~-------------------------------------------                   --
        I+ I       Environment
                   Canada
                                 Environnement
                                 Canada
          9250 49 Street
          Edmonton, AB T6B 1K5                                             HAIL ROOM
                                                                     SALLE DE COURIER
          July 10 2014
                                                                     ZO I~ JUL I b P 12: 4 8
          Sheri Young
          Secretary of the Board                                            NEB/ONE
          National Energy Board
          444 Seventh Avenue SW
          Calgary, Alberta T2P OX8
          RE: Acknowledgement of receipt of a notification pursuant to ss. 79(1) of the Species at Risk
          Act
          Dear Ms. Young :
          This letter confirms receipt of your letter of notification pursuant to ss. 79(1) of the Species at
          Risk Act (SARA), on May 14 2014 in the context of the Carmon Creek Section of the Wolverine
          River Lateral Loop NGTL As a disclaimer, please note that this letter serves only to
          acknowledge the receipt of your letter of notification pursuant to ss. 79(1) of SARA; it should not
          be considered as a response from Environment Canada on any other requirement regarding
          this environmental assessment process.
          This project is currently undergoing an assessment of the environmental effects under the
          Canadian Environmental Assessment Act 2012. Environment Canada will continue participating
          in the assessment of the environmental effects review of the project.
          Environment Canada is the lead jurisdiction for notification purposes for the Olive-sided
          Flycatcher and Western Toad , noted in your letter and advises that you must consider, during
          the environmental assessment process, best available information regarding these species such
          as: final or draft federal Recovery Strategies/Action Plans/Management Plans, COSEWIC status
          reports all available on Species at Risk Act Public Registry (http://www.sararegistrv.gc.ca).
          The Western Toad is managed by the province of Alberta ; as such, you are advised to consult
          the Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development for their information , expertise
          and advice on this species.
          Please note that under ss. 79(2) of the Species at Risk Act, (the person required under an Act
          of Parliament to ensure that an assessment of environmental effect is conducted) must identify
          adverse effects on all listed species, which include species of special concern and the critical
          habitat of extirpated, endangered and threatened species; and if the project is carried out,
          ensure that measures are taken to avoid or lessen those effects and to monitor them. These
          measures must A) be consistent with best available information including any Recovery
          Strategy, Action Plan or Management Plan in a final or proposed version; and B) respect the
          terms and conditions of the Species at Risk Act regarding protection of individuals, residences,
          and critical habitat of extirpated, endangered, or threatened species.
          The competent minister's role within environmental assessment is to provide technical advice
          and support to the federal authority to assist in addressing these requirements. However, it
          should be noted that the SARA competent minister also has certain specific obligations relative
                   Canada                              www.ec.gc.ca
 to species and critical habitat protection stemming from SARA itself, separate from CEAA 2012
or the environmental assessment process.
Sincerely,
Vanessa Charlwood
Head, Program and planning Coordination
Cc: Daniel  lngr~m
                                                        OUNTAIN CREE
                      ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK/Bobtail Descendants
                                                 Traditional Band
                                                Administrative Office
                           718 * Blackfalds, Alberta * CANADA TOM OJO * 1-403-885-2991
                              Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation/Heritage Consulting
       www.inewhistory.com                                                  c/o heritagedatabank@gmail.com
                       Member: Heritage Canada Mountain Parks Aboriginal Advisory Forum
        Nations of Jasper Camp Administrator/Host Nation, 2011, 2012 & 2014 Nations of Jasper Assembly
September 21,2014
National Energy Board,
517 lOAve. S.W.,
Calgary, Alberta
           T2R OA4
Attn: Ms. Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: TransCanada/Nova Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL)
    Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Application
    Board File: OF-Fac-N081-2013-1802
    Aboriginal Engagement
In 2013 NGTL filed the above application, wherein they committed to fulfill the Aboriginal Engagement
requirements of the National Energy Board (NEB).
The Wolverine River Lateral Loop lies within the historic TLU area of the Mountain Cree (Asini Wachi
Nehiyawak) Traditional Band (MCTB). Members of the band still utilize the area.
The MCBT/AWNTB has been recognized by the NEB as a group falling under the NEB Duty To Consult
requiremens since October of 2013. We are engaged with the Trans-Mountain and Trans Canada Energy East
pipelines.
We have never been notified or approached by NGTL for either our input re. our TLU, nor with information
pertaining potential economic involvement or contract/procurement oppotunities.
We believe this to be a deficiency.
KITA MIYOHIN
J. Fromhold, (B.A., Arky.; M.A. Soc/Anth; Ph.D. Pend., Econ. Dev.; Cert. Bus. Analyst; Dip.F.Art)
           Camp Chief; Nations of Jasper 2011, 2012 & 2014 Assembly
           CEO/Head, Mountain Cree (Asini Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band
           Recipient: Heritage Canada Minister's Award of Excellence in Leadership
           Okimaw, Nations of Jasper O Kichita
           Okimaw/Trustee, Kayashik O Kichita (Heritage Protection Society)
           Member: Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering Committee
           Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum
           Lead Historian: Enoch Cree Nation Land Claims
           Lead Historian: Dene Tha' First Nation Land Claims
           Advisor: Ermineskin Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
           Advisor: Samson Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
            Advisor: Sucker Creek Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
                   Elder: Beaver Lake First Nation * Mountain Cree Band * Calgary Friendship Centre
             Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum * Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering
                                    Committee * Enoch Cree Nation Elder's Committee
                                             Mountain Cree Business Group
                         Asini Wachi Manpower Services * Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation
                                                           Affiliates
                           Alberta Moundbuilder Protection Society * Classic Ford Auto Repair
         Donalda Buffalo Pound Development O Kichita * Donalda Store * Fromhold Security * Heritage Consulting
                  Heritage Publishing * iNEW Development Society * Inew Hair Salon * Inew Publishing
    J. Fromhold Business Consulting * Kayashik O Kichita * Moundbuilder Holdings * Mountain Cree Museum Society
  Mountain Hotshot & Delivery * Mountain Cree Ranching * Mountain Spring Water * Museum Development Consulting
                 Northern Janitorial * Paintball Warrior * Red Deer Antiques * Sheldon Mountain Trucking
                               Temple Mounds Development * Todd's Welding * YardWork
cc. trishna_wirk@transcanada.com
Environmental Protection Operations
Environmental Stewardship Branch
Environment Canada
351 St. Joseph Blvd.
Gatineau, Quebec, K1A 0H3
                                                   NEB File No: OF-Fac-Gas-N081-2013-18 02
                                                   EC File No.: 4194-10-3/6175
October 2, 2014
Sheri Young
Secretary of the Board
National Energy Board
444 - 7th Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2P 0X8
Dear Ms. Young:
RE:     Hearing Order GH-003-2014 - NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.
        Application for the Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Project
        pursuant to sections 52 and 58 of Part III of the National Energy Board Act
1. On June 27, 2014 the National Energy Board (NEB) issued the NOVA Gas Transmission
   Ltd. (NGTL) Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Project List of
   Participants and accepted Environment Canada (EC) as a Commenter in the proceeding. A
   deadline of October 2, 2014 was provided for Letters of Comment in Hearing Order GH-003-
   2014, issued July 17, 2014.
2. The March 2014 Environmental and Socio-economic Assessment (ESA) included in the
   NGTL’s Application for the Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Project
   (the Application) has been reviewed by EC. Specialist or expert information or knowledge on
   environmental matters is provided, related to EC’s mandate and in accordance with our
   regulatory responsibilities. Please note that EC has a regulatory interest in migratory birds,
   species at risk, and water quality as administrator of the Migratory Birds Convention Act,
   1994 (MBCA), Species at Risk Act (SARA), Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999
   (CEPA), and subsection 36(3) of the Fisheries Act, respectively.
3. This Letter of Comment submission includes advice and recommendations related to
   species at risk and migratory birds, and information on our role in any emergency response
   and management in the event of any pipeline accidents or malfunctions.
 Species at Risk
4. The federal SARA is directed towards preventing wildlife species from becoming extinct or
   lost from the wild, helping in the recovery of species that are at risk as a result of human
   activities, and promoting stewardship. The Act prohibits the killing, harming or harassing of
   listed species; the damage and destruction of their residences; and the destruction of critical
   habitat. The prohibitions apply to all Threatened, Endangered and Extirpated species listed
   on Schedule 1 of SARA on federal lands. The prohibitions apply only to migratory birds
   (under the MBCA) and aquatic species (under the Fisheries Act) on lands that are not
   federal lands, unless an Order is made.
5. In EC’s July 10, 2014 letter to the Board, EC confirmed the receipt of the NEB’s May 14,
   2014 Notification under subsection 79(1) of SARA that, should the project as scoped be
   approved and constructed, it may affect Olive-sided Flycatcher (threatened) and Western
   Toad (special concern) listed on Schedule 1 of SARA and/or their habitat. Please note that
   under subsection 79(2) of SARA, the NEB (as the responsible “person”) must identify the
   adverse effects of the project on Schedule 1 listed wildlife species and their critical habitat
   and, if the project is carried out, must ensure that measures are taken to avoid or lessen
   those effects and to monitor them. The measures must be taken in a way that is consistent
   with any applicable recovery strategy and action plans.
6. If species at risk are likely to occur within the project area, proponents are advised to use
   experienced personnel to undertake appropriately timed surveys and using widely accepted
   protocols. To minimize effects to listed species, proponents are advised to follow species
   appropriate timing restrictions and setback distances.
Migratory Birds
7. The Department’s mandate includes the protection of migratory birds and their habitat.
   Regulations pursuant to the MBCA provide for the conservation of migratory birds and the
   protection of their nests and eggs. Section 5 of the Regulations prohibits the hunting of a
   migratory bird except under authority of a permit, where “hunt” means chase, pursue, worry,
   follow after or on the trail of, lie in wait for, or attempt in any manner to capture, kill, injure or
   harass a migratory bird, whether or not the migratory bird is captured, killed or
   injured. Section 6 of the Regulations prohibits the disturbance, destruction, or taking of a
   nest, egg or nest shelter of a migratory bird. Possession of a migratory bird, nest or egg
   without lawful excuse is also prohibited. Section 5.1 of the Act prohibits the deposition of
   substances harmful to migratory birds in waters or areas frequented by migratory birds or in
   a place from which the substance may enter such waters or such an area.
8. Environment Canada advises avoiding scheduling, locating or undertaking disruptive
   activities during all key periods of high migratory bird usage, including breeding, staging,
   and migration periods should be avoided, as the best approach. If an individual has a prior
   knowledge of an active nest or indicated nest (i.e., behaviour indicative of nesting such as
   aggression, distraction or territorial behaviour; carrying of fecal sacs, nesting material or
   food), at any time during the year, it must be protected with a suitable species-appropriate
   buffer until the young have fledged. Proponents should refer to: http://ec.gc.ca/paom-
   itmb/default.asp?lang=En&n=AB36A082-1 for general avoidance guidelines. Information
   regarding the risk factors for and general nesting periods of migratory birds in Canada can
   be found at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/paom-itmb/default.asp?lang=En&n=8D910CAC-1#_001.
                                                                                                        2
 9. With respect to the Proponent’s proposal to complete nest surveys in areas where work
    cannot be avoided during the time periods of greatest risk of encountering a nest, the
    Proponent should be advised that EC guidance on the use of active nest surveys to
    determine the presence of nests in advance of vegetation clearing has changed. Except
    under very limited circumstances, EC no longer recommends this approach. Refer to
    http://ec.gc.ca/paom-itmb/default.asp?lang=En&n=8D910CAC-1#_003 for additional details
    on EC’s recommendations on determining the presence of nests.
Wetlands
10. Numerous species of migratory birds are dependent upon wetlands for survival. The Federal
    Policy on Wetland Conservation (FPWC) promotes the wise use of wetlands and elevates
    concerns for wetland conservation to a national level. The FPWC is a government-wide
    policy approved by federal Cabinet and adopted in 1991. This policy provides guidance on
    what EC considers to be a best practice to promote the conservation of Canada's wetlands
    to sustain their ecological and socio-economic functions, now and in the future. The FPWC
    goals promote the maintenance of the functions and values derived from wetlands
    throughout Canada, recognition of wetland functions in resource planning and economic
    decisions, enhancement and rehabilitation of wetlands in areas where continuing loss or
    degradation of wetlands or their functions have reached critical levels, and utilization of
    wetlands in a manner that enhances prospects for their sustained and productive use by
    future generations. EC strongly encourages that it be adopted by proponents.
11. Environment Canada advises that the FPWC applies to this project. Wetlands should be
    avoided irrespective of whether they are wet or dry and buffers or setbacks should originate
    from the high water mark. One hundred (100) meter setbacks should be utilized, where
    feasible, and especially in areas that have experienced extensive wetland loss and where
    there are ecologically sensitive wetlands. Where impacts are unavoidable, wetlands should
    not be impacted during sensitive periods for migratory birds, and wetlands should be re-
    contoured to approximate natural conditions and reclaimed. Where wetlands will be lost,
    consideration should be given for compensation that is consistent with the FPWC.
Emergency Response and Management
12. A pipeline accident or malfunction causing a spill could result in the release of deleterious
    substances to receiving waters. The responsibility for the administration (including the
    enforcement) of the pollution prevention provisions of the Fisheries Act (including subsection
    36(3)) has been assigned to the Federal Minister of the Environment. Subsection 36(3) of
    the Fisheries Act specifies that, unless authorized by federal regulation, no person shall
    deposit or permit the deposit of deleterious substances of any type in water frequented by
    fish, or in any place under any conditions where the deleterious substance, or any other
    deleterious substance that results from the deposit of the deleterious substance, may enter
    any such water. In general, any substance with a potentially harmful chemical, physical or
    biological effect on fish or fish habitat may be considered deleterious. The act of depositing
    a deleterious substance should be considered a violation of the Fisheries Act, regardless of
    whether the water itself is made deleterious by the deposit. Subsection 36(3) of the
    Fisheries Act makes no allowance for a mixing or dilution zone.
                                                                                                 3
 13. Through legislation, such as the Department of the Environment Act, CEPA, the Fisheries
    Act, and the MBCA and, subject to various interagency agreements, EC is mandated to see
    that the environment is appropriately protected in the event of an environmental emergency.
    Please refer to the attached document entitled: “EC’s Support Services for Pipeline
    Accidents and Malfunctions” for more information on the scientific advice and support that
    EC’s Environmental Emergencies Program can provide to Lead Agencies in the event of a
    pipeline accident or malfunction.
In Closing
14. The foregoing comments are intended to provide expert support to project proponents and
    decision-makers, in accordance with its program related responsibilities and associated
    guidelines and policies. These comments are in no way to be interpreted as any type of
    acknowledgement, compliance, permission, approval, authorization, or release of liability
    related to any requirements to comply with federal or provincial statutes and regulations.
    Responsibility for achieving regulatory compliance and cost effective risk and liability
    reduction lies solely with the project proponent.
15. I trust these comments will assist the NEB in the review of the Wolverine Lake Lateral Loop
    (Carmon Creek Section) Project. If you have any questions or require clarification, please
    contact Miles Zurawell by phone at 780-951-8973 or by email at Miles.Zurawell@ec.gc.ca.
Sincerely,
Marc D’lorio, Ph.D.
Director General
cc: Susanne Forbrich, RD – EPOD PNR
     Miles Zurawell, EA Coordinator
Attachment:     EC’s Support Services for Pipeline Accidents and Malfunctions
                                                                                              4
          EC’s Support Services for Pipeline Accidents and Malfunctions
Through legislation, such as the Department of the Environment Act, the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act (CEPA 1999), the Fisheries Act, the Migratory Birds Convention
Act, 1994 and, subject to various interagency agreements, Environment Canada (EC) is
mandated to see that the environment is appropriately protected in the event of an
environmental emergency.
When an environmental emergency happens, one organization is identified and takes charge as
the “Lead Agency”. This decision is based on the type of emergency and its location. The lead
agency could be a federal or provincial department or agency, a response organization or an
industry responsible for the emergency. For cross-jurisdictional pipeline incidents in Canada the
Lead Agency is the National Energy Board (NEB).
Federally, Environment Canada fulfills a scientific and technical advisory role in support of lead
agencies during emergency events on a 24/7 on-call basis from its National Environmental
Emergencies Centre (NEEC) located in Montreal, Quebec. Specifically, EC’s Environmental
Emergencies Program scope of concern involves pollution incidents that impact federally
managed resources such as fish and wildlife under the Fisheries Act and the Migratory Birds
Convention Act, 1994, as well as hazardous substances regulated by the Environmental
Emergencies Regulations (E2 Regulations) under CEPA 1999 – with a view to safeguarding
human health and the environment. Environment Canada Environmental Emergencies Officers
(EEOs) are highly trained and well positioned to provide scientific advice and critical operational
support to Lead Agencies respecting:
       spilled material properties, fate and behaviour information, spill trajectory and dispersion
        modeling, spill clean-up priorities and countermeasures (including treating agents)
       meteorological and sea-state and ice forecasts and warnings
       scientific support team with personnel trained in emergency response and utilizing
        specialized equipment (portable instruments and mobile laboratories)
       identification of environmental sensitivities, areas and priorities
       deterrence strategies to keep migratory birds from becoming oiled, and determining
        appropriate response for the humane treatment of captured birds and ‘species at risk’
       priority assessment for shoreline protection and cleanup using the Shoreline Cleanup
        and Assessment Technique (SCAT)
       evaluation of spill countermeasures, containment, recovery, treatment and disposal
        techniques
       performing post-emergency analyses and providing advice on ecosystem recovery
        objectives EEOs working in NEEC (NEEC personnel) typically provide scientific and
        technical advice to lead agencies via telephone, however EEOs can travel to incident
        scenes and provide their services on-site when:
       the Lead Agency or any other organization having authority requests NEEC’s presence
        on-site
       remotely available information does not allow NEEC personnel to determine and monitor
        if the environment is being adequately protected
       coordination and delivery of EC’s services would be enhanced by NEEC’s on-site
        response presence
       on-site response would fulfill specific training needs for NEEC personnel
 In fulfilling this advisory role, NEEC personnel work closely with scientists from other EC
programs and branches such as the Canadian Wildlife Service and the Meteorological Service
of Canada. They also collaborate with personnel from key partners such as the Canadian Coast
Guard, Transport Canada, Health Canada, Public Safety Canada, Fisheries and Oceans
Canada, provincial/territorial departments of environment and more.
Holding designations as Enforcement Officers under CEPA 1999 and as Inspectors under the
Fisheries Act, EEOs are authorized to issue directions (verbal and/or written), should they deem
that a responsible party has not undertaken reasonable response actions related to either of
these Acts.
If a pipeline incident results in a hazardous substance spill into a marine environment, EC can
play a front-line role in the early detection of such spills through aerial surveillance and satellite
imagery (a collaborative program between EC and Transport Canada), thus enabling a more
rapid and effective incident response effort.
When the need arises to access a wider variety of expertise and resources, an Environmental
Emergencies Science Table (Science Table) can be activated to provide a more coordinated
response to the pollution incident. The Science Table is made up of federal, provincial and
municipal government agencies responsible for environmental protection, as well as experts
from industry and non-government associations. The need for the convening of a Science Table
is typically determined by one or a combination of the following factors:
        the environmental emergency or incident is significant in terms of impacts on the
         environment and/or complexity/severity;
        the incident has an international or cross-jurisdictional component; or
        the need to coordinate information impedes the Lead Agency from fulfilling its response
         monitoring role.
During significant environmental emergencies, Science Table members provide consolidated
advice through an integrated mechanism that addresses environmental protection priorities,
environmental damage assessment, clean-up measures and waste disposal. EC can contribute
to or lead a Science Table when requested by the Lead Agency.
                                                                                                     2
7805973920           DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                             08.35:59 am    10-14-2014           1 / 10
                                                                                                              MAIL ROOM
                                                                                                       SALLE DE COURIER
                                                                                                       201~  OCT   I~    A q: 52
           October 10, 2014                                                                                   NEB/ONE
             National Energy Board                                  NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.
             444 Seventh Avenue                                    450-1'1 sw
             Calgary, AB T2P OX8                                    Calgary, AB T2P SH1
             ATTN. : Ms Sheri Young, Secretary                     ATTN.: Ms Trlshna Wirk, Project Manager
             Fax 403·292·5503                                       Fax 403-920-2347
             NOVA Gas Transm ission ltd.                           Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt llP
             450-1 StSW                                            Suite 2500, TransCanada Tower
             Calgary, AB T2P SH1                                   450-1 StSW
             ATTN.: Mr. Matthew Ducharme, legal Counsel,           Calgary, AB T2P SH1
             Pipelines law                                         ATTN.: Mr. Shawn H.T. Denstedt, QC,
             Fax 403·920-2308                                       Fax 403-260-7024
           Subject: Wolverine River ~teralloop (Carmen Creek Section) Applicatin
           DFN members have deep historical and cultural ties to the lands around their community, and continue
           to actively and Intensively use those lands for traditional purposes, and for the exercise of treaty rights.
           The proposed project is located on lands also have very high cultural and heritage significance for DFN
           and it's development may impede DFN's ability to continue their traditional ways of life without
           interference.
           DFN has a "direct, local interest in the proposed project" because DFN members live near and actively use
           the lands within and adjacent to the proposed project, which lands are subject to DFN treaty rights and
           interests.
           In addition, DFN and its members "have information [and] views about the proposed project", including
           "Aboriginal traditional knowledge" and "expert information" relevant to the proposed project area and
           how the project may impact on aboriginal and treaty rights. DFN intends to assist the NEB in making its
         ~ decisions by participating in the hearing processes, including: by making relevant information requests;
           by providing written and oral submission by providing traditional knowledge and expert evidence on the
           affected lands, the potential impacts of the proposed project, and project alternatives.
           Sincerely,   ~e
                i~JyJ/~
           Don Testawich
           Chief, Duncan's First Nation
                                                       Duncan's First Nation
                                               P.O. Box 148, Brownvale, AB TOH OLD
                                               Tel780·597-3777 I Fax 780-597-3920
                                                    www.duncansfirstnation ca
                                                                                          \
                                                                                            \
     OCT-14-2014      09:13                           7805973920                            93%                      ?.001
 7805973920         DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                             08:36:09a.m.  10-14-2014        2110
                                      National Energy                     Office national
                                                 Board                    de l'energle
                                               NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.
                                 Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section)
                                                  Application to Participate
            Step 1 -I am applying as:
                                                           A Group
            Select which one best describes your Group:
            'b/     My group is an organization that will represent its own interests
            0       My group is a collection of individuals with common interests. If so, you MUST list
                    the first and last names of the Individual(s) you represent for this ATP Form to be
                    considered and you must check the box below.
                     0    I have permission to identify and speak on behalf of the people listed below.
                    Name(s): - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    (You may attach additional pieces of paper if required).
            NOTE: Individual persons you are representing as part of a Group with a common interest do not
            have to complete a separate ATP form.
            The following describes the categories under which you may apply. If you want to apply as an
            individual or authorized representative, please contact the National Energy Board (NEB or
            Board) and request a form for that category.
            An Individual is one person or landowner who may or may not have a lawyer or person
            speaking on their behalf and who will represent their own personal interests. Apply as an
            Individual if you plan to bring forward issues regarding personal impacts or property-specific
            issues, and you are not represented by a Group. Use the Individual ATP Form if you have a
            lawyer or representative but are filling in the ATP Form yoursel£ If your lawyer or
            representative is filling in a form for you, you do not need to complete a separate A TP Form.
            An Authorized Representative on Behalf of an Individual is someone who speaks or submits
            documents on behalf of an Individual. This may be a lawyer or other person. An Authorized
            Representative will present the views and personal interests of the Individual they are
            representing.
                                                                                                      Pagel of9
      OCT-14-2014    09:13                          7805973920                            93%                   P.002
 7805973920          DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                               08:36:21 a.m. 10-14-2014         3/10
            A Group is:
                • an organization with its own interests (for example, a company, NGO, special interest
                     group, Aboriginal group, government agency), or
                • a collaboration of two or more people that represents the common interests of those
                     people.
            The Group will have a Main Contact Person(s) and may also have an Authorized Representative
            such as a lawyer. The Main Contact Person will usually fill out the ATP Form on the Group's
            behalf and will respond to questions in the hearing on behalf of the Group if participation is
            granted. A Group representing an Individual should select the ATP Form for Authorized
            Representative on Behalf of an Individual.
            Step 2- Heariug Information
            The Project to be assessed in this hearing is defined as:
            The Project to be assessed in this hearing is defined as: the Wolverine River Lateral Loop
            (Carmon Creek Section).
            The NEB bas received an application under section 52 of the National Energy Board Act (NEB
            Act) from NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL) for approval to construct and operate the
            Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) (the Project).
            The location of the proposed Project is 35 km north east of Peace River, Alberta, and would
            involve the construction and operation of a 61 km pipeline, 508 mm (20 inches) in diameter, to
            transport sweet natural gas. Approximately 57 km of the pipeline would be built alongside
            existing linear disturbances. Other Project facilities would include tie-in connections to existing
            facilities, valve sites, launcher and receiver facilities for inline inspection, and cathodic
            protection.
            Project Name:             Wolverine River Lateral Loop {Carmon Creek Section)
            Company Name:             NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.
            NEB File Number:          OF-Fac-Gas-N081-2013-18 02
            Heariug Order:            GH-003-2014
            Participant Funding is available for this hearing. For information please see the Participant
            Funding Program fPFP/ Guide.
            The NEB has people who can help you to understand the Board's process and answer your
            questions about process. They can also assist you if you have questions about filling in this ATP
            form.
            For process support on this hearing please contact the Process Advisor Carole Leger-Kubeczek by
            emailing Carole.Leger-Kubeczek@neb-one.gc.ca or calling direct (403) 221-3465 or toll free 1-
            800-899-1265.
                                                                                                          Pagel of9
      OCT-14-2014     09:14                         7805973920                                93%                   P.003
 7805973920          DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                          08:36:34 a.m.  10-14-2014        4/10
            Step 3 -Important Information
            The NEB will use only the information provided in this ATP Form to decide whether you are
            allowed to participate in this hearing. Previously submitted infom1ation will not be considered. It
            is important to provide all the requested information on this ATP Form. It is your responsibility
            to demonstrate that the NEB should allow you to participate.
            You must fully complete all required fields on this ATP Form in order to be considered. If
            you do not provide sufficient information on this ATP Form, you will not be allowed to
            participate.
            You should refer to the Guidance document called Guidance Document on Section 55.1 a11d
            Participatio11 in a Facilities Hearing when filling in your ATP form.
            Service: You must send a copy of your final ATP Fom1 to NGTL, at the following addresses:
            Ms. Trishna Wirk
            Project Manager
           Regulatory Services
           NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.
           450 -I St S.W.
           Calgary, AB T2P 5Hl
           Facsimile 403-920-2347
           Mr. Matthew Ducharme
           Legal Counsel
           Pipelines Law
           NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.
           450-1 St S.W.
           Calgary, AB T2P SHI
           Facsimile 403-920-2308
           Mr. Shawn H.T. Denstedt, QC
           Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP
           Suite 2500, TransCanada Tower
           450-1 St S.W.
           Calgary, AB T2P SHl
           Facsimile 403-260-7024
           Step 4- Privacy Agreement
           The Board is authorized to collect, use and disclose personal information in the context of any
           Board proceeding. Except where confidentiality is granted, all information and documents filed
           with the Board as an Individual or on behalf of other Individuals will be made public.
                                                                                                   Page3 of9
    OCT-14-2014     09:14                        7805973920                           93%                     P.004
 7805973920         DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                             08:36:45 a.m. 10-14-2014       5/10
           Additionally, any contact information provided may be used to contact you or serve documents
           on you.
           Under the federal Per&onal Information Protection and Electronic Document& .A.ct, the
           Regulation& Specifying Publicly .Available Information state that personal infonnation in a record
           of a quasijudicial body (like the Board) is publicly available without consent, provided that the
           collection, use and disclosure of that information relates directly to the purpose for which the
           info!Diation appears in the record
           By signing here, you are Indicating that you have read and undentood the above
           -z.:-4'¥
           Sigaatur#                               L
                                                                                                   Page4 of!)
   OCT-14-2014   09:14                         7805973920                              93%                    P.005
 7805973920         DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                          08:36:51 a.m. 10-14-2014        6/10
            Step S- Contact Information- Group's Main Contact
            Enter the name of the person who will appear as your Group's contact on the List of Parties. Any
            questions or correspondence to the Group will be sent to the person listed below.
                 Duncan's Ejrst Natjon
            Name of Company or Group
                   Chief Donald Testawjch
            Name [Mr., Mrs., Ms.; First Name; Last Name]
                    Box 148
            Address I [apt; street; city]
                    Brownyale Alberta IDH OJ      n
            Address 2 (provinc~; postal code, zip code; countiy]
                   780-597-3777               780-597-3920                dt.chief@duncansfirstnation.ca
            Phone                         Fax                           Email
            Step 6- Contact Information -Authorized Representative for Group
            A Group's Authorized Representative is someone who speaks or files documents on behalf of the
            Group. Yau may have more than one Authorized Representative.
            Name: __~K~e~n~R~Ic~h_________________
            Address:  --~s=am~e~as~a~b~o~v=e_____________
            Phone: _ __,7-"!8:!!:0-~6~25=!:-4:!!7""5"'-0----------­
            Fax: _ _~78~0~-5~9~~=~~2~0----------
            Email: ----~k~e~n-~dwm~@R~ho~twm~awil~.co~m~-------
                                                                                                   PageS of9
      OCT-14-2014   09:14                        7805973920                            93%                   P.006
 7805973920         DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                            08:37:00 a.m. 10-14-2014          7110
            Step 7- Method or Level of Participation
            Tell us how your Group wants to participate:
            A Commenter:
                • may provide views on the proposed project in a Letter of Comment; and
                • is not considered a Party (Intervenor or Company) to the hearing, cannot ask information
                     requests or cross-examine other Parties, and cannot provide final argument.
            An Intervenor:
                • may provide evidence;
                • responds to information requests or oral cross-examination on evidence you file; may ask
                     information requests or cross-examine other Parties who filed evidence; and
                • may provide argument.
            Intervening requires a time commitment to the hearing process.
            The NEB will review your ATP Form and decide whether your Group is allowed to participate.
            Additional information about the role of commenters and intervenors may be found in the
            Hearing Process Handbook.
            Please select one of the following:
             0      Commenter
            !il'    Intervenor
            Step 8 - Interest or Expertise
            The NEB will only use the information provided in this ATP Form to decide if your Group will
            be allowed to participate in this hearing. No other information will be considered. When
            completing the ATP Form, you should consider the Hearing Description in Step 2 above and the
            List of Issues in Step 9.
            You should refer to the Guidance document called Guidqnce Document on Section 55.2 and
            Participation ill a Facilities Hearing when filling in your ATP form.
            You are "directly affected" if you have a specific and detailed interest in the proposed Project
            that may be affected by the Board's decision. You have "relevant information or expertise" if
            you have knowledge that will assist the Board.
                                                                                                    Page 6 of !I
      OCT-14-2014     09:14                        7805973920                            93%                     P.007
 7805973920         DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                          08:37:10a.m.   10-14-2014           8/10
            Please select one or both of the following:
            1;1     The Group I am representing is directly affected by the proposed Project
            0       The Group I am representing has relevant information or e:spertise
            Step 9- Your Group's Connection to the Project Issues
            The Ust of issues that the Board will consider in the NGTI. Wolverine River Lateral Loop
            (Carmon Creek Section) bearing is set out below. These are the issues that the Board has
            detennined are relevant to this hearing.
            Please identify at least one issue that relates to:
                1.  How the Group as a whole is directly affected and/or
                n. The infonnationlexpertise that the Group believes is relevant or ofvalue to the Board and
                    provide a brief explanation in the space below.
               o      1. The need for the proposed Project.
               o      2. The economic feasibility of the proposed Project.
               o      3. The potential commercial impacts of the proposed Project
               0      4. The potential environmental and socio-economic effects of the proposed Proj eel,
                          including those to be considered under the Canadian Environmental Assessment
                          Act, 2012.
               o      5. The appropriateness of the general route and land requirements for the proposed
                          Project.
               o     6. The engineering design and integrity of the proposed Project.
              ¢      7. Potential impacts of the Project on Aboriginal interests.
               o     8. Contingency planning, including emergency response planning, for releases or spills,
                         accidents or malfunctions, during construction and operation of the Project.
               D     9. The tenns and conditions to be included in any approval or recommendation.
            Limit your answer to Step 8 and Step 9 to no more than 500 words. You may attach additional
            pieces of paper if required.
                                                                                                     Page 7 of !I
      OCT-14-2014    09:14                        7805973920                           93%                        P.ooa
 7805973920         DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                          08:37:21 a.m.  10-14-2014         9/10
            Step 10- Access, Notification and Service
            Select which official language you would like to use to participate and receive correspondence:
            ~       English
            0
            Step 11- Review and Submit
            You are about to submit your Application to Participate (ATP) Form to the NEB.
            Before submitting your application, you should first review it and check that you have:
                    Checked off one box about your Group's interest (Step I)
                    Checked off that you have permission to identify and speak on behalf of others, and
                    provided their names (Step I)
                    Signed the Privacy Agreement (step 4)
                    Provided the contact information for the Authorized Representalive for the Group (step 6)
                    Checked off ONE box indicating your Group's request to be either a commenter or
                    intervenor (step 7)
                    Checked off your Group's interest or expertise (step 8)
                    Checked off one or more issues (step 9)
                    Provided a brief explanation (step 8 and step 9)
                    Signed the form (step I 0)
                    Made a copy of your form to send to the company (step 3)
            When you're ready to submit your ATP form to the NEB, send the completed ATP form to the
            address below.
            Sheri Young
            Secretary
            National Energy Board
            444 Seventh Avenue SW
            Calgary, AB T2P OXS
            Fax: 403-292-5503
                                                                                                    Page 8 of9
      OCT-14-2014    09:15                       7805973920                             93%                    P.009
 7805973920         DUNCAN'S FIRST NATION                                              08:37:30a.m.  10-14-2014         10/10
            If you notice a typing error or administrative error after filing, contact Carrie Randall, NEB
            Regulatory Officer, at 1-800-899-1265, or email carrie.randall@neb-one.gc.ca.
                                                                                                     Page !I of9
    OCT-14-2014   09:15                        ?8059?3920                                93%                     P.010
                                                                                               '
                                                           OUNTAIN CREE
                     ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK/Bobtail Descendants
                                                    Traditional Band
                                                  Administrative Office
                           718 * Blackfalds, Alberta * CANADA TOM OJO * 1-403-885-2991
                             Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation/Heritage Consulting
       www.inewhistory.com                                                   c/o heritagedatabank@gmail.com
                      Member: Heritage Canada Mountain Parks Aboriginal Advisory Forum
       Nations of Jasper Camp Administrator/Host Nation, 2011, 2012 & 2014 Nations of Jasper Assembly
October 25, 2014
National Energy Board,
51710Ave. S.W.,
Calgary, Alberta
         T2ROA4
         e-m: sheri_young@neb-one.gc.ca
Attn: Ms. Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
                                                                      Filed Electronically
                                                                      Doc: 4701670
                                                                            A62951
                                                                            A4C2Y1
                                           • • • . . - .
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: TransCanada/Nova Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL)
   Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Application
   Board File: OF-Fac-N081-2013-1802
   Aboriginal Engagement
                               1
Reference: A4C6D6
             A62951
             A4C2Y1
            A63050
                                                                                            .
On September 21 the Mountain Cree Band submitted a letter to the National Energy Board
(A62951, A4C2Y1), with cc to NTGL, indicating that
          The Wolverine River Lateral Loop lies within the historic TLU area of the Mountain Cree (Asini
          Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band (MCTB). Members of the band still utilize the area.
and
          We have never been notified or approached by NGTL for either our input re. our TLU, nor with
          information pertaining potential economic involvement or contract/procurement opportunities.
                                       •
          We believe this to be a deficiency.
On September 25, 2014, the National Energy Board (NEB) sent a letter of inquiry to NGTL (Information
Request # 4, A63050) on this matter.
                                                         •
On October 1, 2014, OSLER, on behalf of the NGTL, replied to the Information Request (ffi) rejecting
our stated claim (doc. A4C6D6). As of October 25th we have not yet received a hard copy of said reply.
 In the reply OSLER put forward several reasons for their rejection of our position.
We herewith respond to those statements:
1. "NGTL's research confirms there is no information that suggests current use of lands for traditional purposes
     by Mountain Cree in the Project area."
   Response
            OSLER/NGTL claim that in the short 5 days between the receipt of the letter from the
           NEB on or about September 26 and formulation of their reply on September 30, they
           conducted an exhaustive research project into what Land Use the Mountain Cree and it's
            membership had in the Project area.
            This is patiently absurd and factually impossible on such a short timeline. Furthermore,
            OSLER/NGTL have no knowlege of who the Mountain Cree membership is, hence can
            not document usage by MCTB or it's individual members.
            MCTB, on the other hand, has documented historic, traditional and current use of the
            area on file and can considerably fill this out with further TLU study.
            OSLER/AGTL has made no attempt to engage the MCTB to assess or evaluate such
            information as we have.
2. "Mountain Cree does not define its asserted traditional territory."
   Response
            The Wolverine River Lateral Loop lies within the historic TLU area of the Mountain Cree (Asini
            Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band (MCTB). Members of the band still utilize the area.
            In Supreme Court Rulings (Delgamuukw, Chilkotin, etc.), claims made by aboriginal parties
            constitute a Statement of Fact until proven otherwise. The onus of proving the nonexistence of
            such claim is on the appelant.
            MCTB has documentation on file on historic, traditional and current use of the area. This
            information is available for viewing and can be filed in the NEB Hearings.
3. "Mountain Cree relies on affiliations with several Aboriginal communities throughout the province of
     Alberta, none of which is in proximity to the project area."
    Response
            MCTB is an independent entity. MCTB has no "affiliations with several Aboriginal
            communities" that we rely on for our claims.
                                                                                                        -
            MCTB has 350 years of documented history and development.
            Our claim is based on documented historic, recent and current history of use by individual
            members of the MCTB.
            MCTB is not a reserve-based band. Historically it was a far-ranging band and our membership
             is spread throughout Alberta.
             Our claims are based on members resident in and around the Project area. This includes
             members living in the Lesser Slave Lake area, Fort Vermilion, Red Earth, High Level, Lac
             La Biche and Edmonton.
                    •
 4. "The advice NGTL has received through its network of contacts with Aboriginal communities in the
      Project area suggests that the Mountain Cree will not be affected by; the Project."
                                                               '
    Response
           We question who these "contacts" are and why they should know anything about MCTB
          interests and activities.
          In the past MCTB, as an entity, has had no official interaction with local bands excepting
          some in the Lesser Slave Lake-Upper Peace ("Western Cree") area.
          MCTB is not an Indian Affairs Band, hence we have had little reason to interact on a
          political level with the bands existing in the Project area as a political entity.
          MCTB has only recently entered into the Duty To Consult engagement process, hence
          have had only limited official interaction with projects in northern Alberta.
We note that AGTL was or should have been aware of our existence and out potential interest in the
Project area. We have in the past had some communications with Trans Canada Pipelines, the parent
company of AGTL.
On October 8, 2013, we advised Trans Canada about our interests in the Grand Rapids pipeline, but
received no response.
On October 8, 2013, we advised Trans Canada about our interests in the Energy East pipeline, but
received no response.
On March 4, 2014 we filed for Intervenor status with the NEB for the Energy East pipeline.
On July 1, 2014 we received correspondence from Trans Canada re. Energy East pipeline.
On August 26, 2014 we were contacted by Trans Canada re. Energy East with an offer to meet with
us re. Engagement. Several scheduled meetings were cancelled, and there has been no further
action to date.
On September 21 the Mountain Cree Band submitted a letter to the National Energy Board
(A62951, A4C2Y1), with cc to NTGL, indicating our current and historic interests in the Wolverine
Project area.
On September 28, 2014 we contacted Trans Canada about our interests in the Keystone XL pipeline,
but received no response.
KI TA MIYOHEV
J. Fromhold, (B.A., Arky.; M.A. Soc/Anth; Ph.D. Pend., Econ. Dev.; Cert. Bus. Analyst; Dip.F.Art)
           Camp Chief; Nations of Jasper 2011, 2012 & 2014 Assembly
           CEO/Head, Mountain Cree (Asini Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band
           Recipient: Heritage Canada Minister's Award of Excellence in Leadership
           Okimaw, Nations of Jasper O Kichita
           Okimaw/Trustee, Kayashik O Kichita (Heritage Protection Society)
           Member: Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering Committee
           Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum
           Lead Historian: Enoch Cree Nation Land Claims
           Lead Historian: Dene Tha' First Nation Land Claims
           Advisor: Ermineskin Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
           Advisor: Samson Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
           Advisor: Sucker Creek Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
                     Elder: Beaver Lake First Nation * Mountain Cree Band * Calgary Friendship Centre
              Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum * Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering
                                    Committee * Enoch Cree Nation Elder's Committee
                                             Mountain Cree Business Group
                           Asini Wachi Manpower Services * Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation
                                                         Affiliates
                                                       .
                           Alberta Moundbuilder Protection Society * Classic Ford Auto Repair
         Donalda Buffalo Pound Development O Kichita * Donalda Store * Fromhold Security * Heritage Consulting
                  Heritage Publishing * iNEW Development Society * Inew Hair Salon * Inew Publishing
    J. Fromhold Business Consulting * Kayashik O Kichita * Moundbuilder Holdings * Mountain Cree Museum Society
  Mountain Hotshot & Delivery * Mountain Cree Ranching * Mountain Spring Water * Museum Development Consulting
                 Northern Janitorial * Paintball Warrior * Red Deer Antiques * Sheldon Mountain Trucking
                               Temple Mounds Development * Todd's Welding * YardWork
cc. trishna_wirk@transcanada.com
                                                                                              • ••
                                                                            •
                                                                                                         .
                                                                    •
                                                                                                         •
                                                         •
                                         -       .   •     • •   •    .   '           •                    .     '
                                                                                        •
                                                   .
                                       •               '                .     i     •                •
                                                                                                   .
                                                                              '
                                             •
                                                                                                               •
                                                                   •
                                                                                          • •
                                                                              •
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                             •
                                                               •
                                  •
                                               ,
                                                                                . i
                                      .
                                           •
                                                         OUNTAIN CREE
                       ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK/Bobtail Descendants
                                                  Traditional Band
                                                 Administrative Office
                           718 * Blackfalds, Alberta * CANADA TOM OJO * 1-W3-885-2991
                             Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation/Heritage Consulting
       www.inewhistory.com                                                   c/o heritagedatabank@gmail.com
                        Member: Heritage Canada Mountain Parks Aboriginal Advisory Forum
        Nations of Jasper Camp Administrator/Host Nation, 2011, 2012 & 2014 Nations of Jasper Assembly
November 7, 2014
National Energy Board,
51710Ave. S.W.,
Calgary, Alberta
          T2R OA4
           e-m: sheri_young@neb-one.gc.ca
Attn: Ms. Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
                                                                      Filed Electronically
                                                                      Doc:
Dear Ms. Young:
Letter of Concern
Re: Hearing Order GH-003-2014
    Nova Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL)/Trans Canada
   Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Application
Reference: A4C6D6
              A62951
              A4C2Y1
              A63050
              A64111
Preamble
On November 4 the National Energy Board (NEB) issued a letter (A64111) to the Mountain Cree
Traditional Band (MCTB) re. MCTB Application To Participate denying the MCTB Application
To Participate, but allowing the MCTB to participate as a Commenter.
Reason for denying the Application to Participate submitted on November 2, 2014 (A64068) was
because MCBT did not
           "include an explanation for missing the 3 October 2014 deadline, nor for missing the
             original Application to Participate deadline of 10 July 2014. The letter also did not
             address how the prejudice of accepting MCTB as an intervenor at this stage of the
             process may be addressed."
The NEB dictated that MCBT is to submit a Letter of Comment by noon on Monday 10 November
2014 stating what in form a ton as to the potential impacts of the Project identified by MCTB
("that pipeline construction may impact some subsistence and gathering activites and will
potential! damage or destroy sites of archaeological, cultural and historical import or interest")
has in it's possession.
 Comment
On March 25, 2014, Trans Canada/Nova Gas filed a regulatory application for the Wolverine River
Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Project.
MCBT believes in establishing a positive and mutually productive relationship with NEB Applicants,
rather than a confrontational legalistic-based relationship such as is established through resort to
the Courts or NEB Hearings.
To this end MCTB contacted Trans Canada Pipelines, parent company for NGTL, advising them of
the existence of MCTB and our interests vis a vis aboriginal engagement and Duty To Consult.
On October 8, 2013, MCTB contacted Trans Canada, parent company for NGTL. However, we did
not receive any subsequent communication from Trans Canada. Neither Trans Canada nor NEB
advised us of upcoming applications or projects. Under Supreme Court runings pertaining to Duty
To Consult it is stated that it is the Developer and the Government of Canada who are tasked with
initiating the Engagement process, not the duty of the First Nation group to keep tabs on what
Applications are being submitted and then beg for inclusion in engagement.
On March 4, 2014 MCTB filed for Intervenor status with the NEB for the Energy East pipeline. To
date we have not heard from the NEB on this matter.
On March 25, 2014, Trans Canada/Nova Gas filed a regulatory application for the Wolverine River
Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Project.
On May 8, 2014, NEB sent two letters (from Jim Clarke and from Ms. Sherry Young, cc. to Trans
Canada) advising us of the Trans Canada Energy East Project and the opportunity to file an application
for intervenor status in the hearings (received May 14).
On May 8, 2014 received telephone call from Thea.VVingert @ NEB re. Intervenor application for Trans
Canada Energy East Project.
 On May 19, 2014 received telephone call from Thea Wingert@NEB confirming Intervenor application
 for Trans Canada Energy East Project was active (A59146, A3VOX1).
 On June 12, 2014, we received an E-mail from NEB confirming that our Application for PFP funding
 for Trans Canada Energy East Project was in process.
 On June 25, 2014 we corresponded by e-mail with NEB re. for Trans Canada Energy East Project.
 On June 27, 2014, NGTL filed an Aboriginal Update with the NEB.
 On July 1, 2014 received correspondence from Trans Canada re. for Trans Canada Energy East Project.
 On July 1, 2014 MCTB responded to ryan.mcfadden@transcanada.com to his letter re. Trans Canada
 Energy East Project. MCTB also forwarded a copy of our Consultaton Protocols, including a map of
 the lands in which we have a Traditional interest.
 On July 10, 2014 the initial deadline for Application to Participate in the NGTL Wolverine Project
 passed.
           At this time Trans Canada, the original Applicant for the Wolverine Project, and parent
           company of Nova Gas Transmission Lines, had been aware of our existence and interests in
           the development activities of their firm, and that MCTB was elegible for engagement under
           the Duty To Consult ever since October 2013.
           During all this time neither Trans Canada nor NEB advised us of the existence of the
           NGTL Wolverine Project
 On July 12, 2014 MCTB sent a letter to Shirley Dawe @ Trans Canada re. Trans Canada Energy East
 Project
 On August 13, 2014, we had a telephone conversation with Mr. Brian Doyle of the NEB re. the Trans
Canada Energy East Project again confirming that our Application To Participate and our PFP
Application were both active and in process.
On August 23, 2014, we were in communication with Ms. Karen Gardner, of Trans Canada, who set
up a date for us to meet with her re. Engagement. These meetings have been postponed several times
and not yet carried out.
On August 23, 2014 we e-mailed Mr. Brian Doyle at the NEB re. Trans Canada Energy East Project.
On August 26, 2014 we received an e-m from Ms. Gardner at Trans Canada to set up a meeting.
On September 2, 2014, we received a telephone call from Ms. Gardner of Trans Canada advising
that the meeting scheduled for that morning was cancelled.
On September 21,2014, we received an e-mail from Ms. Gardner of Trans Canada to arrange another
meeting date.
On September 21,2014, while searching the NEB website, MCTB first became aware of the
existence of the Wolvering project. At this time we downloaded and reviewed the Aboriginal Update
and Engagement filing, noting that NGTL had made no attempt to contact MCTB. In keeping with
MCTB view to avoid confrontation, rather than immediately filing for Intervenor status we submitted
a Letter of Comment to the National Energy Board (A62951, A4C2Y1), with cc to NTGL, indicating that
           The Wolverine River Lateral Loop lies within the historic TLU area of the Mountain Cree (Asini
           Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band (MCTB). Members of the band still utilize the area.
and
           We have never been notified or approached by NGTL for either our input re. our TLU, nor with
           information pertaining potential economic involvement or contract/procurement opportunities.
           We believe this to be a deficiency.
 On September 25, 2014, the National Energy Board (NEB) sent a letter of inquiry to NGTL (Information
Request # 4, A63050) on this matter.
 On September 28, 2014 we contacted Trans Canada about our interests in the Keystone XL pipeline,
 but received no response.
 On September 28, 2014, MCTB re-submitted an Application to Participate in the Hearing (A4C4Y4,
 A63077). In short, our Filing met the October 3. 2014 deadline.
 On October 1, 2014, OSLER, on behalf of the NGTL, replied to the Information Request (IR) rejecting
 our stated claim (doc. A4C6D6). As of November 6th we have not yet received a hard copy of said reply.
 In the reply OSLER put forward several reasons for their rejection of our position, their defence
 being mainly that in their "opinion" we did not qualify to be included, but provided no hard evidence
 to refute our claim to being able to document historic Land Use in the area.
 On October 22, 2014, NEB notified us by e-mail of a filing, which indicated that our Application to
 Participate was denied, deeming it to be an Application for PFP funding, and that since we were not
 approved Intervenors, PFP funding would be denied. However, our Filing Receipt of September 28
 clearly states that it was an Application to Participate, not a PFP application.
 On October 25, 2014, MCTB filed a Letter of Comment (A63844, A4D7DO) responding to Osiers
 reasons rejecting MCTB engagement in the Wolverind Project.
 On November 02, 2014, MCTB re-submitted an Application to Participate in the Hearing (A64068,
 A4E2Z5), the previous submission (A4C4Y4, A63077) of September 28 having been mistaken by
 NEB as an Application for PFP funding. As evident from this timeline, WCTB, in spite of not having
 been notified by Trans Canada/NGTL or NEB of the Wolverine Project, delays by Trans Canada in
 implementing Engagements, and attempts to reach out toNGTL outside a formal/confrontational
 Hearings format, MCTB did meet the October 3 deadline for filing and Application to Participate,
 but that application was wrongly treated as a PFP Application by the NEB.
On November 4, 2014 WCTNB received a telephone call from the NEB advising us that an NEB
letter had been filed re. our Applicaton, and that a response was required on short notice. The NEB
letter advised WCTB that our Application to Participate of October 25 had been denied as having
arrived after the deadline, and requested clarification from WCTB about the reasons for late
application. NEB also requested that WCTB file a Letter or Letters of Comment providing information
about Traditional Land Use, TLU sites, historic, cultural, religious and spiritual sites and other sites of
importance known to us in the development area. As of November 7 (Friday) a Hard Copy of the letter
hand not yet been received.
MTCB would be pleased to file such information as an Intervenor, or in bi-party consultation with
NGTL. Failing that, such information remains the Cultural and Intellectual Property of MCTB and
proceed as we may otherwise deem best to for these sites and for MCTB interests.
KI TA MIYOHIN
J. Fromhold, (B.A., Arky.; M.A. Soc/Anth; Ph.D. Pend., Econ. Dev.; Cert. Bus. Analyst; Dip.F.Art)
           Camp Chief; Nations of Jasper 2011, 2012 & 2014 Assembly
           CEO/Head, Mountain Cree (Asini Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band
           Recipient: Heritage Canada Minister's Award of Excellence in Leadership
           Okimaw, Nations of Jasper O Kichita
           Okimaw/Trustee, Kayashik O Kichita (Heritage Protection Society)
           Member: Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering Committee
           Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum
           Lead Historian: Enoch Cree Nation Land Claims
           Lead Historian: Dene Tha' First Nation Land Claims
           Advisor: Ermineskin Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
           Advisor: Samson Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
           Advisor: Sucker Creek Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
                    Elder: Beaver Lake First Nation * Mountain Cree Band * Calgary Friendship Centre
              Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum * Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering
                                   Committee * Enoch Cree Nation Elder's Committee
                                             Mountain Cree Business Group
                          Asini Wachi Manpower Services * Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation
                                                           Affiliates
                           Alberta Moundbuilder Protection Society * Classic Ford Auto Repair
         Donalda Buffalo Pound Development O Kichita * Donalda Store * Fromhold Security * Heritage Consulting
                  Heritage Publishing * iNEW Development Society * Inew Hair Salon * Inew Publishing
     J. Fromhold Business Consulting * Kayashik O Kichita * Moundbuilder Holdings * Mountain Cree Museum Society
   Mountain Hotshot & Delivery * Mountain Cree Ranching * Mountain Spring Water * Museum Development Consulting
                 Northern Janitorial * Paintball Warrior * Red Deer Antiques * Sheldon Mountain Trucking
                                Temple Mounds Development * Todd's Welding * YardWork
                                                      OUNTAIN CREE
                     ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK/Bobtail Descendants
                                               Traditional Band
                                              Administrative Office
                         718 * Blackfalds, Alberta * CANADA TOM OJO * 1-403-885-2991
                           Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation/Heritage Consulting
       www.inewhistory.com                                               c/o heritagedatabank@gmail.com
                      Member: Heritage Canada Mountain Parks Aboriginal Advisory Forum
       Nations of Jasper Camp Administrator/Host Nation, 2011, 2012 & 2014 Nations of Jasper Assembly
December 1, 2014
National Energy Board,
51710Ave. S.W.,
Calgary, Alberta
          T2R OA4
          e-m: sheri_young@neb-one.gc.ca
Attn: Ms. Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
                                                                  Filed Electronically
                                                                  Doc:
Dear Ms. Young:
Letter of Concern
Re: Hearing Order GH-003-2014
   Nova Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL)/Trans Canada
   Wolverine River Lateral Loop (Cannon Creek Section) Application
    Board File: OF-Fac-Gas-N081-2013-18 02
   NTGL Final Argument A4F1Z2
Reference: A4C6D6
            A62951
            A4C2Y1
            A63050
            A64111
            A4E7Q7
            A4F1Z2
Preamble
On October 8, 2013, the Mountain Cree (Asini Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band (MCTB) contacted
Trans Canada (TC), parent company for Nova Gas Transmission Lines (NGTL). However, we did not
receive any subsequent communication from Trans Canada.
MCTB has subsequently on numerous occasions contacted Trans Canada regarding Trans Canada
development projects and our interests therein (see our submission of November 7, 2014, A4E7Q7).
We received no response to these approaches.
On March 25,2014, Trans Canada/Nova Gas filed a regulatory application for the Wolverine River
Lateral Loop (Carmon Creek Section) Project.
At this time Trans Canada, the original Applicant for the Wolverine Project, and parent company of
Nova Gas Transmission Lines, had been aware of our existence and interests in the development
 activities of their firm, and that MCTB was elegible for engagement under the Duty To Consult ever
since October 2013.
During all this time neither Trans Canada nor NGTL advised us of the existence of the NGTL
Wolverine Project.
On September 21, 2014, while searching the National Energy Board (NEB) website, MCTB first became
aware of the existence of the Wolvering project. At this time we downloaded and reviewed the Aboriginal
Update and Engagement filing, noting that NGTL had made no attempt to contact MCTB. In keeping with
MCTB view to avoid confrontation, rather than immediately filing for Intervenor status we submitted
a Letter of Comment to the National Energy Board (A62951, A4C2Y1), with cc to NTGL, indicating that
           The Wolverine River Lateral Loop lies within the historic TLU area of the Mountain Cree (Asini
           Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band (MCTB). Members of the band still utilize the area.
and
           We have never been notified or approached by NGTL for either our input re. our TLU, nor with
           information pertaining potential economic involvement or contract/procurement opportunities.
           We believe this to be a deficiency.
On September 25, 2014, the National Energy Board (NEB) sent a letter of inquiry to NGTL (Information
Request # 4, A63050) on this matter.
On October 1, 2014, OSLER, on behalf of the NGTL, replied to the Information Request (IR) rejecting
our stated claim (doc. A4C6D6). As of November 6th we have not yet received a hard copy of said reply.
In the reply OSLER put forward several reasons for their rejection of our position, their defence
being mainly that in their "opinion" we did not qualify to be included, but provided no hard evidence
to refute our claim to being able to document historic Land Use in the area.
On October 25, 2014, MCTB filed a Letter of Comment (A63844, A4D7DO) responding to Osiers
reasons rejecting MCTB engagement in the Wolverind Project.
On November 18,2014, NEB sent a letter to NGTL (A4E9YO) instructing NGTL to include MCTB
in their consultation process.
Comments
 1. To date we have not been contacted by NGTL or their agents regarding either Engagement or
    Consultation.
2. NGTL has not sent MCTB a copy of their submissions, planning, environmental studies, historic
    and heritage studies nor any other documents on which we could base an assessment on whether
    or not NGTL planning and process meets either general or specific concerns that we may have.
3. NGTL has not engaged in our Consultation Protocol (attached), of which they have a copy to
    provide us with information on which we could base an assessment on whether or not NGTL
    planning and process meets either general or specific concerns that we may have.
4. NGTL has never provided us with the appropriate National Topographic Survey (NTS) maps required
    to form a professional opinion on the pipeline Right of Way (ROW) or to suitably and professionally
    map points of specific concern to the Mountain Cree Band.
5. MCTB was never engaged by NGTL to develop an Indiginous Knowlege, a Land Use report, or
    to do a Map Assessment of information in our possession.
 6. NGTL has done no engagement or consultation with MCTB that would give them or us the
    opportunity to determine to what degree the pipeline would affect our interests in the area.
 7. NGTL continues to hold that - in their opinion - MCTB has no rights or interests in the area.
    They have not provided any concrete evidence to challenge, let alone disprove, our claim to such
    knowlege and rights. MCTB, on the other hand, have stated that
   a. MCTB has historic interests in the area.
   b. MCTB has documentary evidence to that effect support the claim.
   c. MCTB has band members that live in the area.
   d. MCTB can document land use of the area by band members.
8. Furthermore, MCTB has specific knowlege that is or may be pertinent to the area.
   a. MCTB personnel hunt into the area from the Buffalo Head Hills, Highway 88, Red Earth, Lesser
       Slave Lake and the Peace River.
  b. MCTB has and will continue to operate hunting camps into the area from our customary use
      areas.
  c. MCTB has personnel who work in the area.
  d. MCTB personnel have specific knowlege of paleontological depositions in the area. This includes
      research done and published by band members (1).
  e. MCTB has cause to believe that the archaeological assessment done of the ROW might not
      meet professional standards or standards expected by the aboriginal parties. This is based on
      published research and research done and published by band members. (2)
  f. The area has high paleolithic/early man archaeological site potential from the immediate quaternary
     ice-retreat period. MCTB personnel have specific knowlege in this area, including research done
     and publication by band members.(3)
  g. The area has high archaeological significance in that is a cultural overlap between the Arctic
      Traditions, the Plains Traditions and the Montane Traditions. This is a significant cultural boundary
      area about which little is known at this time. MCTB personnel have specific knowlege in this area,
      including research done and publication by band members.(4)
9. NGTL has not provided any materials or indication that any of these concerns have been addressed
   in any way other than to imply that MCTB has no business to inquire or bring forward any such
   concerns.
10. MCTB shares the environmental concerns expressed by the Woodlands Cree First Nation and
     supports their position. Numerous environmental studies by the DENE THA - who were the first
     aboriginal Nation to impacted by resource development beginning in the late 1950's - have indicated
     that there has been considerable and severe environmental degredation and damage to the
     traditional hunting and trapping lifestyle, economy and subsistence capabilities due to pipeline
     and resource extraction (5).
     The DENE THA have historical ties with the Buffalo Head-Cadotte River area and some families
     still have ties to the area (6).
 11. Until these issues are addressed and information provided to us that these concerns have been
     met to our satisfaction and confirmed by Ground Truth monitoring, we can not in good
     conscience offer our unqualified support for the NGTL Wolverine Project.
Kl TA MIYOHIN
J. Fromhold, (B.A., Arky.; M.A. Soc/Anth; Ph.D. Pend., Econ. Dev.; Cert. Bus. Analyst; Dip.F.Art)
            Camp Chief; Nations of Jasper 2011, 2012 & 2014 Assembly
            CEO/Head, Mountain Cree (Asini Wachi Nehiyawak) Traditional Band
            Recipient: Heritage Canada Minister's Award of Excellence in Leadership
            Okimaw, Nations of Jasper O Kichita
            Okimaw/Trustee, Kayashik O Kichita (Heritage Protection Society)
           Member: Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering Committee
          Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum
          Lead Historian: Enoch Cree Nation Land Claims
          Lead Historian: Dene Tha' First Nation Land Claims
          Advisor: Ermineskin Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
          Advisor: Samson Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
          Advisor: Sucker Creek Cree Nation Justice and Consultation, Heritage Protection
                   Elder: Beaver Lake First Nation * Mountain Cree Band * Calgary Friendship Centre
              Member: Jasper National Park Aboriginal Advisory Forum * Nations of Jasper Cultural Steering
                                  Committee * Enoch Cree Nation Elder's Committee
(1) Paleontological
          A SPECULATIVE LOWER CRETACEOUS SEQUENCE FROM THE LOON RIVER FORMATION, FORT
          VERMILION, ALBERTA; 1994
          ICE RETREAT AND GLACIAL LAKES IN NORTHERN ALBERTA; 1994
(2) Archaeological Publications
          KINDER-MORGAN Trans-Mountain Pipeline ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY
          ASSESSMENT, Winterbum - Wabamun, Alberta; 2013
          A PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED ARTIFACT TYPE: Typologically Similar Artifacts From
          Brooks and Edmonton; 2013
          ABORIGINAL CULTURAL SITES OVERVIEW CITY OF RED DEER, SEC. 34
          TWP. 38, RG. 27, W 4; 2012
          ALBERTA ARCHAEOLOGY: CONTRIBUTIONS; 2013
          ASSESSMENT OF SITE # 13-05-29-01: INTERPRETATION OF A HEIGHT-OF-LAND SITE;
          2013
          'HARDISTY POUND' ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES: Preliminary Assessment of summary
          statement, 'Archaeologcial Sites FdOt-1, FdOt-9 and FdOt-10 at Hardisty Alberta'; 2014
 (3) Paleolithic Archaeology
          ICE RETREAT AND GLACIAL LAKES IN NORTHERN ALBERTA; 1994
          THE WESTERN CREE (Pakisimotan Wi Iniwak): BACKGROUND AND PREHISTORY; 2011
          WEST CENTRAL ALBERTA: Prehistory -13,000 YEARS OF INDIAN HISTORY; 2011
 (4) Prehistory
          THE WESTERN CREE (Pakisimotan Wi Iniwak): BACKGROUND AND PREHISTORY; 2011
          WEST CENTRAL ALBERTA: Prehistory -13,000 YEARS OF INDIAN HISTORY; 2011
 (5) Dene Tha
          APPROACHES TO NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT: Theory, Bureaucracy and Political
           Expediency; Ph.D. Thesis; 1997
         DENE THA1 TRADITIONAL LAND USE AND OCCUPANCY STUDY; Arctic Institute,
        Calgary; DENE THA' NATION; 1997
        DENE THA' TRADITIONAL LAND USE, CONCERNS AND MITIGATION MEASURES WITH
        RESPECT TO TCPL's PROPOSED NORTHWEST SYSTEM EXPANSION PROJECTS,
        ALBERTA PORTION; Dene Tha1 First Nation Lands and Environment Department, Chateh,
        and All Nations Services, Edmonton; 2011
        DENE THA' TRADITIONAL LAND USE, CONCERNS AND MITIGATION MEASURES WITH
        RESPECT TO TCPL's PROPOSED NORTHWEST SYSTEM EXPANSION PROJECTS,
        BRITISH COLUMBIA PORTION; Dene Tha1 First Nation Lands and Environment Department,
        Chateh, and All Nations Services, Edmonton; October 31; 2011
        DENE THA' TRADITIONAL LAND USE WITH RESPECT TO THE SIERRA YOYO DESAN
        ROAD UPGRADE IN NORTHEASTERN BRITISH COLUMBIA; Dene Tha' First Nation Lands
        and Environment Department, Chateh, and All Nations Services, Edmonton; June 22; 2012
        DENE THA' TRADITIONAL LAND USE WITH RESPECT TO THE PROPOSED BOOTIS HILL
        PIPELINE, NORTHWEST ALBERTA; Dene Tha' First Nation Lands and Environment Department,
        Chateh, and All Nations Services, Edmonton; July 20; 2012
        DENE THA' TRADITIONAL LAND USE ON THE MBE CHON II LINNAH (Lower Petitot River);
        Dene Tha' First Nation Lands and Environment Department, Chateh, and All Nations Services,
        Edmonton; 2012
        DENE THA1 TRADITIONAL LAND USE WITH RESPECT TO BC                       HYDRO'S PROPOSED
        SITE C DAM, NORTHEAST BRITISH COLUMBIA; Dene Tha' First Nation Lands and Environ-
        ment Department, Chateh, and All Nations Services, Edmonton; 2012
        GOING TO WHEREVER THEY'VE BEEN, The Nagahzie (Cameron Hills) Traditional Land Use
        Study; Den Gah Gotie Dene Council and At! Nations Service; March 31; 2011
        HE'S GOTTA SHOOT ME FIRST, Dene Tha1 Traditional Land Use with Respect to the Proposed
        Mackenzie County Land Stage 3 Land Transfer Project, Northwest Alberta; Report Prepared Dene
        Tha' First Nation and the Minister of Environment and Sustainable Resources Development,
        Government of Alberta; Dene Tha' First Nations Lands and Environment Department, Chateh,
          Alberta, and All Nations Services; August 30; DENE THA FIRST NATION; 2012
        Northwest Alberta; Report Prepared for the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, Government
        of British Columbia; Dene Tha' First Nations Lands and Environment Department, Chateh,
        Alberta, and All Nations Services; June 13; DENE THA FIRST NATION; 2012
        Old chief regrets new lifestyle; EDMONTON JOURNAL, March 8; 1979
        SUBSISTENCE ECONOMY OF THE INDIANS OF NORTHERN ALBERTA; 1972
        SURVEY OF THE DENE THA1 FIRST NATION TRADITIONAL AND CURRENT LAND AND
        RESOURCES USES IN AREAS THAT MAY BE AFFECTED BY THE MACKENZIE GAS
        PROJECT; hDene Tha' First Nation; 2008
(6) Dene Tha History
         INDIAN MOVEMENTS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN THE NORTHWESTERN ALBERTA
         REGION; FROMHOLD, J.; 1975
         INDIAN TRIBES OF ALBERTA; Glenbow Museum, Calgary; DEMPSEY, Hugh A.; 1988
         INDIAN TRIBES OF ALBERTA (Dempsey) - A Review; J. FROMHOLD; 1994
         SUBSISTENCE ECONOMY OF THE INDIANS OF NORTHERN ALBERTA; 1972
        THE TWILIGHT PEOPLE: THE INDIANS OF NORTHWESTERN ALBERTA: AN
         ETHNOGRAPHIC SURVEY; Research Report on File with the Boreal Institute; 1974
        THE DENE THA FIRST NATION, Historic Overview; 2013
        THE 'PARTNER1 CONCEPT AMONG NORTHERN ALBERTA INDIANS; 1980
       The Pre-Machine Ethic of the Athabascan-Speaking Indians: Avenue of Barrier to Assimilation?
       A NORTHERN DILEMA: REFERENCE PAPERS; Western Washington State College,
       Bellingham, Washington, U.S.A.; ZENTNER, Henry; 19675
       THE SLAVE INDIANS; Alberta Opportunity Corps Program, High Level; 1976
                                            Mountain Cree Business Group
                       Asini Wachi Manpower Services * Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation
                                                          Affiliates
                         Alberta Moundbuilder Protection Society * Classic Ford Auto Repair
     Donalda Buffalo Pound Development O Kichita * Donalda Store * Fromhold Security * Heritage Consulting
               Heritage Publishing * iNEW Development Society * Inew Hair Salon * inew Publishing
 J. Fromhold Business Consulting * Kayashik O Kichita * Moundbuilder Holdings * Mountain Cree Museum Society
Mountain Hotshot & Delivery * Mountain Cree Ranching * Mountain Spring Water * Museum Development Consulting
Northern Janitorial * Paintball Warrior * Red Deer Antiques * Rocky Mountain Outfitters * Sheldon Mountain Trucking
                             Temple Mounds Development * Todd's Welding * YardWork
                        Old burial, archaeological site and hunting camp site
                                           •£• , ..^. • ,
                                                   Old Hunting Camp
                                                            OUNTAIN CREE
                        ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK/Bobtail Descendants
                                                      Traditional Band
                                                     Administrative Office
                              718 * Biackfalds, Alberta * CANADA TOM OJO * 1-403-885-2991
                                 Asini Wachi Nehiyawak Consultation/Heritage Consulting
        www.inewhistory.com                                                     c/o heritagedatabank@gmail.com
                         Member: Heritage Canada Mountain Parks Aboriginal Advisory Forum
                                         CONSULTATION
                                         PROCESS FOR CONSULTATION (v.13.01)
                                                           With The
                            ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK (Mountain Cree) TRADITIONAL BAND
The Process for consultation with the ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK is designed to protect the
Band's interests and rights within ASINI WACHI Traditional Territory. Any proponent
considering initiating industrial activity and within ASINI WACHI Traditional Territory which
could affect the aboriginal rights of it's members should refer to this process. This
Process will result in better time management, improved relationship and increased
professionalism between the proponents and the Band, as well as providing a common,
formalized framework for all to follow.
                                              PROCESS FOR CONSULTATION
NOTIFICATION
Proponents must send a letter accompanied by project maps at scales of 1:250,000 and
1:50,000, detailing project scope, project timelines and contact person prior to commence-
ment of any development, exploration, logging or ground disturbance on ASINI WACHI
Traditional Territory. Due to the enormous volume of industry referral correspondence
the ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK receives on an annual basis, the more lead time provided by
a company regarding its activities in the Traditional Territory, the more timely a response
can be expected from the ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK Band.
An acknowlegement of receipt by the ASINI WACHI Band will be sent out as soon as the
initial notification letter is received. Ideally, if a proponent has identified long term
development plans for the ASINI WACHI Traditional Territory, it would be advantageous for
the proponent to be proactive in its norification of the ASINI WACHI Band. This would provide
for adequate time for the proponent to answer any concerns the Band may have, and will
prevent delays. Person-to-person contact is highly recommended.
RESPONSIBILITY
Since the proponent assumes full responsibility for the presence and conduct of their
employees, contracted companies and service or supply businesses which they cause to
come onto the ASINI WACHI Traditional Territory, it is the responsibility of the proponent to
notify the ASINI WACHI Band. Consultants of sub-contractor notification of activity is con-
sidered unacceptable by the ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK Traditional Band.
 CONSULTATION
Depending on the scope of the project, a meeting between the proponent and Chief and
Council may be required to answer any questions regarding the project.
ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK Traditional Territory
The following map outlines traditional lands used by the ASINI WACHI NEHIYAWAK. These
parameters have been documented, tested and accepted by the National Energy Board
(NEB) of the Government of Canada.
The National Energy Board is the agency tasked with determining which aboriginal Nations
fall under the Supreme Court Duty To Consult rulings. The NEB is also tasked with assessing
the validity of the territorial claims of these Nations.
Our claims have been assessed, tested and accepted, and our position is established In
Law.
                                      " Documented Land Use
                                      —
                                   !?   Other Travel
