1m
Natiunal Energy ,g_;ﬁérq.“t Dﬁ'ice natinnat
Enard #Jhﬁ‘” da Fért ETQIE
:2..'.._ rv:?r:
Letter nf Cumment
__—'__.—_.-_-_._.__m.__—_—I
Data: September15.2D11
Frnceeding Infurmatiun
iject Name: Nnrth West Mainline Expanﬂun Flujact
Hearing ﬂrder Nﬂ: GH - 2 - 21111 File Number: File nf Fat: — Ga—Hﬂm—EMD-tﬁﬂﬂ
Enntact Infurmatiun
Name: Grant Paul: Addreas: Fﬂ. Em: 143
Title: Directnr: Lands and Ecnnnmir. City: Eruwnvale i
D&velu . ﬂ'lﬂﬂt ,
Organizatinn: Duncan'ﬁ FirEt Hatiﬂn Prntu'intte Alberta
. Telépttune: Ital] - 5'3? — :1??? F'ﬁE-tﬂ1 Eﬂde: TﬂH EILIJ .
| Facalmtts: TBﬂ-EE? - 392th Email: grantﬂgrantpautsﬁum ._|
Please ensure that ynur letter at mr'nrnant includes:
- the nature Elf y'ﬂUJ' interest in the appliﬂaﬁﬂn
. wmments cm the aﬂplicatiun
- any relevant Infnrmatinrt that will explain tar auppnrt y'ﬂur cnmmentﬁ
Fnr further infnrrnatitm, please refer tn the Hearing Order cm the NEE websita at
m_nEh—unegﬂca
Eummentﬁ
Attach additinnal pages. it necessarg
..._-- ._-_.._.1_.....__,._._...,. ...:._._..__ _ _......_ —-—--|
Plaase MVIEW :ttached Duncan's Ftrst Natmn letter. :
HFﬂhthanks I
Telannnnaﬂéléphttna : [4-Day 232-4300
2:: ?EnriﬂﬂTEéJ: DEE; FaulmiIEtT-Eténttnieur r [dﬂﬁ-t 292-5533
9 m I I-tttp'thuwwratzunne.gt:.ca
Hutu Septiéma manna 3.43. C dink]: Telauhmmelénhune : 1-EInﬂ-EEQ-12Etﬁ
Ealgﬁryr tﬂtlt-Ena] TEF‘ DIE an a a chslrmlaﬁélénnn-am : i-EITT~EE-E|~E-Eﬂ3
EEP-lE-EDH BEHEE EST}: P.ICICIE

i The erepeeed Ehihehege Leterel Leee Pipeline
. The erepeeed Tenghe Greek: Leterel Leep Pipeline {Cranberry Eeetteh]
- The ereeeeed Netth WEST Main Line Leep {Pyramid Seetieh} . end
- The euerell eenetruetien et 12 prejeete {which ineludee the eheue referenced
erejeete ferming pert ef TEPL’e Herth I«Meet Syetem Exeaneten Prejeette — a
strategic: pipeline eerh'der extending fer a distance et ever Eﬂﬁﬂ'h’l frem an area
herth —eeet et Ft. Neleen. Eh: te eh nerth —- weet ef Manning. Alberta].
In writing te the TEFL themhere ef the JWG, the DFN hepee te ﬁnd ways and meene et
[:1rtleu‘mti'uretyr eddreeeihg ite eeneerhe we the meehenierhe end ereceduree eet eut within
the TEFL — DFN Agreement- '
e}The Impeet ef Prejeete en the Bhinehege Beriheu Range and the Rights and
Interests ET the BF” in Retatiun te Carihnu Pnpuletinn end Earibnu Habitat
The prepeeed Ehinehege Leteret Leep Pipeline. Tenghe Greek Leterel Leee {tirer'ttterwr
Seetieh} Pipeline Prefect end the Nerth West Main Line Leep Pyramid Seetteh F’ieetihe
ell intersect the range and habitat ef the Ehinehege eeri‘eeu herd and the range and
habitat et the Hetehkiee eeriheu euh — here and '[Jﬂtﬁl'l‘ttﬂlt'jt that ﬁt the Deedweed
eeriheu herd. [See etteeheel men}
As yeu ere aware, the DFN hee timited capacity and reeeureee tn:- dEEI with the array,
number and breadth et Iehde end reeeureee epplteetiehe end Izuelteyr mettere referred te
it fer eeheultetten putpeeee. 1I.:"'I.thitne the Drth eekhewledgee end is thankful fer the emelt
emeunt et eeheultetien funding that TEFL end the Geuernment at Alberta preuide te
euppﬂrt eeneultatiene en epeeifie prejeete, it ie eirrtelyr net eneugh te allew the BF“ te
keep ehreeet and en tep ef ell et the key ieeuee end mettere that impact en ite rights and
tntereete.
Deeette thie heeltleg ef werlrt and feet: ef reeeureee. thie epring the DFN wee ehle tn
undertake e review et eueitehle literature en the euhjeet et the etetue ef eeriheu
pﬂpulatiehe end eertbeu habitat within the hereei fereete et nerthern Alberta. nerth —
western Alberta and within ite treditienel territery. ﬂur review et thie hEt-Et‘y‘ et eeedernte
literature eleerly heere eut whet DFH eldere have been eeying end trying te elert
geuernment egeneiee fer eeme yeere -— that the It3htrleheuge, Deedweee end Hetehltiee
earthen herde ere in dire tremble and en in the decline-
EEP—lﬁ—Eﬂll emee e'te em;

In eurnn'iery. eeriheu eteyed en irneertent rele in the treditienel diet et the DFN end wee
preferred eeeeiee. Eldere end the yeunger generetlen ef DFH huntere eentinuee te
eetiyely hunt eerieeu inte the “1933's within the DFN traditiehel territery- A marked free
tell in eeriheu peeuletiene wee netee threugh the tEEﬂe and 1993's.. While eeme
huntere eentinued te Itill the edd eeriheu while hunting. the rnejerity ef DFN huntere
elected te etee hunting eeriheu giyen their eeneern eyer the dwindling nurnhere. Recent
interyiewe. reyeel thet thie wee en eetiye eeneeryetien eheiee by many ef the DFN
hentere.
Eeriheu are new ieund end eheeryee withln Ew ereee within [JFN‘e treeitienei territery.
The enly area where eeriheu can he feund new is in the area nerth ef the Clear Hille.
weet ef the Peace Hiyer end the Chihehege yelley end ereee edjeeertt te the Ehinehege-
A few eeriheu heye heen eited within the pest iiye yeere eeuth ef CEIFH'IDH Leite end
weet ef the Seal eiltieldet juet te nerth ef the DFN’e Wiltiem Meekenzie reeerye. These
areas repreeent the Ieet few remaining areas within eur treditienel territery that can he
eeid te heye inteet ereee thet preyitzle the neeeeeery hehitet eenditiene fer eeriheu.
Further, theee ereee elee represent the last rernnent lende. where DFN eeeeie repert
thet they can ﬁt: where they can still hunt with eerne ldegree ef eueeeee end where they
feel they can 9-: end he unrneleeted hy induetriel eetiyity. The DFN hee the greeteet
intereet and meet eeneern eleeut the Chinehege. Hetehiciee end Deedweed peeuletienei
rengee. whieh ere in eieee preitin'iity te eur reeerye eernmunity. Eeriheu. ee en indieeter
peintte the impertenee eftheee few and remaining inteet hehitet ereee eyeilehle tn: the
DFN te pursue their treditienel yeeetiene end trenemit their euiture te the next
generetien.
DFH elders heye reperted thetthe eeeiine er neted ebeeenee ei eeriheu eepuletiene
eppeere te eerteepehd with the Geneentretieh ef industrial actiyity anti where there is
marked eeneity ef lineer eerridere. inelueing thet ef pipelinee. trenernieeien iinee end
eeeeeereeEE.
Giyen theee eeneerne, the EIFN felt eemeellee te write the Geyernrnent et Alberta te
elert it et DFN eeneerne anti the piight e‘i eeriheu herds within DFH'e treditienel territery
enel nerth —weetern etherte. The nature and heeie eiite eeneerne ere eet eut in the
etteehed Mey E, 2311 ietter. 1y'y'ithin thie letter. the DFN requested that the Beyernrnent
at Alberta eeeee end deeiet in ieeuing further tenuree. permits end eppreyele te third
pertiee within theee rengeet
1|r'y'hile the DFN hee eenetruetiye knewledge ef TEPL'e Herthweet Syetern Eeeeneien
F'rejeete. it wee net in e eeeitien {giyen eeeeeity and sheer weritleeti] te rnenitet. reyiew
end reply te the sheer enteunt et eeplieetiene end ieeuee inelueing the prejeete being
eetiyeiy advanced by TEF‘L in thie area. he eueh. we heye juet been able in new elert
eEF—te—eett nine:= ete P.I'Jlﬂ

‘fﬂLl ef eur eeneerne aheut the ramtﬁeatiene et TEPL'a Eteweieph‘tehte in the Chihehaga
eariheu range.
ﬁts aean as practicable. the DFH read the deeieiehe et the Netiehal Energy Beard {NEE}
in relatien tn the appretred TEFL Tanghe Greek Lateral Leap {Sleat Creek Seetien] and
ether prejeeta that the HEB haa aperetred within the uieinityﬁeth TEFL [within its
aereehing repert and applieatieh} and the Beard {within its reaeerte fer deaieieh} hate
the issues related It“: the presence et eariheu in the area, eariheu habitat and the aeriaue
challengee that industrial activity paee fer eariheu papulatiene. Heweuen hath parties
ﬁnd the effects ef the prejeete ae negligible given the prefect apeeiﬁe mitigatieh
measures hrepeeed lay TEFL.
TEFL hae generatly reached the eame eeheluaiana within ita applieatieh and
enwrenrnehtat screening repert and applicatieh far the Tahghe Creek Lateral Leap —
titratttterrtir Seetleh that is eurrentlt.i hefere the Beard — which is, that impacts eh eariheu
pepuiatieha will be negligible ehee TEFL applies ir‘IIIZtLIetI"';.Ir Standard meaaurea.
We believe it ie alea aafe ta assume that TCPL'e pending applieatiehe fer the ptepﬂsed
Ehihehaga Lateral Leep arid NWML Leep — Pyramid Seetien will alee again reach the
same enhelueieh and preheee the same heiler plate mitigatieh meaeuree
The DFN muat respectfully disagree with the eaheluaiene reached let; TEFL within its
environmental eereenihg reperte and applieatieha and in the ﬁeeieienereaehed by the
Beard in relatieh te theee applieatiane.
It is abundantly clear te the DFN that measures eueh ae demarcatihg eatiheu aenee with
signal “early in — early eut guidelines. mahitering aha ehaewtng eariheu when prejeete
are under eehetruetien and reducing time cut site frerh RﬂWe tte net address the hey
teetere that are eehtrihutihg ta the eliminatien at eariheu tram the hereat landscape and
within the Chinehaga range. Rather it ie the erepehderahee at industriai activity.
cumulative disturbance and fragmentatieh et hahttat by linear earridere such as
pipelihea that give rise tn the impact an earthen pepuiatiehe and the righta and intereste-
ef the BF“ in relatieh te eariheu and the habitat cm which they rely. We helietre eur
views are herhe eut hy the views at pretrinelal. federat anti univereiw hielegiete that
have studied these matters fer yeara.
The DFN take the view that Ta hg he Creek Laterat Leap - Cranberry Seetieh, the
prepeeed Chihehaga Lateral Leap and NWML Leep {Pyramid Seetéeh] will result in
signiﬁcant adverse envirehmehtal affects an earthen and aarihau habitat and airzitteraeltnr
impact the rights and interests at the DFN. We believe that further. mere eampreheneiue
study is warranted with the tte'y' partiea wariting ta underetahd the impact ettheae
eeeeiﬁe prajeete atertg with the eenatruetiah ef the Harth West System EIPHI‘IStﬂt‘I
Prejeet as a whale and ether deueleemehte impacting en the Ehinehaga Earthen Range
eEP-te—eett 05:35 ate F.013

anal eritieai hahitat- |n eeeenee. TEFL ia eenatrueting a majer prejeet— a etrategie
Energy eerrider inte the heart eithe Ehinehaga earlheu range in the faee at a
erepeneeranee ef evidence and epinien that helee, that prejeet ae prepeeed ie an
undeairahie planning eptien and ehauld Iae aueided in faaeur at ether eptiene that
preserve earihau habitat.
Further. we are alae unaware and have net heen prnwded any infermatien that eauld
determine whether the inereaaee eapaeityr within the Nerth Weet Mainline eerrider eeutd
give rise te. and shape subsequent develenrnent within the Chinehaga eariheu range“?
In ehert. ie the pipeline I pipeline eerricier fully eemmitted and deee it act as a "haliet
line" mewng natural gae uaiumea fren't the item River Elaeinte TEPL‘e eyetern at the
reeeiet paint near Manning? Dr deee the pipeline t pipeline eerrieer prauide additienal
available capacity that parties eauld eeeln: ta take advantage af— thus resulting in further
eaeleratien and develepment within the Ehinehage earthen range and areas adjaeent ta
the pipeline eerrider‘? The DFN believes that this is reaeenahle and relevant aueetien
and wiehee ta he ahle ta werI-t with TEF'L and er ether eartiee te addreea thie.
Gwen this, we eat: that Jeint Wanting Great: eentrene a meeting with all eeeeihle epeea
ta review DFhle eeneerne in relatien te eariheu and begin the impertant werlt at
addreeaing theae eeheerna via the Cemmunily‘ Agreement.
1|litihile the intent at the agreement is far the eartiee te attempt te addreee all ieeuee en a
hi — lateral heals, the DFN feels that it meets alea alert the Hanaerahle Members at the
Beard at ear eeneerna with aepreued prejeete, prejeete under review and pending
aeplieatiene that TEFL ie activelyr ferward'rng- We hepe that TEFL will eupeert eur
deeieien te rnaI-ce the NEE aware at the nature at eur eeneerne at this imeertant stage.
hlﬂFH Eeneerne Aheut the Segregatien ef the Herth Weet Mainline Prejeetle and
the Apprepriate Etandard fer Review
The DFN enteree inte the Ehr'nnnunittlr Agreement with TEFL with the geal ef imprawng
ita relatienahip with DFN and trying te impreue the deficient eeneultatien etanclartle and
pelieiee new in place within Eanada. Athena and Etritieh Gelumhia. White geuernment
agencies have deveieeed eelieiee and guidelines that purpertedlyr implement the duty te
eehault, theee develeped tn date are fauna te he weetully inadequate and lacking. let
the time that DFN enteretzi inte the Eemmunity Agreement, it wae still uncertain whether
quaei -ju::iieial hediee have the duty te eeneult and if ea: haw this duty weuld be
implemented within the eenteat e‘i ‘ieaerallyr regulated preieete? DFN entered inte the
agreement with TEFL as a ghee faith effert te bridge that uneertainty ta determine
whether the eurrent eituatien eeLlld he appreved en.

EEPelE—Eﬂlt ee:ea 3?: P 91%

Duet the past year. heth parties have generally eeted eh same at the previe'rnhe with
eerhe peeititre reeutte. TEFL hee net hetifiee that it is het eetteﬁed with DFN'e eetiehe
under the agreement te dete. DFN hee pertieipetee ih fietd eeeeeemente end ieeued
memerehtie end letters in reletieh te TEFL hrejeet applieetiene. ft is eetiuely werlting en
the TLUS prejeet that witl pretride a better heeetihe eet eftreditienel and cultural uee
date that can end wiil he utilized in future TEFL prejeet eeeneriee.
At the time et the agreement signing. DFN wee made aware efeeme et the
deuelepmeht emhitiehe hf TEFL in respect te the Herh River Eeein, hewever DF-‘N wee
ihttietly infermeel thet TEFL intended te advance ehe Ierger. integrated prejeet— the
Nerth West Mainline Prejerzt.
In recent menthe. TEFL amended thie hleh end preeeedee te break up the hrejeet thte
emeller eenetituent prefect applieenene whieh it theh eubmitted tn the Beard hureuent te
Seetieh 52 end 53 at the Nehenet Energy Eeerﬂ {NEE} Aer.
Frem DFN'e perepeetiue. the fetlewihg eppreuecl. pending hrejeete end prejeete under
review appear to he pert ef ene large integrated mejer prefect er undertaking being
femerttet‘i underthe ruhrie "Herthweet System Expeheieh Prejeete:

- Ferttme Creek Metre Stetien

. Herh River Mainline —I{ernie Herth Seetieh

- Herh River Mainline Leep — Hyhle Creek Seetieh

- Hem River Meihlihe Leep — Tewrteeitei 1‘JteeI-r: Seetieh

II- Hem River Mainline Leap — Little Hey- Seetien

I Mendy Creek Eemereeeer Etetieh

- HMWL Leep — Timhertrtrelf Seetieh

- HWML Leep — Pyramid Eeetieh

I Hidden Lake Nerth Eempreeenr Stetieh

- Tenghe Greek Leterel Leer: — Sleet EreeIt Beetieh

- Tehghe Greek Leterel Leeh e t'jrehhehrt.r Beetiehh

- Ehinehege Leterel Leep
Ae heted. the 12 prejeete thet matte up the greup e1 Nerth Weet System Expeheien
Prejeette ie in elt ihtehte end etlrpeeee u ene mejer pipeline hrejeet resulting in the
ereetieh at e etretegie er'tergt.r eerhder extending fer a dietenee at ever EDDHM frem an
area herth —eeet hf Ft. hleleen. EH: eereee the Alberta — Eh: harder then It: eh nerth —
west ef Manning. Alberta.
Quite simply, if 'It Eeelte tilte e pipeline. wetite like e pipeline and tellte ﬁlm a pipetine. it‘s
likely a pipeline — in the ease ehe mejer integrated pipeline preieet reeultihg in the

eEP—te—emt ﬂE:3IE eve e.tute

eahatruetian at a etratagie energy aarridat in area at cultural and aeeie — eeahamie
eighiﬁeanae te the DFN.
In recent weeks, the DFN raiaad thie eeneerri with TEFL repreeentatiyea and asked the
aueatian at why TEFL epteci te ferwara a aeriee ei’ eegregated. diaereet ptejeete ae
appeaea ta ehe integrated prejeet. Dur aueetiaha and eeneerne aheut thejuetifieatien
far this aetiatt aha ite reauitihg affects an etattitery and legal requirements and duties
ewett ta the ﬂFN hae net been adequately addreeeea ta date. Further we hate that
within reeent weeks. the DFM eeeur‘nahtee TEFL repreeentatiyee and TEFL euh -
eaheuitahte were they eanfirmed that the key faetar in deciding ta break apart the
prejeet ihte a eeriee ef emallar eampenehta wae a euhatantially reduced time perieti anti
Ieee eemplieatett reyiew preeeaa.
Eueh inferihatieh ferthaemihg tram TEFL reareeentatiyee hae eniy increased eur leyei
at eeneern that due preceee ie being auhyerteti in TEPL‘e intereet {and that at its
euetarhera} at getting the eipelina arajeet anti earriaer huilt faater and eliminating the
need fer a mere fuleema anyirenrnehtal anti aeeie — eeehemie impact aeeeaemeht
reyiew and eeneuitatien araeeee with the DFN and ether Firal: Natiane-
White we tie net hate the reeeureee ta undertake at present a legal epinienat this time.
we fear that in breaking up the preieet. TEFL has and is precluding the ability at the
NEE ta earry eut ite mandate ta adequately aeeeee the aaanamie. technical and
aeanemie feaeihility efthe prajeet and the enyirehmantal and aaeie — eeehamie imaaata
at the prejeet, many at which haye eumulatiye dimeneiehe. Ia eating against a mere
fuleeme and integrated rew'ew at the prejeat. TEF‘L may alae preeiude the atiiiity ef the
DFN. ether First Natiehe and ether ataiteheldera ta adequately aeaeee key releyant
strategie iaeuea that impact an them {e-g- eumulatiye eﬁeeta eariheu impacts ate} and
ta he aﬁerdeti the aaaertunity ta he meaningfully eanauited at a Ieyel in keeping with the
aeeae at the prejeet and all at ite effeete-
The DFN reeeeetftiiiy euhmite that the breaking up at thie ehe majar prateet er
undertaking {inte 12 diaereet erejeete} under Seetiehe 52 and EB efthe NEE ha is
ihaaarapriata in thie eaee arid ie hat in keeping with the spirit and letter at the DFN -
TEFL Cemmunity Agreement anti releyaht eemmah law and etatutary requirements-
We understand that the NEE hae ieeuecl an Infarmatien Ftequeet te TEFL in relatian ta
thie matter. and we 1am»: reward te reviewing TEPL'e taepehae. Further. we alaa
reaueet that the JWG greue eehyehe a meeting ea that TEPL'e ratiehaie anti
juatifieatieh far thie aptiah aan heard. undereteed and duly eanaicieretl hy the DFN. It
may he that DFN may require aaeietanee via a third party reyiew ta understand and
reapand ta TEPL'e au’amiaaien.

EEP—tE~2011 ﬂElti-IE 37:: Fume.

lh eleeihg. we wish te eummerize by setting that the DFH hee identiﬁed end
uneedreeeee pre}eet epeelﬁe eeheerhe in reletien te theprepeeed Ehinehege Leterel
Leep Pipeline. the Tehghe Creel»: Leteret Leep Pipeline [EFEIFIIJEFW Seetteh} end the
Nerth 1tt'tl'eet Main Line Leep {Pyramid Seetien} erejeete. We wish te eueil eureeluee et
the preeeee eet eut under the TEPL— DFN Cﬂ-r‘ﬁmur'lify' Agreement with e UiEW te
reeeluihg the ebeue eeneethe. We will werk with yeu te EDTWEﬁ-E‘. e meeting e1: the
earlieet peeeible end mutually,r werkeble dete-
‘feute trulyt
.r.’
IS A I. ' '
It .-"‘..l'-.+-"lll J' t“...- I"
Mr. Grant Peuie: Jeint Werking Group Member
GE: Chief Den Teetewieh end Beuneil
Mr. Tern Green. DFN Lends
DFN Elders ene Cﬂmmunlt‘f Membere
Rehertliendel. Trenet‘jeheee
Netiehel Energy.r Beerd
eEP—te-eett ee:
35 ete e.tut'

- . E'E'I'Tl:
Attachment: Hey Carihuu Ranges: WIthIn DFN TEFTHIDW ﬂf Interest and Can
The Chinchaga .' Hutchklss I Deadwnﬂd
“'32 .'- .i._._.._...r:a - ' ~' g.
rm- 5'5““ “ﬁg; ._
; - vw -.. ' 4+?“ .. 5mm m-nwnal
5‘ ”5‘ 3'! hm- f". *- . ﬂair. ' - _
-..-".".€ “ ﬁﬂ'ﬂ -J_ ' - #5
.-'.‘. 43$.- Jh . I " ‘-. J‘
."l §ul'-"l:':l-'Il1:i"h $111
*1? I"~"lfﬁ'i3ilIFJ-F'I’H "' imwmmiﬂ=
..-.':.--.- ' . .-.~';=~:;.
_.. 5+. 4 -.-l- - ”*1? aﬁfft. ﬂ .-
i. "P. ,- _ 1 LEE“ Eﬂrlri .‘.. *— u. Hmhﬁg
. I 1.4 .l-. .- . - . :"'.'.
.2361 . . -"'. '7' "‘17- "
".'. ' mutuhh'rss 1* *L -~“ T..- .m ‘ a P
" ‘l_|_..:-:.;:|h_ '11 3:1: 1;". ﬁxg l “arr: n r
. _ . _. _ . . 1.“ '. F" 1...
ﬂﬁﬂﬁWﬂD ' . " I If "- ‘ ' "
I'LL - |._ H ---II!!'.- . ..-_-ul..
I .E-a—W |."|'-.'1":' ." Will; I -- -. 4% Ii. rﬁhﬂ '
.a #- ﬁ E":9: .1 * 15%er .m-
- .' "' ' " :-1.2 '-"'-""-'-'.'-+ ..
b” ' ' _ . -' -.___;5---.,||l.+ .ﬁﬁﬂﬂ
5"- .'.-.e-' __ rm.— ':-.‘:a ca. rh' f. _' _:_'_--. 4151'
- -'~ _, " .' ‘ 1'
5- 251“: Lake ' -- ”a ..;.:—:- : ﬁrm
. .'l - '
Rﬁdmchrairiﬂ- J - ._ 1””- """"-“ - ' '
3.117.“??? !" ' a .'a “:1 “rinlun
' ml- -- +__ " E1? fﬁ-ﬂm'l .H-m : "7' *1- H 1’ .1
. Hr; % Lime Emmy " E33193 1‘1?er
I Jil-‘ﬂ'l' H: “L!“ ‘l
. ﬂ '- L| ('nlml: :Erl l-i'
ﬂLa FEE“! *‘muw ' " rum”: I ..
—. ' ' ‘ 1 L1 ~+I
1:: I H“: '5‘: “Him 'Tiﬂﬂ-‘feﬁ‘:ﬁnfu17 .
..‘!!.J."E"'5'e'*' ' '
' ‘i_-_ {Scrum JHEEIE
I "'~_ . HA”. 'I ‘1'?” ﬂ
ff" ;'" I'I'JJ.“-;"'-:"| "'U”
m ‘1: Hﬂflli Eanﬂ' ----'~:--.
. -' 5-H}? "
Mil“ I 1-! I-i." F'.'.|-'.| 'EIIH‘. mﬁf’
. . _______ls|g:.1|u-_r-'.-H= - ._
Lummmq -- ' I'Hmm
unmnr.
I‘Ii'wr
II.
“31:. 1 LI IHEH'IEJ .
I
SEP-lE-Eﬂii 38:35 351-: ?.DIE

JHBLHN'HHEEﬂre-E Eijtiﬂilé}:
. -.,-' .lrjl _
r"?
Bee lea Brewneale Alberta
TeH em
May 5. EH11
Mr. Dave Hereieue
Preeineiel Eeriheu Management Ceerdineter
‘lﬁﬂ‘: Freeinetel Building
1032i: ._ 99 Street
Grand Prerie
Tee 6J4
VIA FAK: TED — 533 - 5622 I ma - Edd - 4532
Dear Mr. Hereieux:
I am writing te yeu en hehetf ef the Duneeh'e Firet Netten {DFN‘J in reeeeette the
Eeeernment et Alberta's prepeeee Weedtend Bertheu F'elie-z.f fer Alberta [the Pelieyt.
Rights of the Duncan”: Firet Neﬂen
The DFN is en adherent te Treaty #3 signed in 1399. and tune er the First Netten
henefieieriee r::r."|i'reet1.ur E, which preuidee treatyr rtghte within the meaning ef e. 35 ef the
eee—te—eeu eeme eee ?.Dee

Eenetttutten Act, 1955- Treaty 3 hrerridee. inter etie. the fe1lewing righte ter ite
hehefieieriee:
”And Her Majesty the Queen HEREBV AGREES with the hate thtttehe that they ehett
here right te hhreue thetr ueuet eeeetiehe ht hunting] trapping and ﬁshing threhgheut the
treet surrendered ee heretetere deeehheti, euhjeet te eueh reguiettene as they trhm ttrhe
te time he made hy the Geeemmeht hi” the eeuhtw. eating under the eutheh'ty et Her
Mejeety. and seeing end excepting eheh treete ee they he required er tetreh uh trem
ttme te ttme fer eettiemeht, mihtrtgl turttheh'hg, trading er ether herpeeee.“
he yeti ere ewere. Treaty 3 did net eetehlieh e lend Liee hluehriht ter heleneing the right
ef the Erewn he take he tends fer develehmeht end eettlerneht with the right ht DFN te
use all lentie het ee teI-cen eh. Instead. the Treaty wee intended te eetehiieh reletiehehihe
et truet end reeheet between the Erewn ehd Treaty 3 heeplee within which the weritihg
hut ef sueh e lend lhee hiuehhht chute, and remains he he develeped.
The DFN eeeerte thet eheeiﬁe erel eemmitrhente end undertakings were made by the
Deminieh TI'EEW Eemmieeiehere iheideht te rtegetietieh hf Treaty E in ertter te ihrtuee
the Firet Hetien heehlee te enter ihte Treaty reletiehe with the Queen. Theee
eemmitmehte end undetteltinge included Crewn eernrnitrnehte that the Indiehe weeld he
he tree he the their life after 1the Treaty ee hetere er‘ttrtir ihtﬂ Treaty; thet “'15 CTﬂWl‘I WDUM
peee rte tewe eeneerhlng fieh ehti wittltite wh'teh were net in the intereete ef the Indians;
and the Crewn weultt hreteet the lndiene in their weyietdife end eenduet et their ueuel
veeetierte et hunting. tiehihg and. trapping.
The EIth eeeerte thet it wee the intehtien ht the hertiee te Treety E that while the Erewh
eeulh eutheriee eerhe eettlemeht end eeeelehment ht the land eehieet he the prettieiene
etthe Treaty reletiert'e eet eht eheue. the hehetieieriee et Treaty hr thelutting Duneeh'e
penplaﬁ weul-ti he ehte te eetry eut their wey—et- life and eeereiee their hehel ueeetihhe.
Thie rrieerte that the Drewn meet eneure that the taking up et lende! ie the erreeht'hh
rather then the ruie end that there elweye muet he eufﬁeieht tenet e't euttieient quetittr Left
te euhpett the meaningful etrereiee ettreety righte he the DFH.
The DFN helde end exereieee Treaty and hheriginei Rights threugheut the etrhehee et
Treaty #3. the hieterieel tehde et the |[tree eeehle, threugheut the Pteuinee ht hlherte
enrl the DFN Firet Netieh Traditienei territery. The Geeernrneht hf htherte hee heen
preuidett eenetruetiee hetiee etthe teeetieh and extent et DFM'e traditieriel territery end
the righte exereieed within hi; the DFN en prier eeeeeiene.
eee—te—eett earth 3¢H e.eet

: |1""'-\-..‘ _ ,. 1|w‘1-_~. ' ... I E.-

_ I._}t.1m..-m_~ 11:31 FEHHIE -

-e-_.->.t._.- J_qe-IJ .

_ ...---.-_--...._-_ F -4----

F'ﬂ. Be: HE Erewnuate, htherte
TCIH ﬂLEI
3eeternher15, 2ﬂ11
Ms Ann Marie Erieksen: Seeretery ef the Bee rd
Netienei Energy Beard
«die Seventh Avenue SW
Eetgery. Alberta
T2P GEE
WA FAX: [4:934 293 - 55M
LETTER DF CDMMENT: Eeneerne ef the Duneen'e Firet Netien in Reletien te-
Trane Benede Pipelinee Ltd. Nerth Weet Mainline Expeneien Prejeete: Hem River
Mainline Leap [Hymn Erin: Seeﬁen}. NW Mainline Leap {Timberw'elf Sentien],
Tenghe Greek Lateral Leap [Erenherry Seetien}
Deer Me. En'el-teeh end Heneurehle Membere et the Heard:
The Duneen'e First Netieh {DFN} ereuidee this Letter ef Eemment in respect te the
aheue referenced epptieetien te hetify the Hetfenel Energy Beere [NEE] ef the eeheeme
we have in retetten te thie epplleetten end the series at prejeete being eeueneee by
eEP—ie—eeu emee 37“ F333

Culture] and Seeie — Eeenemie Neede at the Duneen'e Feegie
The DFN has. and eentihuee te rely eh eeuntry feeds. Unguiete peewetiehe play 3 key
rele in preyieihg fer etJr eemmunity'e euetenenee. eulturei. spirituel end eeeie —
eeehemie heede. While the DFH'e treeiitienel eeenemy end mede ef life has been
altered eyer the Ieet ferty yeere threugh heeitet deetruetieh by industry ene‘
uneueteinehie heryeetihg Ieyeie permitted by geyerhmeht. the Duneen'e peeple eehtihue
te treyei irite the tereete te hunt fer their families te put feed en the table.
Netwitheteneihg the impacts te hehitet end the declining etete ef wildlife reeeureee
within nerth -weeterh Albertet the Duneen'e hunting euiture has persisted. is being
meihteihee erie is being eeeeett ehte the new generetien.
A peiht needs he he made eheut the eeeie — eeehemie eheilehgee the Duneeh'e eeeele
feee. Hunting ef unguletee eeritiheee due te the unique eeeie ~— eeehemie
eireumeteneee that the Duheeh'e eeepie feee. The eyeiieel heture ef the regiehe
eeenemy. and lack et eertieieetieh in the meinetreerh eeeherhy. meene that many ef eur
ierniliee etiil rhuet rely en ungulete peeutetiene te make it threugh eerteih eeriette ef the
year. The high eeet ef etere heught eeureee ef pretetn. meene thet hunting meet
eehtinue te he an eetieh fer the rneny ef eur femiliee. This means. that they meet rely en
the range ef eeeeiee ef unguietee within the hush. Meeee end eeriheu ere eited as being
the preferred eeeeiee that were ereeureci in the pest.
Further, the Duneeri‘e peeple eleet te rheihteih theirtreeitienei wey ef i'rfe despite the
feet they Iiye within 3 mixed and changing eeenerhy. The DFN pieeee 3 high erierity en
being ehie te eehtinue te utilize lerge pertiehe ef ite traditienei territery ee thet they can
maintain their eulture end transmit it te future generetiene. Like the eeriheu, the
Duneen'e eeeple heed eleeee where they eeh ge where there are still eutfieieht lende et
eufiieieht quality and where they eeh eeereiee their righte in e meaningful way. The
exereiee ef treety rights is predicated ueeh yiehle pepuletiene ef unguietee. whieh in turn
is predicated upen the exietehee ef yiehle hehitete-
tmgeﬂgnee ef Eeriheu te the Duneen’e Firet Hetien
As yeu are aware! the DFN'e treditiehel territery is situated within an area ef lewer
hielegieei preduetiyity. ih eemperieeh te ereee te the eeuth. Unguletee heye edeeteti
themeeiyee te the unique eeelegy ef thie regien end heye distributed themeeiyee eereee
the leneeeepe as e euryiyei etretegy. This is true ef meeee. but especially et eeriheu.
The DFN edeetett their hunting petterne ehe eeeeeeei reuncl et treditiehel eetiyitiee te
meteh thie pattern. This meant that the Dueeen'e peeple treyellee fer and wide and heat
te reiy en the range ef unguietee available including eeriheu end meeee. A deelihe ih
EEP-lE-Eﬂii 03:41 373 ?.DDE

ehe epeaiee plaeecl mere hreeeure eh DFN femiiiee end the DFN were required 1th
adapt
The DFN haa undertaken eerne iriitial reeeareh threugh traditienal eeelegieal intewiewa
with eerne elttere and has eenttrrned that eariheu wee indeed a eritieal eultural reeeuree
that ptayee an imhertaht rele in the way hf life at the Dunean‘e heehle. With further
reeeareh, the DFN are hehing ta preeuee iriiermatien that may help te identify the
farmer hiethrieal ranges hf eeriheu within the Peace Regieh arid nhrth western Atherta.
Cariheh was a preferred ehaeiee and elders. aliye tedey reeali the impertartt rate eariheu
hieyeh in the eeaaeeal reune hf aetiyitiee. Same eltlere can recall their parents and
grandparents eieeuaaing where they felt the eariheu weuld he at a giyen paint in the
yeery hearing news item ether families aheut where the eeriheh were and then making
plane fer travelling eut te theee areae where the hrejeetee the earthen te he.
Gwen that earihhe trayeltett in greuhe. the eeriheu eeuld he reiied en te feed a family fer
tanger periede at time. Thie eh htraetett with mheee that had ta he treated. aheeryeti.
etalked and hunted an an individual haete er within emaller greupe. The effert and time
that had th he put inte hunting eariheu heree eften had a larger heheﬁt and dividend fer
femiliee.
E'Itiere {aged Eh ant.I elder} and the yeuhger generatien at DFN hunters [aged 45 — Eh)
eentihuett th eetiye1y hunt eariheu inte the 1Qhﬂ'e within the DFN traditienai territery. A
marked free fall in eariheu eeaulatiena wae hated threugh the thhhe anti thhﬂ'a- White
eerne hunters eentiriuecl te hill the add eariheu while hunting. the rhajerity hf DFN
hunters elected ta atee hunting eariheu giyeh their eeneerrr eyer the dwindling humhere.
Fteeent interyiewa. retreat that thia wee an active eheiee hy meny hf the DFN hunters.
in thia regard, the DFN aaeert that they etiii have the rightte hunt eariheu. heweyer they
eleet ta net EIETElEE that right en the gretthti at this time as a wise eeneeryatihh and
management eheiee. Nehyithetandihg. the DFN aeeert that they have a real and
auhatahtial intereet in eariheu hepulatierte, their management. their eehaeryatien and
ultimate reeeyery. The DFN have a 1egai interest in seeing eariheu hreteeteti anti
reetereti threugh their hieterie fermer ranges.
he an indicater eheeiee. eariheu are prawdihg a elear eighel ef the eegradee states at
aea-eyeteme within DFH‘e traditiahal territary. the Peaee Raglan and earth weetern
rhlher'te Eariheu are new fauna and eheeryetj within few areae within DFN'e traditiehai
territhry. The enly area where eariheu can he taunt! new is in the area nerth hf the
Elear Hille, west at the Peace River and ehuth at the Chinehaga valley. A few
earihhu have heart eitad within the past ﬁve years ehuth hf Carmen Lake and west
at the Seal eilfielcta,juet te nhrth hi the DFH‘e William Mackenzie reeenre. Theee
ereee repraaeht the Iaat few remaining areae within etir trahitienel territery that ran he
aea+ta—aa11 aa:41 eta ?.mae

eeitl te heue thteet ereee thet pteuide the neeeeeeryr hehitet eehttitiene ter eeriheu.
Theee ereee eiee repreeeht the last remheht Iehde, where DFN ?Eﬂﬁtﬁ reeert that ”TE“!
eeh ge where they can etilt hunt with eeme eegree et eueeeee end where they feel they
can 9:: end he unmeleetee hy ‘hduetriet activity.
The DFN hes the greatest interest and meet euneern ebeut the Ehinehege.
Hetehltlee end Deedweed putt[:nLtletiehe1'ranges1 which are in eteee proximity te
eur reeewe eemmunity [See attached range map}-
EWmLt—WWW
Fer eeuerel yeere. the DFH hee platted thet Geuerhmeht ef Alberta en nettee eheut ite
eeheerhe eheet the sheer eeee end eeeee ef dEUElemEﬂt within its traditiehel territem
egrieutture. eil end gee, legging and ether ferme et deuetepmeht heue heavily .mpeeteel
e eign‘rﬁeent pertleh ef DFN‘e trettttiehel territew. Deer the yeere. DFH eiders end
huntere ell reperted en the significant uplift in deuelepmeht end the eerreependihg
decline in wildlife habitat and their ability te eLtt:r:.eeetu|eh.lr hunt.
In elmeet etl eeeee. DFH memhere repert that they eheewe mere entmete and heme e
higher degree ef eueeeee ef hunting in areas that have less reeds. well eitee, pipelines.
seismic lines and fﬂrEEtW hteeke then in these ereee euhjeeted te higher retee ef
enthrepegehie eieturhehee. DFN huntere reeert that the enlt.»r pteeee that they can still
eheewe eertbeu, :etiheu treette end eeritaeu sign is the in area prﬁuiﬂusly identified -—
that being the area herth ef the Clear Hiltei eeuth et the Chinehege end weet ef the
Peace River. Thie eree eenteihe e meeete et eld greehh fereet end peettehtt areas end
has net heeh hEﬂ'I-I'il‘f fragmented try reeds and industrial deueIeemeht ee ether ereee.
The DFN ret';eht|~_..r reteett the ieeue ef eeriheu ehd earthtm hehitet within the centettt ef e
prepeeed mining expleretteh pregrem- A massive ireh eehde depeett underiiee the
eerlheu range within the ehtwe hetett eree. UUEF the pest feur years. Irenetehe
Fteeeureee hee undertaken twe mining expleretteh eregreme entt ie new preparing fer
en epptieetieh fer e hullt eemp'ling permit end it. ehteihing ferelgh thueetmeht te suppert
an EA eeptieetten fer e surface mining eperetteh th the area. The eerhpretty,»r helde e
meeehre tenure eree in the Rambling Greek: Clear Hille end Heti'ltewih watershed. The
extent and petentie! eize ef the tree eende teeeuree wee studied by the etherte
Reeeereh Geuneit within the peet three deeedee. 1t eehtirmett that the reeeuree eetirnete
et the area as euhetentiel- lrehetehe‘e recent erhlihg eregreme have firmed up the
reeeuree estimate.
The DFN requested that the Geuerhment ef elhene net issue further permits. te the
prepeheht heeett. in pert, eh ite eeheerhe related te imeeete tn the area's eeriheu
SEFFlE-Eﬂlt ne:te ete ?.DDT

eeeutetiehe end rengee. DFH'e eeheerne were net addreeeed end the gevemrnent
epereued the preeehent'e eeriheu preteetieh pieh. Given the eetehtiel eeele et what is
being prepeeeci. DFN teem! the eeriheu pleh te he weefuiiy ineeequete end were
eeteundeci ee te hew the Geuemmeht ef etherte eeuitt eentihue te ieeue mining
eppreueie in the eeriheu rehgee gweh what it knewe eheut the etetue ef eeriheu. The
DFH ie eeneemed that the Geuerhment ef Alberta will eehtinue te provide engeihg
epprevele te the Eﬂmpﬂny irrespective ef the endangered etetue ef eeriheu end DFN'e
eeneerhe eheut the eeeimetieh ef ehe hi the leet eeriheu rengee end heeithy wiidiite
heh'rtete Iei't within its treditiehel territew-
The Geuernment e'i etherte hee teicl the DFN. thet eueh eeneerne een ehci eheutd he
dealt with the ueeeming iend uee pienhing that will eeeur under the euepieee ef the Lend
Liee Fremewerk {LUF}. The DFN hee intermed the Gevernmeht et hiberte that it ie
ereeered te pertieieete in the relevant land use eiehning preeeeeee. Heweuer. we grew
inereeeingiy eeneerhed end eeeetieel eheet hew LLiF will edereee imeeete te eeriheu
and First Hetiehe righte ehci ihtereete given the reeent releeee et the Lewer htheheeee
pieh deeumente.
Further tn the nerth, DFN members eentinue te attempt te hunt in ereee threugh
the Ehinehege valley. This area has been heeiii'ih.r impacted threugh engeing
fereetry end eit end gee deuetepment. The area ie eriee-ereeeed with reeds,
eeierhie Ilhee1 pipelines and well eitee. White eeriheu numbers within thie area are
an the deeline, BFN members eentinue te eee erneH greupe ef eerihuu tn the
eeuth pertien et the developed eree ef the Ehinehege vetiey. The DFM are aware
that eempeniee are required te prepare eeriheu preteetien plane fer develepmeht
within eeriheu range in thie eree. Heweuer eueh plane the net preutde any 'levei et
preteetieh ef hehitet within the ranges. The prepenent simply filee e heiler piete
plan whieh is readily eppreued end is then merely required te repert [en a reeulte
heeed reperting heeie] eny eheewetiene et ea riheu end etrive te eempiete
eperettene prier tn the calving eeeeeh.
The eeriheu reneee within eurterritery ere being taken up eieee hi; eieee witheut the
Geuerhment ef Alberta taking ehyr eetieh te address the eumuietiue imeeet ef eueh
wideeereee :ieueiepment. Thee. DFN has had firett hencl experience at hew eeriheu
veluee end DFN'e intereete in the eeh'heu eeeuletiene ere eerheieteij,I ewept eeiee
threugh eueeeeewe ineuetriei eppreuele.
Statue ef Eeriheu Herde and View; at Engerte
The DFN ie e emeii eerhrhur'iitilir end it deee net have the reeeureee te EﬁE-ﬂti'u'ﬁly' engage
the Geuemment ef eiherte er Geuernmeht ef Danette en eeriheu peiiey mattere en en
eEP—te—ee11 ee:ee eee F.eee

equel teetihg. It deee net have the reeeureee te undertake er ﬁJtlyr understand the tweet
array of academic literature, existing eeliey deeumente er disparate viewe held by the
academic. eemmunity end geuemment deeieien maker in reletien tn the statue ef eeriheu
herds.

Hetu-urithetending. the DFN has been able te undertake a cursory review ef eeme ef the
meteriele at hand. Eeeed en thie review. the DFH understands the fei'lewing views and
peeitiene ef eeriheu experts [including hielegtete thet wee: fer the geuernmente at
Athens: and Canada} and eeedemiee in reletien theleritieel statue of eeriheu pepuiatiﬂns
arid eeriheu habitat:

- Etereel eeriheu require large ereee ef hid grewth eenl‘ier fereete end peetlencle.
with Iew levele ef human dieturhenee.3nd1ew numbers ef predetere eueh ee
wehree and bears

an The primary ehti _. eredeter strategy that Bereel eeriheu ert'ilziihzir ie te dieperee
themeeluee wideiy and spatially. separating themeetuee trem predators and
elternetitie pFEy eueh ee meeee end eeriheu

+- Eeriheu herde within Alberta are net eelf sustaining! meaning that they are
unlikely te pereiet euerthe ieng term witheut inteheitre ihtewentien end that
eeriheu herde wilt net pereiet witheut immediate and aggressive management
ihtementieri

- Weedlend Eeriheu will he extirpeted unleee eeheewetieh eetiene are
implemented immedietely. including full preteetien ef remaining weediehd eeriheu
rengee frerh industrial develepmeht

- Adequate infenhetieh existed as et Eﬂﬂﬁ te enehle reepeheihie ministers and
managers te identity eritieel hehltet ef weedtend eerlheu and tea effect a TEEUV’EW
strategy

- The eritieel hehitet ef eeriheu within Alberta are well knewn end their critical
habitat. et a minimum is. their current range

- The 'Iiltely reet cause at decline in :eriheu heputetien and habitat eehditiehe is
lendeeepe disturbance. with seismic lines. reeds and well sites being e signiﬁcant
:entrihuter te this decline. A eagnitieent reductien ih enthrepegenie disturbance
and reeevery ef disturbed hehitet ie heeeeeeryr

SEP—iE-Eﬂii he:e2 ete ?.DDE

- Landaaapa disturbance and the ensuing changes in pradatar— pray intaraatiana
affaata baraal aarihau habitat uaa. Earlhau haya baan ahaaryad ta raduaa thalr
aaitahla habitat in alaaa praxtmityta aaiamia Iinaa. raada anal wail altaa whara
aarlhau ayaid raada and wall aitaa by apptaximataly Eﬂﬂm and lhim naapaatwaly-
Dua ta thia ayalaanaa, raada may aat aa aami - aarmaahla harriara ta aarihau
mayemant

I Linaar aarriclara such as raada and salami: lines may alaa facilitate walftrayal
and hunting hahayiaur within aarilaau rangaa

. Thara ara aar'mtla thraata ta tha auryiyal at raaayary at Earihau amputatiana aa a
result at landaaapa disturbanaa tram aalating, plannacl and raaaanahly

. faraaaaahla industrial dayalapmant and aatiyltiaa in and arauntl tha aarihau
ranges. Further dagradattan at rangaa mayr haya aanaua aanaaauanaaa far laaal
papulatlan paraiatanaa

- That there is clear ayidanaa that human :auaaa ahangaa ln yagatatian an
carihau ranga are well ahaya any thraahala that aauld auppart yiahla aanhau
papulatiana

- Extanaiya all and gas aaaaaita undarlia mast aarihau ranges in Alberta and very
high levels at patralaum and natural gas. dayalapmant haya taken place an maat
af alharta'a aarihau rangaa

l Baraal :arthaﬁ will nnt paraiat far mara than tth ta taut daaanaa withaut
immediate and aggraaaiya managamant intaryantian {in fact the aituatian ia mara
dire than this - wa nata that at the april 213. 21311 Gayarnmant af Alberta Earlhau
Palicy Infarmatian Warkahaa that a EDA rapraaantatiya natatl that aama
papulatiana may aallapaa within the decade withaut immatiiata lntaryantlan}

- The benefits at habitat raatnratian wtll not he realized far aaaadaa haaauaa thara
ta 3E! — 5D yaar large time fallawing taalamatian bafara tha faraat will haaama ald
anaugh ta ha canaitlarad law quality far athar pray. and suitably altl be used by
aanhau

aEP-ta-aatt aataa ata P.ata

- Welt end eeribeu predeter ebntrei bregreme ere eniy e eteb gee measure with
unkngwn buteemee and may enty pertleily elbw the iheyitebie eeeline tn the feee
ef engeihg hebitet imbeete trem induetriei disturbance

- The eurreht eppreeeh bf ettembting tb mitigate imbeete tb eeribbu end eeribeu
hebitet eh e erbjeet by brejeet beeie ie failing end that thie ieeue must be
eedreeeed threegh tendeeebe end regibnei planning and the eetebiiehment et
eritieel threeheltle limiting tieyelebmeht within eeribeu rengee in eembihetien with
immeeiete interim meeeuree eueh ee e freeze in dEUEt-lﬂpmﬁ‘r'tt end mereterie en
the ieeuehee at new tenuree within eeribeu rengee-

' DFN beiieyee thet ite ebeei'yetiene end eeheerne ebeut the eeeline bf eeribeu
eeeulettene end the teetete reeulting ih theee eeelinee within its treditienei territery ere
beme but by the ebbye yiewe at the eeeeemie eemmunity.

Alberta’s ﬂngeing Failure te Preteet Eeribeu end Beribeu Habitat
The BF“ te ewere net the engeihg failure by the Geyemmeht bf Alberta te eet te bretee:
eeribeu end eeribeu hebitet threugheut Alberta and within its tretiitiehel territery. The
DFH take the view that the Gbyemment et elberte bee eetebiiehett en engeihg betterh
ef beheyieur where it appears te tette etebe te study and address thie mettert Teeme ere
eetebiiehee. studies undertaken. reperte tabled end reeert‘irnendetibne are made
heweuer the Eeyernment bf hiberte eehtinueity feile te eet en the advice and beta
breyided by its ewn experte. defere eetien er teile te eneet beliey at the ministerial er
eebihet level-
Fer exemble. ih EDGE the hiberte Weedlenb Eeribeu Reebyery Teem wee ereetett te
tteyeieb e reeeyery bleh terWeedlehd Eetibeu. The Reeeyery Teem tebied ite Aiherte
Weeeiehe' Earthen Reebyery Pteh in Eﬂt‘tﬁ. The Reeeyery Fleh'e yiew et key teeters
etteetlng eeribeu end eeribeu hebitet end management bettehe te eddreee eepuletien
deelihee wee beheieteht with thet et eebene engaged by eueb egeneiee eueh ee
Enyirehmertt Eeheee. Ceneideretien ef mereterte en further mineral and timber
reeeuree eiieeetien ir-i eertein eeribeu rengee wee given and reeemmendee.
The Geyernmeht et elbene reieetett the mereterium reeemmendetien within the
Reeeyery Plen, etetihg that it weuld net eeeebt the reebmmeheetibn related te the
mereterium be further minerei end timber elleeetiene en epeeiﬁe beribbu rehgee.
Feilewihg this [in and. embed} Zﬂﬂﬁ, the hiberte Beribeu Cemmittee wee preyided e
hew terme bf referehee end wee egeih eherged with brbyidihg edyiee at the ministerial
ieyet. Since thie time, the Geyemment ﬂfﬂlber‘te heist deieyeci the brbduetibn bf
Iendeeepe piene.
eee—te—eett ﬂﬂ:43 ete p_gli

Eeeed en the Geuernmeht et Alberta's eeet heheweur entt DFN'e eireet experience. the
DFN had he eheiee hut te eeheluee thet Alberta has he reel lhtehtieh ef preteeting
eeriheu er eerfbeu habitat where theee interests eenﬂiet wlth previdtng eperetiehel
tlet-t'rlzlillhlr te induetry ehtt deriving reuenuee trem eueh areas. It le eleer thet Beverhmeht
ef Alberta 1'5 ih eehtliet end has been iheepehle ef attending te lte ehwrehrhentel
preteetieh duties. and duties te Flret Netiehe. Te he blunt. the fee wee entrusted te watch
the henheuee end eeele—eeehemle eeheideretiehe were end eentihue te be given higher
Dl'iﬂ'l'lt}! then eemptiehee with the law.
The Geuerhmeht et |l'.'.‘.er'tette elee eleye e rele ih thie leeue. Eenede fer ell intente ehtl
purpeeee hee eeeneenetl the ﬁeld and delegated ite dettee under the Seeelee at Risk
eetﬁeﬁtette the Beverhrheht ef Athena Thle wee unwiee given that Alherte hee pi'ﬂ'tFEﬁ
lteelf te he an LH'ltl‘LiE‘t'I-F-I'Dr'lh‘f etewertt ef the enwrenmeht end preteeter et F lret Netiehe'
rights-
The DFN netee that in EDGE. the Dene The' Firet Netieh ef nerth - weetern elher'te wrete
te thee Ehwrenment Minister Stephen Dieh, requesting that he tnuelte hie etetutt‘tl‘r
dutlee under 5. ENE] ef S&RA te reeemmehcl thet Eehinet melte an emergency ereler
ereteetlhg the Etietehe Pleteeu eerlheu. Cenede felled te reeeend at that time-
Further. the DFN hetee that en ..lI.t|:-,lr '15, 2010. several Firet Netlene mede e elmiler
requeet te preteet weetllehd eerlheu lh herthern eeeterh Alherte. er in e wttler eree
Again J:“jerleltle felled te reeeehtt. Thle matter ie new in litigatien. DFH will he meihteihihg
e wetehlhg hrlet en thie matter. end may“ eet te intervene eheulel the initial eeee he
eppeeled tw erw et the eertiee lhelucllhg the Eeuernment ef Alberta.
We eet eut the ehewe, ee we believe Alberta’s engelng pattern et heheweur is relevant
when eehelderlhg the currentlyr ereeeeed Ceheeu Pelfey Alberta.
Fregeeeg Weedlend Ceriheu F'eliejg
Uh Mereh 24‘“, the Geuernment at Alberta ferwertled e letter te the ﬂFN. requesting that
they attend an intermetlen eeeeien te prewde eemrnente er eeneerhe en the ehetre
neteel peliey. end er te submit written eemmehte tw Met; E. 251 “l- The DFN wlehee te
preuitle these initial eerhrnehte te meet thie requeet:
Leela: ef Cegeeitg end Teehnieel Aeetetehee te Aeeiet in Plan Review
Flret ehtl feremeet. it le erltleel fer the GDUEl'r'lmEl'I’L ef etherte te understand that the
DFN is e emell Firet Netleh wlth eeeree reeeureee te edelreee the multitude et lane and
reeeuree leeuee end eeelleetiene that it meet deal with- We ee net heue the teehhleel
expertlee er the reeeereee te engage the required teehnleel expertise te preeltle en
eEP— — :
1e eeti ee :3 ate P.012

infermeel eritieue eteeur peltee. At the hem EU, Etltt'l meetihgr DFH'e representative
inquired as whether reaeureea er funding weutd he made aaatlahie ta assist the Firet
Hatieh in undertaking a teehnieal and eettey review. The meeting faeititatere teld him
that he t.:a|:tae'tt1.ur tending hae arweuld he made available te aaetat Ftret Hatieh. heweeer
DFH eeutd make such a request it it wiahea.
thheut the requisite eaeaett}.r aha teehhieal eu‘peert! the [JPN takea the view that
Geuernment at Alberta eheuld net appreue the eurrent eelteyr at this time and aheutd
erewde the neeeeeary reeeureee fer the DFN te undertake an adequate review at this
petley’.
thaaeguate Timing .hltggated fer Review and ﬁghauttatigh
While the DFH appreciatee that the Wheatanel Eariheu eeeument ia a higher level pﬂlity'
deeument intended te ereeide geidanee fer Iewer Ieuel planning and ptah
implementatteh, it ie a significant deaurhent. Given this. DFN feels that the time fer
review was inadequate and that mere time aheutel he atleeatea fer meanihgtui
eenauttatien te eeem- We hate that in the rhinutea ef the April 2th. 2011 meeting
Geeernmeht ef Athena representatiuea hate that “there may net he an epperturttty fer
First Nations te review the final draft at the euttljeyr fer eehaideratien".
The EIth takes the view that GDUEI’F‘ImEﬁt at Athena eheula net appreue thie peltey until
a mere reaeenahle parted at time haa heen alleeated fer meaningful eenauttatieh te
eeeur, given the rights and interests that are ataI-ce in this matter.
Deeg Genaultatieh, Jugiaeietien and Petential Reguirement fer Eeneent
Mere eenaultatieh ia net eufﬁetent in this eeeeifie thetahee. Rather. deep eeneultatien
weula he the minimum and aeeeptahte etahdard given the feet that eerne eariheu
pepulatiehe within DFN'e tarritertr new face the preapeet ef axttnetten within a decade er
twh. Furthen the eatinguiahmeht ef DFN'e right ie alee at atake in this apeetﬁe eaae.
Gwen the etatua ef the eariheu pepulatieha, the engetng impact te earihee ranges tram
develepmeht apareuale ieeued by Alberta, the failure at Athena te tnveke aapreprtate
peliey aetiene and the etearly defined rele ef the tederal Minister ef Enairehment under
SARA, we queetieh whether Alberta has the mavenetertey.»r erjurieelietien in these matters
where eariheu peeulatiene new faee ealtapae-
1n additien. tt aepeara te us that given the petential fer extirpatieh ef the herete and the
patential whaleaale eatinguiehment at DFN‘e rightte earthen, that the Crewn ie ehliged
EEF-iEe :
amt ee 44 3TH F.ﬂta

te eeelt the eeheent ef etfeetett Firet Netiene in reepeet te management plehe. interim
ertlere end develepmeht eepjieettene within eeriheu rengee- Anether interim eptien may
he that et eeemertegement- The Geuernment et Cenede hee entertained end
implemented heteret reeeuree ewmenegement eehemee tn the past in re rteih. eeeee,
end we auggeet thet ee-menegemeht et Alberte'e eeriheu peputetiene rhet.r he required
in thie epeetﬁe eeee by Cehette and affected Firet Netiene.
ﬂthet Eeneerne Fteteted tn the Preggged Peliey
1n e review efthie petiey. it again eepeere that the Getterhrheht ef Alberta ie intending te
eet Lip e ettuetieh where eetten eenhet he tekeh given :tn'tit"|t.'.:iell'g.nr ereetett hettleheelte end
deterring ef eetien te eeme ether tehle which wuli deal with the matter eerne ether dey.
Speciﬁcally we hate:
“Earthen :eneervetien is a shared geeernment, public and private setter, ted by
Geuernrnent".
DFN eeeerte that this ineerreet- The dwieieh et geverhmehtet reepenethtlittee are clear
under the Eenetitutten ehtl heth Alheﬂe end Eehede ere reepeneihte fer eeneewing
wildlife epeeiee ehtt in mettere et envirenmehtel preteetleh- Furthert SARA mandates
and requires epeeiﬁe eetiene et gevemmehte. These reeheheibilitiee eenhet be
delegated te third pertiee er he dependent en the greed wHI ef eerperetiene er the puhtie
et large.
‘Jmptementetfen and associated tend use planning should preefde certainty tr:
industry and secure a breed range uf envirenmentef uefuee. The impfementetr‘nn
ef this putter reﬂects nur eeeiet‘ license and ehﬁgetﬁnn ta effectively manage eur
natural reenmees”.
This statement egeih expeeee Alherte'e preference te eeeid the law end its
enuirenmentel, eenetitutiehet end eemmen Jew duties. The legal requirement is ten
preteet eeriheu end eeriheu hehttet end Firet Netiene rights and interests in retetien
therete. Thie statement reveals that thle peltey wi'll egein preuide guidance te
euheeeueht eetiene end lewer level planning. where ihstetty interests. geuerhmeet
revenuee enel eee'le -- eeehemie intereete are to preueit twer legal requirements.
“Earthen habitat needs will be addressed in tend use planning and epprnret‘e...”
He stated. the DFN appreciates the nature at the Eertheu F‘eli-eturr ee e higher level [JIEI-Iicy
deeument. Heweeer th the eeees it ie eteer te DFN that the Geuernment ef Atherte egein
prepeeee te defer erttteel eetiene end deeieiene pending the euteerhe ef lent! use plans
ereeted under the auspices ef the Lend LJee Fremewerk. the we hetre neted "key ieeuee
eEP—tE-eett ee:tt
ete eett

Trene Behede Pipelinee Ltd {TEFL}, threugh ite whelty ewned euheltlieryr Neva Gee
Trenemieeieh Ltd tHETL].

e] The Nerth Weet Main Line F'rejeetele end DFH Treditienel Territelr'yf
1I.I"t.lhi|e the euhjeet efthie letter ie that ef the Nerthweet Melnllhe Expeneieh Prejeetle1 it
will he HECEESEIW fer DFN te reference ether prejeete within this eubmieeien te eeeiet the
NEE. in understanding the nature ef eur eeneerne.
As the Eteerd is fully aware. TEFL ie preeeeihg te eenetruet end eperete e number ef
eepeneiehe end an eeteneleh te ite plpelihe eyetern. under the ruhn‘e ef the Nerthweet
System Expeheien Prejeetl'e. Eeeh et these three epplieetiene are at different stages ef
the NEB’e review preeeee. ee deeerlhed belew
Tenghe Creek Leterel Leee #2: {Eleet Creek §egieh} - Aggreued
TEPL applied fer the Tehghe Greet: Leterel Leee {Steet Creek Seetien} prejeet
{including the Meeely Greek and Hidden Lehe Nerth Eempreeeer Etetlehe} in February
em. The NEE apprehend thie eeelieetien hy erder greeted en July 25. Eﬂt‘l.
Nerthweet Mainline Eegeheieh F’reIeet — Under Review
TEFL epeliee fer the Nerthweet Mainline Expeneien Prejeet in April 21311. This
applieetieh ie eethre. It includes the fellewihg eempenente: Hern River Mainline Leer:-
{Hyhle Greek Seetieh]. Nerthweet Meihllne Leee {Tlmhemelt Seetieh}. the Tenghe
Creel: Leterel Leee {Crehherry Seetieh}. The HEB ieeued 3 Hearing lElrtier en June 10.
ED'H setting dewn e ehe-tieyr puhlle hearing fer Men: 29. 2m 1.
Nerthweet Meinline—Hemie Nerth Exteheien - Fre—Agglieetieh
NGTL netee that it expects te apply tn the NEE fer the NW Melnllne-Hemie Herth
EItEI‘IEiﬁH in "I113 2011“. A Frejeet Descriptten has been ﬁled with the NEE end ehee
the NEE is in receipt at an epelieetien end eheuring 'rt le eemelete, the NEE w'rll
echeeule a public hearing am this Prejeet.
In reepeet te the Herthweet Meihlihe Eeeeheien Prejeet. DFN wishes he hete thet e
humher ﬁt the prejeet eemeenente fell within the identiﬁed tredttfenet terl'lttzuhlr ef the
DFN, whereee ethere the net. {See etteehed Traditienel Terrltery Map]. The Tenghe
Ereelt Leterel Leep (IL'Jrer'therhlr Eeetieh} telte within the BF“ treditienel territery. The
Herh Fthrer' Mainline Leep [Hyhle lEreell: Seetieh] end the NW Mainline Leer: {Timhenmelf
Section] fell in lanes edjeeeht he the identified DFN territery ehe petehtlelly 'rrnpeet en
lite},r cultural and eneirenmentel veluee eueh ee eerlheu end earthen hehftet. he yeu ere

eEF—te—eeit ee:ee eee F.3he

aheut pretentien ef eariiaeti habitat and deveieament threeheid ieueia wilt be pushed eff
te another tahie. ta he tiealt with anether day.
Further, if Aiherta‘e eariheu peiiey ie te he dependant ah the euteeme at the LUF plans.
we are in far tteuhie- The deeumehta eamihg tram the Lewer Athahaaea areeeae ahew
that eariheu arid earilaeu hahitatwiii net he attttreaeett in a wet,I that addressee the ietter
ef the iaw-
”Within the eentext er sustaining Alberta’s earthen peputattens, planning and
imptementatien wii‘i‘ eenetder etakehetder Interests and aboriginal: rights,
Previneiat and federal tegietathre requirements and eeeiai‘ I eeanemie impact”
Earihaa pepuiatiahe and First Natiehe tights taee eittihetiah arid extinguiahmeht here
and new. This is the euer—tiaing eehaiaeratieh and requirement in law— net hew this will
atteet ENRL, EhEaha er Sheli‘e aharehalttera er eehiar etteeutwea. Theae eampahiee
aperate within thejuriatiietieh et Gahada and are aware that Canada's tame muet he
eheyed- it Alberta haa ever — reaeheti itself in granting tenurea te third parties, then it
can eempenaate them ae a eehaeeuenee et net adhering te Canada‘s legai
req uiremente and its duties.
Bleeing
At the April 2:} 2011 meeting, DFN'e representative heteti the DFN‘a wiilihgneee ta he a
eahatruetiue participant m the termuiatien ef earlheu peiiey within Alberta and planning
ta affect the maintenartee aha reeeuew et eartheu aepalatiehe within its traditiehai
terrttery. In this regard. DFN heteti that it remained hepetul that thie peliey wilt reverse
the decline ef eariheu pepuiatiena.
Further! as wee stated at the meeting. aheuid thie paiiey net meet this iegai requlremeht.
Alberta fail ta act and eentihue te ieeue tenuree anti aeprevaie te industry within the
eatihau ranges et eur traditienal territaw. we will have an ether eheiee hut te step in and
act ta tie what we can te preteet eariheu and eariheu pepulatiena. That is aur
reahehaiiziiiitiir that we ta ite eeriau aiy.
ea etthie date, we are requesting that Gaaernrheht at Alberta eeaae and desist in
issuing further tenaree anti deueleameht aaereuale within the eariheu rangee within eat
traditiehal tetritery. Shaula yeti retintirttier the DFhJ reaewea the right ta tiring eerhmeh
law and legal aetiena against the reapehaihie thirtietera. The DFhl peeple alae reaerue
the right ta bring a elaea aetian auit againat eerperatiena and their eehier executives. in
this matter.
aaF—te—aatt ea:tt eta p_315

Uh 3 fine! hete. we wish te eeI-thewledge the difﬁcult rete thet yeureetf. hielegiete and
ether technicians are in. We see that yeu attempt tn preuide ttete, lhtenhetieh end matte
reeemrhendetiene eased en the best eueileete eeienee te ministers and cabinet.
Heweuer, yeur etferte and science eenttnttee te he igneree hy- theee within geuernment
that wish in maintain the statue que.
We hepe that the Erewn wilt reeenetdet its eppreeeh at recent years and eerhe inte
eemp'lienee with the laws ef Canada end its treaty reletienehip with the Dunne rt‘e Firet
Netien end the Duneante peeple. The earthen peputetiene at Alberta deeerue eur
eeetetenee end immediate intewentieh and much is at stake fer all.
We thank fer yeur time and eeheidetetieh ettheee matters ene eur pleedihge.
In Peeee and Respect.
DRIGINAL SIGNED
Chief Denny Teetewieh
Duneen‘e Firet Netien
EC; DFN Eldere end Cﬂmmumt‘f Members
Minister et Sustainable Fteeeuree Deuelepment: Geuerument ef Alberta
Mtnieter ef Envirenment: Geuemment ef Cenede
Canadian Aeeeeietien ef Petreleum Predueere
Cemeeniee Dpereting within Eerihee Ranges ef DFN Treeitienel Territet't.r
Jeeeh Hansen: Aberigihel Adviser: Alberta Eueteihehte Reeeuree Develepmeht
eEP-LE-ee11 03:45 572 P_ﬂ1E

ih- - ._ ' 'I'l'" '.-' ' I .|:-.
:1: H . 3%.” -:~ #1" 1- Emlbﬂu Mall" 1
ﬂ“ E“ - .r ?I- x "" .
. 3.; 5:3. - . -..
J _. fﬂ I'.'I.. .- - . -.
.'.- kill .9. r '- . .'.-
. - : a. 3:1
I“... 3.11, _ ' -'_|. 1"" .I.-..':"'
IF.“ MytlhﬂL I 9'3}?! at'ﬁ-‘Ht'ﬂ
.. - .'.~
mm a - i: "'1
i-Crl'iiﬁ g_* __.., 1.“. .._ Amirﬂ
w. ,,__._..__"F.—'-'uh" "IF '1'- if -‘-' 5:: _..._
- hi Fund Earth. - - " ~‘h Pinata;
I. "" - "fl- . .
4:35: Wm” 3- 2:» “f“ .m .
' __ .. .. “ml” 4. I'*---_'- mﬁ “4%. W _
- ,-. g!- .- - wag 2-; 11.4% w? imam, “FEE- .
d. - , -.:E. -- :1."- . _ 3.! nl-I-i :33}- 1.?ILI :a—It'rhE‘L .
I: ‘ . 1::- '-" 'I If. ; .”' I ' ”H H' H: I. I'll." I
DEHEIVM H". E. ' '__;r-i; . - 'I _ 'Ih:_._ _‘ﬂ: .'“w:
k 113“” r-mrr-I! _" - I. 1'3}. :1?“ _ - -.v
:3: " -I . | 1-H 'II: 'iI'L I-rJ-i' .l _ﬂ- . "I.'_
{h E: . , ,.-,. r -:." L M1";- '.|:!.I":-'" -
‘__.- ‘ I. J. t' - 1' i. '! I'Lt.""%"r .. ﬁt .-
.r.. .53?" “TEE; 3.3.; -. 5"??- L'H‘ﬂF #51,.
' JL—r—d-H." 4. _:-.f -.'-_'__" 'E.
h m . """ﬂu «.‘jﬁa; 4a ' GLAWF- 5
, .‘.Imr-Eﬂ" '- . Iw'gluﬂ-t-n Itﬁl “:1 - _..- .'.lls' _'
Harmwa ﬂnﬁ -. . _ tinﬂ-ﬁn‘l 'b'ldﬁr1.ﬂl*h$&1ﬂ- ‘
l: I "' |- I.. II'
IﬁqdmnMPl-zﬂrw' , 1"“ T1 _
_ "‘7" A3% _ ..-'-_ 'i“ rm
'- diﬂJﬂ-aﬂl |_Hl-.I I '-' 1‘.- I. _
p _h_ .. - - _ - .--.
I 1 @321 Lune smoky; Eﬂﬁlﬂhﬁﬂ
. Jrllfu'lE " '59-” ,d if 6:1? I] ”IMH‘U “rgﬂitﬁf'ﬂﬂ-ILIE-
.ﬂ:.LE FI'IE'CHE - agglnn ”a:vih'ﬁl _ _.._-;.-_n.-_.
'I""”"" . ““45? -' ~,_'.'.I.:1I:1r.-.'1r 5.-.-=
'1 . Egmh Jamal“ - -
I. H ..:q 1H '- 1r .1,.1.,;,-1..
Ilhhﬂ- - "-" 5.1::li :munLLH .
_ -;' “ﬁfth 3'5"!” _ 1|.I'-_"-i.'--I-"I _
E w 'I ___.... l-aI-. -. I
": figmumnu-I': ‘- . i-
w 3.: 1, . .: - . Wu _
' - I Flfnllr'ruih
whim ' .qu
'-1.i.:I'I"....J-"ﬁ.
El..'l
i
-.I-1ra:lmr.4 .
Map 1 ‘
CARIEUU RANGES: ALBERTA
SEP—lE—Eﬂll 33:45 3E3“; 13.317

w w nopyaPnntCentre
“ ﬂmug-waiﬁaﬁii' ' filinidﬁﬁﬂils'ﬁl'ﬁﬂﬁ'ﬁ. ' ' " ' W 'Nismplﬁsﬂﬂ'pﬂﬁnﬂpﬁﬂtﬁﬂ
Dam: Ml—M‘“ i
Humbug: nf pages including nuuar shcct: ;
Tu: "mm mm m [ Pram: MJS FEE mm H
. .._._ i __—...__— E
Phnna: —---—--~——-—-—-—~—~—.
Fax: Z HDSI géﬂ’Lh—ééﬂé I Phnne:
cc: Fm:
EEMRHS: CI Urgent CI Fﬂryuur reviaw El Empty ASAP C] Hm: 12mm: '
I- I T I -— '1 E DAE- ;
CHL- ﬁ '13:. ELM _ g
- Fur ?nur Ennvenience, Emma Busing: Deput Eupr Eentra alga uffer thase additinnal servings:
- Futl Serum: Black and White Cnpying as law as 44¢ per mp? .
- Full Sewice Enlnur Laser Coplas as law as .ﬁEII per cum I- -
- Emuenient Self SEWE Eupier's . Wide Furmat Frintlng -
- Binding and Laminating Benita -
. . Eustnm Etamrﬁ and Engraving Pmducts -
- Eusmm Business Cards, Letterhead and Emetupes .
- Farnhalized Business Fauna and Chequas .
*....Emi"ﬁfufﬁﬁmr5- '
EEF-iE-Eﬂii 05:31 SITE P.Iﬂlﬂl

eweret eeriheu herde migrate threugh prejeet ereee, treeitiehei territeriee ehd
weterehede indifferent te eueh heuhden'ee. Thee, while eertein eempenente ef the Nerth
West Mainline EIII'JFJFIEIDH Prejeet fell within the identified treditiehel territer'yr ef the
prejeet. the tetelity et the ereieet elee |:=l:.ntehtielllt.uI impeete en the rights and intereete et
the DFN. especially as theyr relate te een'heu. The eeme can he eeid ef the ether
prejeete thet TEFL |E- edueneing under the rubric et Nehh West Eyetem EIIJ-Et'lﬂtﬂt’l
Prejeette.
h} Engagement with the Prepenent

DFN endeeueure te engege prejeet preeenehte in prejeet eeheultetiene end eueile iteeli
ef eueilehle regulatery ereeeeeee with a view te identifying prejeete impeete end
eemmunity eeneerne end reeeluing them wherever peeeihle- The DFN elee trerh time te
timet entere inte agreements with prepenehte in an ether: te imereue prejeet
engagements and address the gape end ehert eemihge ih geverhmeht egeheyr
eeneultetieh peiieiee. ﬂh e eeee by case heeie. these agreements eeh et timee euppeh
the pertiee te edereee erejeet ieeuee. |Either timee theyr tie net.
In the peet year: the DFN entered ihte e “Cernmunity Agreement“ with TEFL te
strengthen the engagement preeeee eh mejer prejeete end In eureue mettere et mutual
interest eueh ee prejeet engagement. esheeity building. training and edueetieh. in the
eeet year, TEFL end the DFN have made eeme iimiteti hut peeitwe pregreee in several
areas. Fer example. TEFL ie helping te fund an adult edueetien upgrading eregrem end
a treditienel uee etude that is eehedulee te eemeieted in Neuemher efthie yeer.
Under the agreement. TEFL hetitiee the DFN ef prejeet plane and pretridee intermetieh
and eupperte the eehe‘uet efﬁeld etudiee with direct eemthlr‘Iity.f ih'urelvemeht. The DFN
elee previeee hetitieetieh ef hrejeet ieeuee end eeneerhe in reletieh te erepeeed preteete.
The euerell geel et thie preeeee ie te attempt identity and eddreee ieeuee eh e hi ~
leterei heeie. wherever peeeihle.
Dn September 4th, the DFH netifiee TEFL efieeeee end eeneerne it had in reletieh te
impeete eh eeriheu ehcl eeriheu habitat and the hetehtiel fer ”prejeet splitting" arising
frem the Nerth Weet Mainline Prejeetl‘e. {See attached} The pertiee will be meeting
pursuant te the agreement he dieeuee theee matters and e field eeeeeement ie eiee
being planned. Thue while preeedurei eepeete ef eeheuitetieh ere undemey. the DFN
fee'le eemeellee te write he the HEB green the peliey heeie and nature ef eur eeheerhe —
matters which TEFL may be able te epeell: te, hut net ultimately eedreee.

EEP-lE-Eell ethee ete eeee

e} Ceneerne Related te impacts en Ceriheu end Eeriheu Habitat

In eur letter at September 3, EU"! 1. DFN expreeeed prejeet epeeifie eeheerhe ih reletiert
te eeriheu anti eeriheu habitat. The hierth West Mainline Expeheien F'rejeet tee well as
the eppreuett Tehghe Creek Letetel Leep #2: {Sleet Greek SEEtiE-F‘I} - 5W3 pending
hierthweet Meiniine—Hemie Nerth Exteneien prejeete} ie heing eehetrueted within eeriheu
range and wiil imeeet eh eetiheu ehe eeriheu habitat. The prepenent‘e EIS eentirme the
risk and the petentiel fer effeete en eeriheu-
The DFH hee righte end interests in reletien te the remaining eeriheu eepuietiene. in the
peet. eeriheu played an impertent rele in the diet and the culture at the DFN, hewever.
ee eepuietiene began in plummet theugh the tﬂﬁﬂ'e anti iQEﬂ‘e, it eppeere thet DFN
huntere etepped hunting eeriheu ee eheiee based in eeneeruetien. DFN eeeerte that it
hee an interest in the reeeuery ef eeriheu herds and the preteetieh et remaining eeriheu
habitat within ite traditienel territet‘y te maintain its eulturel ehe liueliheee preetieee in
reietieh te eeribeu.

DFN eitiete end he htere have attempted te netityr the DFN end geuerhment egeneiee
eheut their eeheerhe eheut thie eierming dewnwerd trend. GenereIIy1they eheerue that
where there is e eeheentretien et induetry activity, disturbance and linear eetrieere. yeti
eheewe tees eeriheu anti Ieee eigh ef eeriheu.

Given theee eeneetne. the DFN underteelt e eureery level er reeeereh in reletien te the
etete ef eeriheu end the Chihehege. Deedweed ehe Hetehil-tiee herds in the eerihtjir
summer et Eti'i “i. A brieﬁng was held fer the eeuneil end eemmunity. Fellewing thie
meeting: DFH matte e deeieieh te requeet thet Crewn egehetee eeeee in ieeuing further
tenuree within eeriheu ranges end eeeee in issuing erejeet eppreuele thet impeet eh
eeriheu habitat.

Theee events and deeieiene eeeurred, after TEFL submitted its Nerth West Meinlihe
Expeneien Prejeet. he yeti een welt understand. the DFN Ie limited in size: ﬁneheiel
reeeureee ehti eepeeity end simply eenhet lteep en tee ef and keep up with the myried
et etejeete end peliey mettere referred te it. it ie fer thie reeeen that we are intetrhing the
NEE etthie eeheern at this time in reietien te the hierth West Meiniine Expeheien Prejeet
anti wee net ehle te inten'n it ef eueh eeheerhe in reietieh tn the eppreveti Tenghe
Ereei-tk Leterei Leep Prejeet {whieh inelueee the Eieet Creek Seetieh - including the
Meeey Creek: and Hidden Latte Nerth Cemeteeeer Etetiene}.

We heiietre thet eur eeneerhe eheut Nerth West Mainline Expeneien erejeet ere heme
nut and undereeeree by the eeheerhe ettpreeeecl by Envirenmeht Eenade- Envirenment
Eehede'e recently issued Draft Eeriheu REEDVEW Strategy...r eentirrne that the Ehihehege

eee—te—eett ee:ee ete F.eee

Eeriheu herd is declining, net eeIf—eueteinihg end that critical hehttet ie held he he at Tate
disturbed teemeereti te the 35% disturbance tlrn'rt identiﬁed as required fer eetf-
sustaining pepuletiene}.
Further: we hete the recent letter ieeued tw Ehwrehmeht Eenede te the Netienet Energy
Beere‘ in which Envirehmeht Eeheee eeitett fer "eggreeeiue meeeuree te mitigate fer
any petehtiel impeete te Weedlehtl Eettheu“ and requesting "that maps eleerly
indentityihg Weedlehe Eeriheu ranges. eere habitat, and unguiete winter rengee. be
prﬂUidEd ee pert et the prepeeetl prejeet‘e eppﬁeetien".
Given this, the DFH reeueete that the NEE tel-te eetteh within the eehtettt et the Herth
Weet Mainline EIPEIT‘IEiD-n Prejeet te assess and manage ptejeet impeete en the
Ehinehege eeriheu here. Eeilerplete, industry standard mitigetien measures such as
eerlyr 1h eeut windewe. reducing line ef site and repenihg en earthen ettihge are net
eutﬁeteht in this eeee, given the level et disturbance-
d}{1eneerne Related te Prejeet Sptitling
Within the Septembere 2ﬂ11 letter, DFN netttied TEFL eheut it eeheerhe. queettene
end intereete reletett'te the Tegulatﬂl‘y review et the Herth Weet Mainline Exeeneien, the
Nerthweet Meihlthe — Kemie Merth Exteneieh end the eeereued Tehghe Creek Leterel
Leepe‘E Prejeet [Bteet Creek Seetieh}.
We have a grewihg eeneerh that it appears that eti et the prejeete thetTCF‘L hee end is
advancing eheule have been reviewed, eeeeeeed and applied fer ee ene prejeet.
We are aware that there ere eetentiet advantagee te prepehente in epttttihg e terge
prejeet ihte emeller eemeeneht epptieetlehe- Fer example. under federel envirehmentel
eeeeeemeht legietetien, e eemprehenewe etuey required fer en eit end gee pipeline
mere then ?5 km in length eh e new right ef wet; {Eempreheneiue Etettyr Liet
Regulatiene. Schedule. 5. 14(e.}. We are eeheerhee that by splitting e pipeline inte
smelter epplieetiehe helew thie threeheltl has meant that TEFL hee Etnly been required
to submit eeteehtng reperte fer eeeh tlieereet prejeet epplieetien.
It appears that this htetter wee et eeheerh and interest tn the Netienel Energy Beertt
nine menthe age when it issued an Intermetien Request te TEFL. asking it te explain
the retienele fer advancing ehtt segmenting theee prejeete tn the. way. Eleerty the NEE
teuntt thet TEPL'e et-tplenetien wee euﬁ'ieieht given 1te eppreuel et the Tenghe Ereelt
Leterel Leeetttz F’rejeet {Sleet Ereelt Seetieh}.
We ere net Tegulatﬂw experte and the net heue eeeeee te technical and regulatery
expertise that can help: ue underetentt the uen‘eue triggers. threeheltle end regulatiehe
eEP—te—emt 03:33 ew: P.IZHTIT

that determine hew prejeete are he he eeeeeeed. reviewed and applied fer. Her deee
DFH have the funds te ehgege e third party reviewer te eeeiet ih eueh en eiiereiee.
Heweuer! the DFN ie eeheerned enti wiehee tn untieretehd the nature ef the NEE'e
ihitiel eeneern and why it felt it wee heeeeeery te ieeue the IR in the first place? We are
intereetecl in understanding TEPLEe reepenee and whether and why the Eieere felt that it
wee an adequate respehee?
DFN tihde TEPL'e written explenetieh end juetifieetien ee highlyr teehnieel end deee het
underetehd TEPL‘e reepenee. DFr-J edweee that it deee net hewe the funding te review
the ueiidity ef NGTL'e juetifieetieh fer the eeperete epplieetiene. Further. the DFH
reqLIeete the NEE eeneider and investigate this matter using the Beerd'e ewh newere
eueh ee theee erewded in e. 15 ef the Nefi'enei Eheiigrjpr Beard Aer.
ct] Clusing
The DFN ie intereetihg in Wﬂt'lting with heth TEFL end the NEE te addreee theee
eutietehtiiie end preeedurel mettere in e eenetruetwe end timEI'f manner. We are willing
te heet meetings with heth TEFL end the NEE! with a view te deueleping e ehered
underetehti ef eeeh pertiee views in these mettere end reeelwhg them.
Please tie het heeitete te eenteet myself er Chief Den Teetewieh et {?EU} 59? — 3???
Sheuld yeLi require further infermetiﬂh.
Yeure in respect.
i? '.I
it. ._|L1IM£!I Er iherﬁt
Grant Paulie: Duneen'e Firet Netinn
Direeter: Lende end Eeenemie Deuelepment
EC: Chief Den Teetewieh anti Eeuneil
Me Jude Dehiele end Armand Cardinei n TEFL
Attachments: tlunean'e Firet Netieh Treditienel Territery Mep
Duneeh'e Firet Hetien September 2. 2011 Letter
eEP—ie—een ﬂﬂtﬂd- e'i'e eeee

Attachment
DFN Traditional Territnry Map
Tn Ba Forwarded as E - Attachment
SEP-lE-Eﬂil 113:34 3T5: Fﬂﬂﬂ

;“'.:;:1|r.-: 1: 51i'11!
_’_s}|_*.._._”£_..._h—E'__..—_£j;,
ill .I
P.D.Ee1t 143 Emwnuae, Alberta
TﬂH eLtl
September 3. 21111
Me. Jude Daniels and Mr. Armand Cardinal
JeintWerlt'mg Greup Membere
Transﬁanede Eerperetien
45D - '1 Street SW
Ealgary, Alberta Eehade
TEP 5H1
VIA FAIL: [4ﬂ3}EEﬂ-22ﬂﬂ
HE: Eeneerne ef the Duncan's Firet Hetien in Heletien tn Nerth West Mainline
Expenelen Frejeete {Tanghe Greek Lateral Leep .. Cranberry Seetien, Chinehege
Lateral Leap, NWML Leap Pyramid Seetien et al}
Deer Jude and Armand:
I am whiting te ‘y’lﬂu as membere ef the .143th Werkihg Ereup {JWG} pursuant tn the
Trans Canada Pipelines Ltd. [Trans Canada] and Duncan's Firet Netien {DFHJ
“Eemmunity Agreement". The purpeee ef this letter is te highiight eeneeme that the
Duneee'e Firet Netiene hes in relet'ten he the tellewihg prejecte in eeeerdenee 1with the
hreeeee set hut in the I.'_‘.t::r'hr'r'|Lu-Iutyr Agreement:
SEF—lE—Eﬂll time: ET}: Fame

