u— ' °.
January 15, 2018
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
517 10‘h Ave sw
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (“Trans Mountain”)
Trans Mountain Expansion Project (the “Project”)
Westridge Delivery Line Relocation Exemption Application
NEB File: 0F—Fac—Oil—T260-2013-03 02
I am writing in relation to Trans Mountain’s application to the National Energy Board for an
exemption from review under the National Energy Board Act for the relocation of the Westridge
Deliveiy Line from its current location in Burnaby to the tunnel under Burnaby Mountain. Trans
Mountain provided Squamish with notice of this application by email on J anuary 4, 2018 as the
application will potentially impact Squamish traditional territory. I write to express concerns
with respect to the lack of information provided in the application on the potential risks and
impacts of the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line and to request that the NEB undertake a
full assessment and review of the relocation of it.
The Burnaby Mountain tunnel is within Squamish territory and near our resen/es, particularly
Seymour Creek Reserve No. 2 (ch’ich’elxwi7kw). Any accident or malfunction associated with
the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line has the potential to impact Squamish people, and
the lands, waters and resources upon which we depend.
Trans Mountain asserts in the application that the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line “is
not likely to have any signiﬁcant adverse residual 0r cumulative effect on any bio -physical or
socio-economic resource”. However, Trans Mountain neither explains nor provides any support
or explanation for this conclusion in the application material. Instead, Trans Mountain merely
states that the work will take place on private land without providin g any assessment of the
potential increased iisks and impacts of including a third pipeline in the tunnel or the need to
develop effective leak prevention and response measures taking into account the increased
volume of product proposed to be transported in the tunnel (particularly as Trans Mountain is
proposing to increase the capacity of the Westridge Delivery Line from an NPS 24 t0 NPS 30).
During the NEB hearing, Trans Mountain indicated that “the third pipeline would be part of a
separate regulatory application” (see NEB Report p. 79), and the NEB acknowledged that the
installation of a third pipeline was not pan of the application before the Board for the Trans
w
* ' * ¢;t_-..\u
-"il§ \X'cst lisplanadc, \nrrh \-';1nmm-'cr. BC VTM lAG ° [ 60/138215“) I 604.982.0515 I ”:5? ' '

Mountain Expansion Proj ect (N EB Rep01t p. 82). As such, in approving the tumiel, the NEB did
not consider the potential increased risks of a third pipeline. Trans Mountain now seeks to avoid
the NEB’s review and assessment of the risk of the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line to
the tunnel by applying for an exemption.

The NEB recognized the risks of the tunnel in the NEB Report noting at page 82 that it is “not
aware of the use of the concrete or grout-ﬁlled tunnel installation method for other hydrocarbon
pipelines in Canada”; that damage to the pipe or coating may occur during installation of the
pipelines or grouting; that there will be limited accessibility for future maintenance and repairs;
and that voids or cracks could form in the grout. These risks would potentially be compounded
with a third pipeline to be included in the tunnel and need to be considered and analyzed by the
NEB so that effective risk mitigation measures during construction and operation of the pipeline
can be developed. The NEB has not yet had the opportunity to consider these risks and Squamish
has yet to be consulted on these risks and impacts.

Further, in the exemption application, Trans Mountain not only seeks exemption from NEB
review, but also from 33. 30(1) and 31 of the NEB Act that require a certiﬁcate for the relocation
of the pipeline and compliance with the terms and conditions of the certiﬁcate. If granted, this
relief would potentially prevent the Board from having proper regulatory oversight of the
Westridge Delivery Line, including the ability to impose and enforce conditions, as the third
pipeline was not authorized pursuant to the Certiﬁcate of Public Convenience and Necessity OC-
064 for the Proj ect.

In the NEB Report (p. 8), the Board noted that “Project—speciﬁc conditions would be required to
mitigate residual effects posed by the Proj ect and to make sure the Proj eet is designed,
constructed and operated safely, and in a manner that protects the environment”. It is integral
that the NEB maintain and exercise the power to impose conditions after a thorough regulatory
review to ensure that the relocated Westridge Delivery Line is designed, constructed and
operated safely. It is not sufﬁcient that Trans Mountain notes that it will comply with the
conditions for the Project, as those conditions were developed based on a hearing and analysis of
the Project as applied for, which did not include the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line.
Trans Mountain further notes in the exemption application (p. 2) that it “will apply to
decommission the existing delivery line at a future date”. Trans Mountain does not provide any
information on when such an application would be made and the remediation activities that
would take place with respect to the existing delivery line. The remediation of the existing
pipeline is an integral aspect the decision to relocate the Westridge Delivery Line to the tunnel
and should be considered by the Board at this time. Trans Mountain should not be able to obtain
approval for the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line without a condition requiring the
decommissioning and remediation of the existing pipeline in Squamish territory.

2 tag?)
ll 3 \‘Vl'sr hsplanadc, \m‘th Vancouver. BC. \'H.V"l lAh ' [ (504.982.0510 I ()U/lfmlllﬁl 5 tl: . I

\
As such, we ask that the NEB decline Trans Mountain’s exemption application and undertake a
full assessment and public review ofthc relocation of tho Wcstridgc Delivery Linc, which
includes consideration 01" the decommissioning and remediation of‘thc existing pipeline, and the
opportunity to test the evidence submitted by Trans Mountain.
Chen kwcn mantumi
(1 thank you),
M725: r’w/
/ '
Chief Ian Campbell
Xélek’/Seky1'1 Siyém
Cultural Ambassador & Negotiator
Intergovernmental Relations, Natural Resources, & Revenue
Squamish Nation
cc. Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC, Scott Stoness (scott_st0ness@kindermorgan.com)
3
n3)
. .0154”?
V 13:4,"
415 WEN Esplanade. \m'th \ﬂmmuvcr. BC. \f'T’M 1A6 ' I ()()"‘i.‘)82.{)510 I 004.982.0515 . ”‘7 '

                                  Application to Participate(A92200)
Filing Date: 2018-05-30
                                            Hearing Information
Project Name: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC - Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Company: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
File Number: OF-Fac-Oil-T260-2017-10 01
Hearing Order: MH-048-2018
                                               I am Applying as:
           { An Individual
           { Authorized Representative on Behalf of an Individual
           ~ A Group
  Select which one best describes your group:
           { Company
           { Association (Special Interest Group)
           { Aboriginal
           { Federal Government
           { Provincial Government
           { Territorial Government
           ~ Municipal Government
           { Others
           ~ My group is an organization that will represent its own interests
           { My group is a collection of individuals with common interest
                                            Contact Information:
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                            Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                       Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                          http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                             1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                          1
     •   If you apply as individual, the contact information is for the Person Applying to Participate.
    •   If you apply as Authorized Representative, the contact information is for the Individual you are representing.
    •   If you apply as Group, the contact information is for the Group’s main contact.
Salutation: Mr.
Last Name: Dattani
First Name: Dipak
Title: Director Corporate Services                                Address:
Organization: City of Burnaby                                     4949 Canada Way
                                                                  Burnaby, British Columbia V5G1M2
Telephone: 6042947771
                                                                  Canada
Facsimile: 6042947425
Email Address:
dipak.dattani@burnaby.ca
Address for Courier/Personal Service: (if different from mailing address)
Telephone: 6042947771                                             Address:
Facsimile: 6042947425                                             4949 Canada Way
                                                                  Burnaby, British Columbia V5G1M2
                                                                  Canada
                               Authorized Representative(s) Information:
 If you do not have an authorized representative this section will be blank.
Salutation: Mr.
Last Name: McDade
First Name: Gregory
Title: Q.C.                                                       Address:
Organization: Ratcliff & Company LLP                              500-221 W Esplanade
                                                                  North Vancouver, British Columbia V7M3J3
Telephone: 6049885201 Ext: 623
                                                                  Canada
Facsimile: 6049881452
Email Address:
gmcdade@ratcliff.com
Address for Courier/Personal Service: (if different from mailing address)
Telephone: 6049885201                                             Address:
Facsimile: 6049881452                                             500-221 W Esplanade
                                                                  North Vancouver, British Columbia V7M3J3
                                                                  Canada
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                          Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                                      Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                                         http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                            1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                                         2
 Salutation: Ms.
Last Name: Bradley
First Name: Michelle
Title: Lawyer                                              Address:
Organization: Ratcliff & Company LLP                       500-221 W Esplanade
                                                           North Vancouver, British Columbia V7M3J3
Telephone: 6049885201 Ext: 326
                                                           Canada
Facsimile: 6049881452
Email Address:
mbradley@ratcliff.com
Address for Courier/Personal Service: (if different from mailing address)
Telephone: 6049885201                                      Address:
Facsimile: 6049881452                                      500-221 W Esplanade
                                                           North Vancouver, British Columbia V7M3J3
                                                           Canada
                                        Method of Participation
  I wish to participate as a:
            { Commenter
            ~ Intervenor
                                           Interest or Expertise
            ; The Group I am representing is directly affected by the proposed Project.
            ; The Group I am representing has relevant information or expertise.
                                     Connection to Project Issues
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                 Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                            Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                               http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                  1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                               3
 1.     The need for the proposed Project.
2.     The economic feasibility of the proposed project.
3.     The potential commercial impacts of the proposed Project.
4.     The potential environmental and socio-economic effects of the Project, including any cumulative
       environmental effects that are likely to result from the Project, including those required to be
       considered by the NEB’s Filing Manual.
5.     The appropriateness of the general route and land requirements for the Project.
6.     The suitability of the design of the Project.
8.     Contingency planning for spills, accidents or malfunctions, during construction and operation of the
       project.
9.     Safety and security during construction of the proposed Project and operation of the Project, including
       emergency response planning and third-party damage prevention.
10. The terms and conditions to be included in any approval the Board may issue.
The City of Burnaby (“Burnaby”) is a key stakeholder with respect to this project. Burnaby would be directly
affected by the upsizing and relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line because the existing pipeline and the
Burnaby Mountain tunnel are located in Burnaby, along with the Burnaby Terminal and the Westridge Marine
Terminal. The tunnel will be located in the Burnaby Mountain Conservation area that is owned by Burnaby.
The Burnaby Terminal and Westridge Marine Terminal are adjacent to the Burnaby Mountain Conservation
area; and the Westridge Marine Terminal is also adjacent to the Barnet Marine Park. These are lands that are
owned by Burnaby and greatly valued by its residents.
Both the existing pipeline and the Burnaby Mountain tunnel are located in or adjacent to populated, and
frequently used, urban regions of Burnaby, in proximity to residential, business, industrial and
environmentally sensitive areas. The upsizing of the pipeline and the transport of heavy oil in the pipeline
would impact and pose risks to Burnaby, its residents and the environment. If granted intervenor status,
Burnaby would be able to provide the Board with an important and unique perspective on the interests of
Burnaby and its residents and how those interests can best be protected in considering the relocation of the
Westridge Delivery Line.
                                     Access, Notification and Service
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                  Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                             Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                                http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                   1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                                4
 Which official language do you wish to use in correspondence with the
Board and at the public hearing?                                            English ; French
Documents submitted electronically are available on the Board’s electronic document repository, (Click
'View' under 'Regulatory Documents' at www.neb-one.gc.ca). If you have the capability to access the
repository, the Board and other Participants in this proceeding may serve you by notifying you that a
document has been filed and is available in the repository, instead of serving you with a hard copy of the
document.
Are you able to access the Board’s electronic document repository?             Yes ;            No
Notification by email advising that a document has been filed will be sent to the following email addresses:
     Dipak Dattani [dipak.dattani@burnaby.ca]
     Gregory McDade [gmcdade@ratcliff.com]
     Michelle Bradley [mbradley@ratcliff.com]
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                           Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                              http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                 1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                              5
June 29, 2018
Mr. Shawn H. T. Denstedt
Ms. Terri-Lee V. Oleniuk
Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP
Suite 2500, 450 – 1st Street SW
Calgary, AB T2P 5H1
Email: Regulatory@transmountain.com
Mr. D. Scott Stoness
Vice President, Finance & Regulatory Affairs
Kinder Morgan Canada Inc.
Suite 2700, 300 5th Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2P 5J2
Email Regulatory@transmountain.com
Re:    Hearing Order MH-048-2018
       Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)
       Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
       First Information Request of the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance
Please find attached for filing on behalf of our client, the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship
Alliance, their Information Request No. 01 to Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC.
If you have any questions, please contact me.
Jean Teillet, IPC, OMN, MSC
Counsel to the Firm
cc. NEB, Intervenors, STSA
                                                                                               2
                                    Hearing Order MH-048-2018
                         Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)
                               Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
            First Information Request of the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance
                         Information Request No. 01 to Trans Mountain
1.1 Aboriginal Rights and Title under findings of Tsilhqot’in
Reference:
     (i)      Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia 2014 SCC 44: Case Summary
Preamble:
Reference (i) refers to the findings of the Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia 2014 SCC
44 Case findings and declaration of Aboriginal title, therein determining that terra nullius has
never applied to Canada. Canada and the Province of British Columbia have made solemn
commitments to recognize and respect the Tsilhqot'in ruling. We note that there is no court
case that determines that Aboriginal title exists only on Crown land, no court case that
determines that private land or fee simple extinguishes Aboriginal title and no court case
that determines that Aboriginal title and rights are limited to “surface users of Crown land”.
Request:
Please provide:
    a) An explanation of how Trans Mountain has included the Supreme Court ruling
         pertaining to Aboriginal title in Canada and the Province of BC. Particularly, given
         that Trans Mountain concludes that “all surface disturbances will take place on
         private land, and no surface users of Crown land will be impacted” – see request
         ‘1.1a’.
1.2 Aboriginal Consultation
Reference:
    (i)       A5Y6S4: s.58 Aboriginal Consultation, p.1 [para. 1]; [para. 3]
Preamble:
Reference (i) refers to Trans Mountain’s statement that both the Burnaby and Westridge
Marine Terminals are incompatible with traditional use.
Reference (i) also refers to Trans Mountain statement that “the installation of the delivery
line is not anticipated to affect any Aboriginal group, or the exercise of Aboriginal or Treaty
rights.
Reference (i) also refers to Trans Mountain’s statement that there are ten (10) Aboriginal
groups who assert territorial claims and interest in the area encompassing the Burnaby and
Westridge Marine Terminals.
                                                                                                   3
Trans Mountain has, despite multiple requests, still not included Stó:lō cultural sites on their
environmental alignment sheets, has not determined culturally appropriate mitigation, and
has not determined the impact of the TMEP on Stó:lō.
Request:
Please provide:
    a) The Traditional Evidence, from local First Nations, that supports the declaration that
         “the Burnaby and Westridge Marine Terminals are incompatible with traditional use”.
    b) An explanation as to how Trans Mountain determined that there is no anticipated affect
         to any Aboriginal group.
    c) The list of the 10 Aboriginal Groups who were provided letters regarding this
         application.
1.3 Capacity of Trans Mountain Expansion and Existing Trans Mountain Pipelines
Reference:
     (i)      A5Y6S7: Technical Description p.1 [para. 2]; [para. 5]
Preamble:
Reference (i) refers to the increase in size and interchangeability of the “relocated delivery
line to increase its capacity to 4, 635 m3 (700,000 bbl/d) for heavy service oil, whereas the
existing delivery line has a capacity of 4, 635 m3 (700,000 bbl/d) for light oil service.
Reference (i) also refers the interchangeability of pumps and the “relocated” delivery line to
increase both capacity and interchangeability, leading to the elimination of the need for a for
line dedicated to the delivery of light oil service.
Request:
Please provide:
    a. A rationale as to why this increase in size and use of this specific delivery line is
         necessary to be used for heavy service oil as opposed to light oil service, and whether
         this increases the proposed amount of oil to be shipped offshore.
    b. Clarification of whether the statement “the increase in the size of the relocated delivery
         line permits for a capacity of 4, 635 m3 (700,000 bbl/d) in heavy oil service for any one
         of the three (3) delivery lines, thereby eliminating the need to dedicate one of the
         delivery lines to light oil service” means that there is a capability of running all three
         (3) lines at one time or if only one line is in service at a time.
    c. Clarification as to whether or not the increase of the diameter of the “relocated delivery
         line” is actually a relocation or the development of a new delivery line.
                                  Application to Participate(A92388)
Filing Date: 2018-06-08
                                            Hearing Information
Project Name: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC - Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Company: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
File Number: OF-Fac-Oil-T260-2017-10 01
Hearing Order: MH-048-2018
                                               I am Applying as:
           { An Individual
           { Authorized Representative on Behalf of an Individual
           ~ A Group
  Select which one best describes your group:
           { Company
           { Association (Special Interest Group)
           ~ Aboriginal
           { Federal Government
           { Provincial Government
           { Territorial Government
           { Municipal Government
           { Others
           ~ My group is an organization that will represent its own interests
           { My group is a collection of individuals with common interest
                                            Contact Information:
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                            Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                       Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                          http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                             1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                          1
     •   If you apply as individual, the contact information is for the Person Applying to Participate.
    •   If you apply as Authorized Representative, the contact information is for the Individual you are representing.
    •   If you apply as Group, the contact information is for the Group’s main contact.
Salutation: Ms.
Last Name: Baker
First Name: Deborah
Title: Co-Chair                                                   Address:
Organization: Squamish Nation                                     320 Seymour Boulevard
                                                                  North Vancouver, British Columbia V7L4J5
Telephone: 6047894765
                                                                  Canada
Facsimile: 6049804523
Email Address:
deborah_baker@Squamish.net
                               Authorized Representative(s) Information:
 If you do not have an authorized representative this section will be blank.
Salutation: Mr.
Last Name: Kirchner
First Name: Matthew
Title: Lawyer                                                     Address:
Organization: Ratcliff & Company                                  500-221 West Esplanade
                                                                  North Vancouver, British Columbia V7M3J3
Telephone: 604-988-5201 Ext: 625
                                                                  Canada
Facsimile: 6049881452
Email Address:
mkirchner@ratcliff.com
Salutation: Ms.
Last Name: Bradley
First Name: Michelle
Title: Lawyer                                                     Address:
Organization: Ratcliff & Company                                  500-221 West Esplanade
                                                                  North Vancouver, British Columbia V7M3J3
Telephone: 6049885201 Ext: 326
                                                                  Canada
Facsimile: 6049881452
Email Address:
mbradley@ratcliff.com
                                              Method of Participation
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                          Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                                      Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                                         http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                            1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                                         2
   I wish to participate as a:
            { Commenter
            ~ Intervenor
                                           Interest or Expertise
            ; The Group I am representing is directly affected by the proposed Project.
            ; The Group I am representing has relevant information or expertise.
                                     Connection to Project Issues
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                           Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                              http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                 1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                              3
 1.     The need for the proposed Project.
2.     The economic feasibility of the proposed project.
3.     The potential commercial impacts of the proposed Project.
4.     The potential environmental and socio-economic effects of the Project, including any cumulative
       environmental effects that are likely to result from the Project, including those required to be
       considered by the NEB’s Filing Manual.
5.     The appropriateness of the general route and land requirements for the Project.
6.     The suitability of the design of the Project.
7.     Potential impacts of the project on Aboriginal interests.
8.     Contingency planning for spills, accidents or malfunctions, during construction and operation of the
       project.
9.     Safety and security during construction of the proposed Project and operation of the Project, including
       emergency response planning and third-party damage prevention.
10. The terms and conditions to be included in any approval the Board may issue.
The Squamish Nation (“Squamish” or the “Nation”) is a Coast Salish Nation and a band as defined in the
Indian Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5. We are an Aboriginal people within the meaning of s. 35(1) of the Constitution
Act, 1982, with approximately just over 4,000 registered members.
Burrard Inlet, is, and always has been, home to the Squamish Nation and its people. Squamish would be
directly affected by the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”) because substantial aspects of the
Project, including the existing pipeline, the Burnaby Mountain tunnel, the Westridge Marine Terminal, and
the Burnaby Terminal are located within the traditional territory of the Squamish Nation and near Squamish’s
reserves. The area of Burnaby Mountain where the pipeline is proposed to be relocated is known in the
Squamish community as lheklhukwaytn, which when translated refers to the peeling bark of the local arbutus
trees.
Squamish has occupied, governed and sustained itself physically, culturally and spiritually since time
immemorial from the areas of its traditional territory that would be potentially impacted by the Project.
Squamish asserts Aboriginal rights, including title and self-governance rights, within these areas pursuant to
s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982.
^ƋƵĂŵŝƐŚ͛ƐƉĂƌƚŝĐŝƉĂƚŝŽŶŝŶƚŚĞŚĞĂƌŝŶŐŝƐŶĞĐĞƐƐĂƌǇĂƐǁĞĂƐ^‫܂‬ǁǆǁƷ7mesh-ulh are the only group that will
be able to provide the Board with information on the potential impacts of the Project on our community, our
reserves and our Aboriginal rights and title interests. In participating in the hearing, Squamish would be able
to share with the Board its extensive traditional knowledge of the areas surrounding the Burnaby Mountain
tunnel, the Westridge Marine Terminal, the Burnaby Terminal, and Burrard Inlet.
                                     Access, Notification and Service
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                  Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                             Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                                http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                   1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                                4
 Which official language do you wish to use in correspondence with the
Board and at the public hearing?                                            English ; French
Documents submitted electronically are available on the Board’s electronic document repository, (Click
'View' under 'Regulatory Documents' at www.neb-one.gc.ca). If you have the capability to access the
repository, the Board and other Participants in this proceeding may serve you by notifying you that a
document has been filed and is available in the repository, instead of serving you with a hard copy of the
document.
Are you able to access the Board’s electronic document repository?             Yes ;            No
Notification by email advising that a document has been filed will be sent to the following email addresses:
     Deborah Baker [deborah_baker@Squamish.net]
     Matthew Kirchner [mkirchner@ratcliff.com]
     Michelle Bradley [mbradley@ratcliff.com]
517 Tenth Avenue SW                                                                Telephone/Téléphone : (403) 292-4800
Calgary, Alberta T2R 0A8                                                           Facsimile/Télécopieur : (403) 292-5503
                                                                                              http://www..neb-one.gc.ca
517, Dixième Avenue S.-O.                                                                                 1-800-899-1265
Calgary, (Alberta) T2R 0A8                                                                                              5
o
' " City of
. .Burnaby
City of Burnaby
Information Requests to
Trans Mountain
Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
June 28, 2018

5. Risk Assessment
Reference

i) A91555-2 Westridge Delivery Line s.5 8 Response to IR No.4 — A6D8A8 , pp 6-7
Preamble
The reference notes that “to update the risk results of the delivery lines to reﬂect the addition of a
third delivery line, with the same design parameters as the other two delivery lines, the failure
frequencies established for one of the delivery lines was tripled.”
Request

a) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain has assessed the speciﬁc risks (as opposed to
risk frequencies) of locating a third pipeline in close proximity to the two approved
pipelines and the consequent decrease in pipeline spacing. If so, please provide evidence
of those risks.

b) Please provide the steps that Trans Mountain has taken or proposes to take with respect to
the relocation of the existing pipeline to the tunnel to reduce risk to As Low As
Reasonably Practicable.

0) Please list any risk reduction measures that are no longer practicable because of the
proposed addition of the third pipeline to the tunnel and provide the rationale for why
they are no longer practicable.

(1) Please provide an explanation for how a leak from the third pipeline in the tunnel will be
repaired.

e) Please provide an assessment of the risk to damaging the two approved pipelines in the
tunnel if maintenance or repairs are required for the third pipeline.

t) Please conﬁrm that maintenance or repairs to the pipeline will not be able to be
undertaken in the tunnel after it is backﬁlled with concrete.

g) Please provide the lifespan of a pipeline transporting the products proposed to be put
through the third pipeline in the tunnel that is not subject to maintenance, including the:

i. manufacturer’s recommended lifespan;
ii. Trans Mountain’s asset management expected lifespan; and
iii. the actual lifespan of the same or similarly categorized or manufactured pipelines.

h) Will Trans Mountain commit to replacing or decommissioning the pipeline at the most
conservative time stated in response to (g)?

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 8

i) If there is a leak in the third pipeline, how will Trans Mountain access the leak?
j) If there is a leak in the third pipeline, will Trans Mountain have to damage the Burnaby
Mountain conservation area to access the leak?
k) If there is a leak in the third pipeline, please list all possible damage or impacts that may
occurto:
i. the Burnaby Mountain Conservation Area;
ii. properties near to or adj acent to the leak or tunnel; and
iii. other locations 01' areas that may be used to access the leak or repair the leak.
1) Is it possible to replace the pipeline in the tunnel, if it is damaged, or once it reaches the
end of its lifespan? If so, how?
City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 9

6. Products to be Carried in the Pipeline
Reference
i) B32-3 - Trans_Mountain_Resp0nse_t0_NEB__IR_N0. 1_2_of_2 — A3W9H9 PDF
page 40
ii) A81933 — Condition 20 existing NPS 24 delivery pipeline location at 6-5
iii) A77045-1 NEB - Report - Trans Mountain - Expansion Project - OH-001-2014 PDF
page 136
Preamble
Reference (i) indicated that “[i]t is expected that the existing Westridge delivery line will be in
light crude service more often than heavy crude service”.
Reference (ii) states that one of the factors for deciding to relocate the existing NPS 24 delivery
is “increased delivery capability for heavy crude from 453,000 bpd to 700,000 bpd due to larger
and shorter pipeline that runs downhill though [sic] the tunnel”.
Reference (iii) states that “[t]he Board is of the view that depending on weathering state and
environmental conditions, spilled diluted bitumen could be prone to submergence in an aquatic
environment. A number of parties ﬁled evidence conﬁrmng this view. This potential for
submergence must be considered in response planning.”
Request

a) What products would be shipped in the upgraded NPS 30 pipeline? Please include the
products” name, synonym, and CAS No.

b) What are the properties of the crude oils to be shipped in the upgraded NPS 30 pipeline?

0) How will the products to be shipped in the upgraded NPS 30 pipeline differ from the
products shipped in the NPS 24 pipeline?

(1) Has Trans Mountain accounted for the potential increase in heavy crude to be transported
through the upgraded NPS 30 pipeline in its risk assessment for the relocation of the
Westridge Delivery Line? If so, how?

e) Has Trans Mountain accounted for the potential increase in heavy crude to be transported
through the upgraded NPS 30 pipeline in its emergency response measures at the
Westridge Marine Terminal? If so, how?

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 10

7. Impacts on the Economy
Reference
i) AS8837 — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation - A5Y6R8
ii) A88837-5 5.58 ESA - A5Y6SZ
Preamble
References (i) and (ii) do not update the evidence ﬁled with respect to the economic impact of
the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line.
Request
a) Please indicate the impact that any change in products to be shipped in the NPS 30
pipeline will have on exports?
b) Please indicate the impact that any change in products to be shipped in the NPS 30
pipeline will have on the domestic economy in British Columbia?
City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 11

8. Burnaby Mountain Conservation Area
Reference
i) A88837 — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Preamble
Reference (i) states that “[t]emporary physical disturbance is anticipated at the proposed entry
and exit points for the tunnel, both of which are within the fence lines of Trans Mountain-owned
Westridge Marine and Burnaby Terminals”.
Request

a) Please indicate whether any damage will occur to the Burnaby Mountain Conservation
Area. If damage will occur, please provide a description of the damage.

b) If damage to the Burnaby Mountain Conservation Area will occur, please indicate
whether Trans Mountain will commit to remediating that damage to the standards set by
Burnaby.

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 12

9. Leak Detection Technology
Reference
i) A81936-2 Trans Mountain Appendix A Part 1 of 7 Condition 26 - A5J1X2 at PDF
page 15
Preamble
The reference notes that a leak detection method that would be external to the pipe in the tunnel
is being investigated to determine its feasibility.
Request

a) Please provide the results of the investigation into the external leak detection method.

b) Please describe the external leak detection method and provide evidence of its ability to
detect leaks in tunnels such as the Burnaby Mountain tunnel.

c) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain will commit to installing the external leak
detection method on the pipelines through the tunnel. If not, please provide the rationale
for refusing to do so.

(1) If the external leak detection method under investigation is not feasible, please indicate
whether Trans Mountain will commit to investigating and implementing another external
leak detection method for the pipeline in the tunnel.

e) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain’s proposed Computation Pipe Monitoring
system and ATMOS leak detection system will be capable of detecting minor leaks that
do not impact ﬂow or pressure rates in the pipelines in the tunnel.

f) Please indicate how Trans Mountain will deal with a leak alarm for the pipeline in the
tunnel.

g) Please indicate how Trans Mountain will detect the source of the leak in the pipeline in
the tunnel?

h) Please indicate how Trans Mountain will detect the source of the leak where there is no
obvious visual damage to the pipeline in the tunnel?

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 13

Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)
Application for the Relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line
City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain
Table of Contents
1. Government ofCanada’s Purchase ofthe Trans Mountain pipeline system 1
2. Decommissioning of the Existing Pipeline and Remediation of the Existing Pipeline.................... 2
3. Need for a Third Pipeline 4
4. Upsizing ofthe Existing Pipeline 7
5. Risk Assessment 8
6. Products to be Carried in the Pipeline 10
7. Impacts on the Economy 11
8. Burnaby Mountain Conservation Area 12
9. Leak Detection Technology 13
i

1. Government of Canada’s Purchase of the Trans Mountain pipeline system
Reference

i) Purchase of Trans Mountain by the Government of Canada - httgsﬂfwwwneb—
unegacafpgletnﬂngg‘milppftrnsmntnxEnsnfprehstmsmntnge—eng.html

ii) A9204l-l NEB Letter — HO - Trans Mountain and Squamish Nation - Westridge
Delivery Line Relocation - A6E5W0

Preamble

Reference (i) indicates that the Government of Canada has announced that it has reached a deal
to purchase the Trans Mountain pipeline and to complete the Trans Mountain Expansion Project.
As indicated by reference (ii), purchase of the pipeline will occur after critical steps have been
taken in this hearing.

Request

a) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain will commit to ensuring that all successor
owners of the project are bound by Trans Mountain’s commitments made during this
hearing.

b) If so, please indicate the methods by which Trans Mountain will ensure that all successor
owners of the project are bound by Trans Mountain’s commitments made during this
hearing.

0) If Trans Mountain is not willing to ensure that all successor owners of the Trans
Mountain pipeline Will be bound by commitments made during this hearing, please
indicate whether Trans Mountain will commit to requesting that the Board adjourn this
hearing until the purchase of the pipeline is complete and the new owner can participate
in this hearing.

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westﬁdge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 1

2. Decommissioning of the Existing Pipeline and Remediation of the Existing Pipeline
Reference

i) A90591 Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC - Westridge Delivery Line Relocation -

Response to IR No. 3 - page 3

Preamble
The reference states that Trans Mountain is of the View that greater certainly regarding the
commissioning and in service dates for the new installations for the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project is required before ﬁling an application to decommission the existing Westridge Delivery
Line and that based on current construction schedules Trans Mountain expects that it will be in a
position to apply to remove the Westridge Delivery Line from operational service in mid-to-late
201 9.
Request

a) If the application to relocate the existing delivery line is granted, please indicate whether
Trans Mountain, and its successors, will commit as a condition of relocating the existing
delivery line to ﬁling an application to decommission the existing delivery line six
months prior to operational service of the new installations for the Trans Mountain
Expansion Project? If not, please explain Trans Mountain’s rational for refusing to do so.

b) Please provide the steps and procedures that Trans Mountain, and its successors, would
take to decommission the existing delivery line?

0) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain, and its successors, would make an application
for abandonment as part of the decommissioning process?

d) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain, and its successors, will commit to a public
hearing for the decommissioning and abandonment of the existing delivery line?

e) If the application to relocate the existing delivery line is granted, please indicate whether
Trans Mountain, and its successors, will commit at this time to removing the existing
delivery line from the ground after decommissioning? If not, please explain Trans
Mountain’s rational for refusing to do so.

f) If the application to relocate the existing delivery line is granted, please indicate whether
Trans Mountain, and its successors, will commit at this time to fully remediating the area
of the existing delivery line, including remediation of sub-surface utilities, assets,
infrastructure, sediments, soils, other earthen materials, plants and wildlife? If not, please
explain Trans Mountain’s rational for refusing to do so.

g) If the application to relocate the existing delivery line is granted, please indicate whether
Trans Mountain, and its successors, will commit to consultation, engagement, and

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 2

cooperative planning with the City of Burnaby to remediate the existing delivery line area
to the standards set by the City of Burnaby? If not, please explain Trans Mountain’s
rational for refusing to do so.

h) If the application to relocate the existing delivery line is granted, please indicate whether
Trans Mountain, and its successors, will commit to working with the City of Burnaby to
remove the existing pipeline and remediate the existing delivery line area in compliance
with the City of Burnaby’s bylaws? If not, please explain Trans Mountain’s rational for
refusing to do so.

i) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain, and its successors, will commit to not apply to
recommission the existing delivery line if the application to relocate the existing delivery
line to the tunnel is granted.

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 3

3. Need for a Third Pipeline
Reference
i) A88837 — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
ii) A3SOY8, Application Volume 4A, Project Design and Execution — Engineering PDF
page 31 of 110
iii) A3SOY8, Application Volume 4A, Project Design and Execution — Engineering PDF
pages 47 and 48 of 110
iv) A3SOZO, Application Volume 4A, Project Design and Execution — Engineering, PDF
page 5 of 7
v) A81933 — Condition 20 existing NPS 24 delivery pipeline location at 6-5
vi) A77045-1 NEB - Report - Trans Mountain - Expansion Project - OH—001-2014 PDF
page 21
vii) B32-3 - Trans_Mountain_Response_to_NEB_IR_No. 1_2_of_2 - A3W9H9 PDF page 42
Preamble
Reference (i) does not include evidence of the need for a third pipeline once the two NPS 30
delivery lines for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project are operational.
Reference (ii) states that the expanded Line 1 pipeline will be capable of transporting an annual
average of 55,640 cubic metres per day (m3/d) [350,000 bbl/d] and will provide a batched
transportation service for reﬁned products and light crude oils. Line 1 will also be capable of
transporting heavy crude oil at a reduced rate.
Reference (iii) states that Line 2 has been designed so that it will have a sustainable annual
average pipeline capacity of approximately 85,850 m3/d (540,000 bbl/d).
Reference (iv) states that batches of oil destined for the Westridge Marine Terminal will be
collected in the storage tanks at Burnaby Terminal and delivered via two new 762.0 mm
(NPS 30) outside diameter pipelines. Each pipeline with have a capacity of 4,635 m3/hour
(700,000 bbl/d).
Reference (v) states that one of the factors for deciding to relocate the existing NPS 24 delivery
is “increased delivery capability for heavy crude from 453,000 bpd to 700,000 bpd due to larger
and shorter pipeline that runs downhill though [sic] the tunnel”.
Reference (vi) notes that the Trans Mountain Expansion Project would increase the capacity of
the existing TMPL system from 47 690 m3/d (300,000 bbl/d) to 141 500 m3/d (890,000 bbl/d) of
crude petroleum and reﬁned products.
Reference (vii) states that the average annual throughput in each Westridge Delivery line would
be 33,390 m3/d (210,000 bbl/d)
City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 4

Request

a) Please conﬁrm that Trans Mountain has not ﬁled evidence with this application that
demonstrates the need for the third pipeline through the tunnel. If Trans Mountain has
ﬁled such evidence, please provide a reference to that evidence.

b) Please provide the combined total maximum capacity of all three pipelines (if approved)
through the tunnel.

0) Please provide a comparison of the combined maximum capacity of all three pipelines
through the tunnel with (i) the applied for, or approved, capacity with the Trans Mountain
Expansion Project; and (ii) current committed to capacity from shippers.

(1) Please explain why the two new delivery lines approved by the Trans Mountain
Expansion Project with a total capacity of 1,400,000 bpd is not sufﬁcient to service the
increased capacity from the expansion to accommodate the decommissioning of the
existing pipeline without the need for a third pipeline through the tunnel.

e) Please update the evidence with respect to the current shipper commitments for the Trans
Mountain pipeline system.

f) Please provide evidence of shipper commitments or demand for 2,100,000 bpd
throughput to the Westridge Marine Terminal.

g) Please provide evidence of the demand for three vessels to be loaded simultaneously at
the Westridge Marine Terminal as opposed to two with the currently approved expansion
proj ect.

h) Please explain why a two simultaneous vessel loading schedule cannot be
accommodated.

i) Please provide an assessment of the increased risks of loading three vessels
simultaneously, including:

i. increased spill risk;
ii. increased risk of human error; and
iii. increased risk of incident escalation or domino effect.

j) Please indicate whether the boom around the Wetsridge Marine Terminal can handle a
spill from three tankers simultaneously when loading at the Westridge Marine Terminal.

k) Please indicate the maximum capacity spill that the boom at the Westridge Marine
Terminal can contain.

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 5

1) Please provide an environmental impact assessment for the loading of three vessel
simultaneously at the Westridge Marine Terminal, including consideration of the impacts
to:

i. harbor trafﬁc in Burrard Inlet, including the use of small boats, kayaks or canoes near
the Westridge Marine Terminal;
ii. marine animals;
iii. marine environment;
iv. shoreline; and
v. ambient noise.

m) Please indicate whether the Westridge Marine Terminal will have loading arms to load
three vessels simultaneously to serve the third pipeline through the tunnel.

n) Please provide evidence of how the Westridge Marine Terminal will accommodate three
vessels loading simultaneously, including detailed drawings, plans and schematics.

0) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain will commit to taking a precautionary approach
and only load one vessel at a time to reduce spill risk. If not, please explain Trans
Mountain’s rational for refusing to do so.

p) Please provide evidence of the costs savings in decommissioning the existing pipeline
and only having two pipelines through the Burnaby Mountain tunnel.

q) Please indicate whether the ﬁnancial viability of the Trans Mountain Expansion Project
would be impacted by having only two vessels loaded simultaneously as opposed to three
at the Westridge Marine Terminal if the existing line was not relocated and was
decommissioned.

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 6

4. Upsizing of the Existing Pipeline
Reference

i) AS8837 — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation - A5Y6R8

ii) A81933 — Condition 20 compliance ﬁling

iii) B32-3 - Trans_Mountain_Response_to_NEB_IR__No. 1_2_of_2 - A3W9H9 PDF page 42

Preamble

Trans Mountain indicates in reference (i) and (ii) that the existing NPS 24 pipeline will be
upsized to an NPS 30 pipeline.

Reference (ii) at 6—5 states that one of the factors for deciding to relocate the existing NPS 24
delivery is “increased delivery capability for heavy crude from 453,000 bpd to 700,000 bpd due
to larger and shorter pipeline that runs downhill though [sic] the tunnel”.

Reference (iii) states that “the average annual throughput in each line would be 33,390 m3/d
(210,000 bbl/d).”

Request

a) Please conﬁrm that Trans Mountain has not provided evidence of the rationale for upsizing the
existing NPS 24 pipeline to the Board.

b) Please provide the evidence to support the determination that the existing NPS 24 pipeline should
be upgraded to an NPS 30 pipeline if relocated to the tunnel, given that the annual average
throughput would be only 210,000 bbl/d.

0) Please provide evidence of the shipper commitments to support the upsizing of the existing NPS
24 pipeline.

(1) Please conﬁrm whether Trans Mountain intends to increase the capacity of the products to be
shipped through the NPS 30 pipeline from the existing NPS 24 pipeline. If so, please quantify the
increase in capacity.

City of Burnaby Information Requests to Trans Mountain — Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Page 7

Hearing Order MH-048-2018
File No. OF -Fac-Oi1-T260—20 1 7- 1 0 01
IN THE MATTER OF
TRANS MOUNTAIN PIPELINE ULC
WESTRIDGE DELIVERY LINE RELOCATION
N OTICE OF MOTION
Name of person brining motion: City of Burnaby
Decision or order requested: 1. An order directing Trans Mountain Pipeline
ULC to provide ﬁll] and adequate responses
on 01' before a date to be set by the National
Energy Board to the information requests of
the City of Burnaby as set out in Schedule A
to this Notice of Motion; and
2. Such further and other relief as the National
Energy Board deems just.

1.3 (k) Please indicate the maximum Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
capacity spill that the boom at the No. 1.3 (j).
Westridge Marine Terminal can
contain.
1.3 (|) Please provide an environmental The environmental impact Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
impact assessment for the loading assessment in the OH-001-2014
of three vessel simultaneously at the proceeding included an assessment
Westridge Marine Terminal, of vessel loading activities at the
including consideration of the expanded Westridge Marine
impacts to: Terminal, and is outside ofthe scope
i. harbour traffic in Burrard Inlet, of this Application. Please see
including the use of small boats, response to Burnaby IR Nos. 1.3(a)
kayaks or canoes near the and 1.3(b).
Westridge Marine Terminal;
ii. marine animals;
iii. marine environment;
iv. shoreline; and
v. ambient noise.
1.3 (m) Please indicate whether the The expansion of Westridge Marine Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
Westridge Marine Terminal will Terminal, including the number of
have loading arms to load three loading arms, was considered in the
vessels simultaneously to serve the OH-001-2014 proceeding, and is
third pipeline through the tunnel. outside of the scope ofthis
Application. Please see response to
Burnaby IR Nos. 1.3(a) and 1.3(g).
1.3 (n) Please provide evidence of how the The loading of vessels was Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
Westridge Marine Terminal will considered in the OH-001-2014
accommodate three vessels loading proceeding, and is outside of the
simultaneously, including detailed scope of this Application. Please see
drawings, plans and schematics. response to Burnaby IR Nos. 1.3(a)
and 1.3(b).
1.3 (0) Please indicate whether Trans Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
Mountain will commit to takinga No.1.3(n).
precautionary approach and only
load one vessel at a time to reduce
spill risk. If not, please explain Trans
Mountain's rational for refusing to
doso.
7

1.3 (p) Please provide evidence of the costs Matters pertaining to the Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b).
savings in decommissioning the decommissioning of the existing
existing pipeline and only having delivery line are outside of the
two pipelines through the Burnaby scope of this Application.

Mountain tunnel. Consideration of not proceeding
with the relocation of the delivery
line is contrary to the intent of this
Application.

1.3 (q) Please indicate whether the Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b). The
financial viability ofthe Trans Nos. 1.3 (n) and 1.3 (p). need for this Project is an issue in this hearing. Burnaby and the
Mountain Expansion Project would Board need to know the impacts, if any, if the Project is not
be impacted by having only two approved and if only two delivery lines are operational in
vessels loaded simultaneously as Burnaby. This is an important risk reduction measure that must
opposed to three at the Westridge be considered in this hearing.

Marine Terminal if the existing line

was not relocated and was
decommissioned.

1.4 (b) Please provide the evidence to Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. The response to Burnaby IR No. 1.3(b)
support the determination that the No. 1.3(b). does not address this request, but only confirms that the annual
existing NPS 24 pipeline should be average throughput would be only 210,000 bbl/d. This request
upgraded to an NPS 30 pipeline if remains outstanding and Trans Mountain has not provided any
relocated to the tunnel, given that justification for refusing to provide a response.
the annual average throughput
would be only 210,000 bbl/d.

1.4 (d) Please confirm whether Trans Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. The response to Burnaby IR No. 1.4(a)
Mountain intends to increase the No. 1.4(a). does not address the question concerning increase in capacity of
capacity of the products to be the products to be shipped through the NPS 30 pipeline from the
shipped through the NPS 30 pipeline existing NPS 24 pipeline.
from the existing NPS 24 pipeline. If
so, please quantify the increase in
capachy.

1.5 (a) Please indicate whether Trans Trans Mountain has assessed the Request not addressed. Trans Mountain does not provide the
Mountain has assessed the specific risks associated with the relocated information requested or a justification for not providing the
risks (as opposed to risk delivery line consistent with the information requested. Condition 15 did not relate to the
frequencies) of locating a third requirements of Board Condition 15 relocation of the pipeline to the tunnel. In any event, other NEB
pipeline in close proximity to the for TMEP (A90803), which is beyond conditions (for example Condition 22) require the assessment of
two approved pipelines and the the requirements of the Board’s the domino effect of releases and the cumulative risk. At no
consequent decrease in pipeline Filing Manual for applications made point has Trans Mountain assessed the risk associated with the

8

spacing. If so, please provide under section 58 of the National decrease in pipeline spacing.
evidence of those risks. Energy Board Act (”NEB Act”).

1.5 (b) Please provide the steps that Trans The inherent risk mitigations in Request not addressed. Trans Mountain does not provide the
Mountain has taken or proposes to relation to all three delivery lines in steps that Trans Mountain has taken to reduce risk to ALARP. The
take with respect to the relocation the tunnel including the relocated information requested is not found in the response to Board IR
ofthe existing pipeline to the tunnel delivery line are described in No. 62.1 or in response to Board IR No. 4.3.
to reduce risk to As Low As response to Board IR No. 62.1 in
Reasonably Practicable. relation to Board Condition 15

(A90803). Updated failure
frequencies including the relocated
delivery line was provided in
response to Board IR No. 4.3
(A91555).

1.5 (d) Please provide an explanation for Trans Mountain described anomaly Request partially addressed. The response to Action 11 does not
how a leak from the third pipeline in repair techniques that are being address how leaks will be prepared that do not occur at the
the tunnel will be repaired. considered in response to Action 11 entrances to the tunnel. Trans Mountain only notes that

as a result of a Board Technical ”procedures would be developed and tested to perform an
Conference in relation to the internal weld repair of the anomaly.”
Burnaby Mountain Tunnel. Those
repair techniques would also have
application for a leak repair. Please
see Trans Mountain response to
Action 11(A92235).
It is important to note, and
referenced in the Board Condition
26 compliance filings and response
to Action 11, Trans Mountain will
take a proactive approach to the
prevention of anomalies prior to
backfill installation and during
operations:
- Prior to backfill installation:
undertaking visual inspection of the
delivery line for any evidence of
mechanical damage, holiday testing
of coatings, and in-line inspections
9

(”ILI”) with a combination of high
resolution magnetic flux leakage and
geometry tool technologies, and
hydrostatic testing.

- During operations: the
delivery line will be monitored and
inspected in accordance with the
Trans Mountain Integrity
Management Program (”IMP”). The
focus of the IMP is to proactively
monitor pipelines for all threats and
to take action to prevent the growth
of any anomalies before they
present a risk of failure. The IMP
will require various |L| tools to be
run every five (5) years.
Preventative actions planned during
operations include regular cleaning
pig runs to mobilize any deposits
within the delivery line to prevent
internal corrosion, and impressed
current cathodic protection, which,
combined with high performance
coatings, will prevent external
corrosion.

It is also importa nt to note that the
maximum operating pressure of the
relocated delivery line is less than 25
percent of the pressure at its
specified minimum yield strength
(SMYS), providing a large safety
factor and assurance of no pressure
cycling induced crack growth.

1.5 (e) Please provide an assessment of the Maintenance or repairs undertaken Request not addressed. Trans Mountain does not provide the
risk to damaging the two approved on the relocated delivery line will information requested or provide an explanation for not
pipelines in the tunnel if take place in the manner described providing that information. For example, one of the repair
maintenance or repairs are required in response to Action 11 as techniques Trans Mountain suggests involves ”excavation from
for the third pipeline. referenced in response to Burnaby the ground surface down to the tunnel in locations where the

10

IR No.1.5(d), and in accordance with tunnel depth is 20 m or less, and cut an entry shaft into the

Trans Mountain’s Damage tunnel casing in order to access the lines, and complete a

Prevention Program, which prevents conventional repair such as sleeve installation or cut-out and

damage to buried utilities, including Replacement.” Trans Mountain does not provide any information

adjacent pipelines owned by Trans on the risk such a repair technique would have on the other

Mountain. pipelines in the tunnel, particularly if the pipeline spacing is
decreased with the addition of a third pipeline.

1.5 (f) Please confirm that maintenance or Not confirmed. Please see response Request partially addressed. Trans Mountain notes that the ”IMP
repairs to the pipeline will not be to Burnaby IR No. 1.5(d). will require various |L| tools to be run every five (5) years”, but
able to be undertaken in the tunnel does not indicate what those tools will be.
after it is backfilled with concrete.

1.5 (g) Please provide the lifespan of a To clarify, the relocated delivery line Request partially addressed. Trans Mountain does not provide
pipeline transporting the products in the tunnel is subject to routine the various lifespans requested.
proposed to be put through the maintenance as stated in response
third pipeline in the tunnel that is to Burnaby IR No.1.5(d). The design
not subject to maintenance, life of the delivery line is 100 years.
including the:

i. manufacturer's recommended
Iﬁespan;

ii. Trans Mountain's asset
management expected lifespan;
and

iii. the actual lifespan of the same
or similarly categorized or
manufactured pipelines

1.5 (i) If there is a leak in the third pipeline, Please see response to Burnaby IR Request partially addressed. Trans Mountain does not specify in
how will Trans Mountain access the No. 1.5(d). the response to IR 1.5(d) how a leak will be accessed that does
leak? not occur near either end of the pipeline.

1.5 (j) If there is a leak in the third pipeline, Information on protocols/mitigation Request not addressed. Trans Mountain does not provide a
will Trans Mountain have to damage measures to be utilized in the response to the request. Trans Mountain’s response to Action 11
the Burnaby Mountain conservation unlikely event of a leak of any of the contemplates ”excavation from the ground surface down to the
area to access the leak? delivery lines in the tunnel were tunnel” in the event of a leak. Burnaby requests more

presented in the OH-001-2014 information on whether a leak in the third tunnel could require
proceeding, specifically in response excavation of the Burnaby Mountain Conservation Area.
to NRCan IR No. 2.119 (A66133).
Further, and pursuant to Board
Condition 125, Trans Mountain will
11

file an emergency response plan at
least six (6) months prior to
commencing operations. The
emergency response plan is
currently being developed and will
include locations of control points,
and tactical response measures.
These same measures, protocols
and response plans apply equally to
the Project.

1.5 (k) If there is a leak in the third pipeline, Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.5(j).
please list all possible damage or No. 1.5(j).
impacts that may occur to:

i. the Burnaby Mountain
Conservation Area;
ii. properties near to or adjacent
to the leak or tunnel; and
iii. other locations or areas that
may be used to access the leak
or repair the leak.

1.5 (I) Is it possible to replace the pipeline The potential replacement ofthe Request not addressed. The ability to replace the pipeline in the
in the tunnel, if it is damaged, or relocated delivery line is not event of damage or if it reaches the end of its lifespan is relevant
once it reaches the end of its contemplated in this Application, to issues 4, 6, 8 and 9 in this hearing. In addition, it is relevant to
lifespan? If so, how? nor is it required by the Board’s any conditions that may be imposed on approval (issue 10).

Filing Manual for applications made
under Section 58 of the NEB Act.
Trans Mountain’s focus and efforts
will be on preventative maintenance
as described in response to Burnaby
IR No.1.5(d).Trans Mountain is
committed to the safe operation of
the relocated delivery line in a
manner that promotes the safety
and security of the public and the
protection of the environment.

12

1.6 (a) What products would be shipped in The products to be shipped on the Request not addressed. The nature and properties of the
the upgraded NPS 30 pipeline? relocated delivery line are subject to products to be shipped in the pipeline if it is relocated to the
Please include the products' name, the Trans Mountain Commodity tunnel, as compared to the products currently shipped through
synonym, and CAS No. Approval Process. the existing pipeline are relevant to the potential impacts and

https://www.kindermorgan.com/co effects of this application (issues 3, 4, 8, 9 and 10). This is critical
ntent/docs/Commodity_Approva|_P information that Trans Mountain is refusing to provide. Trans
rocess_|ssue_6.pdf]. Specific Mountain provided some information on the products in OH-OOl-
products would not be known at this 2014, but has not provided any justification for why that

time. information is not available for this pipeline.

1.6 (b) What are the properties of the Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.6(a).
crude oils to be shipped in the No. 1.6(a).
upgraded NPS 30 pipeline?

1.6 (c) How will the products to be shipped Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.6(a).
in the upgraded NPS 30 pipeline No. 1.4(a).
differ from the products shipped in
the NPS 24 pipeline?

1.6 (d) Has Trans Mountain accounted for Yes. Trans Mountain has accounted Request not addressed. Trans Mountain does not answer the
the potential increase in heavy for the relocated delivery line in its question asked. Burnaby asked whether Trans Mountain had
crude to be transported through the risk assessment as provided in accounted for the increase in heavy crude to be transported
upgraded NPS 30 pipeline in its risk response to Board IR No. 4.3 through the delivery line not the relocated delivery line. Trans
assessment for the relocation of the (A91555). Mountain’s risk assessment does not explicitly account for the
Westridge Delivery Line? If so, how? increase in heavy crude with the concomitant risks acknowledged

by the Board in the report in OH-001-2014.

1.6 (e) Has Trans Mountain accounted for The emergency response plan for Request not addressed. Emergency response measures for the
the potential increase in heavy the Westridge Marine Terminal is pipeline if it is relocated to the tunnel and the increase in heavy
crude to be transported through the outside of the scope ofthis crude through the tunnel are directly relevant to this hearing
upgraded NPS 30 pipeline in its Application, and will be filed with (issues 8 and 9).
emergency response measures at the Board at least six months prior
the Westridge Marine Terminal? If to operations pursuant to Board
so, how? Condition 126.

1.7 (a) Please indicate the impact that any The economic impact of a total of Request not addressed. In the OH-001-2014 proceeding, the
change in products to be shipped in three (3) delivery lines, including the Board did not consider the change in product in the existing
the NPS 30 pipeline will have on delivery line in question, was pipeline if it is relocated to the tunnel, specifically the decrease in
exports? assessed in the OH-001-2014 light oil and the increase in heavy crude.

proceeding, as described in
response to Burnaby IR No.1.3(a).
The relocation proposed in the
13

Application will not impact the
analysis or conclusions in the OH-
001-2014 proceeding regarding the
economic impacts.

1.7 (b) Please indicate the impact that any Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. In the OH-OOl-2014 proceeding, the
change in products to be shipped in No. 1.7(a). Board did not consider the change in product in the existing
the NPS 30 pipeline will have on the pipeline if it is relocated to the tunnel, specifically the decrease in
domestic economy in British light oil and the increase in heavy crude.

Columbia?

1.9 (a) Please provide the results of the The result ofthe investigation into
investigation into the external leak the external leak detection method
detection method. stated in the compliance filing for

Board Condition 26 was described
further in response to Board IR No.
59.5 (A88930). In that response,
Trans Mountain confirmed the
potential capability for an external
fibre optic leak detection technology
for distributed real time sensing of
vibration, temperature and strain
changes along the length of an
approximately one (1) km long pilot
installation.

1.9 (b) Please describe the external leak Please see Trans Mountain response Request partially addressed. Trans Mountain does not provide
detection method and provide to Board IR No. 59.5 (A88930). evidence of the external leak detection method’s ability to detect
evidence of its ability to detect leaks leaks in tunnels such as the Burnaby Mountain tunnel.
in tunnels such as the Burnaby
Mountain tunnel.

14

- 2
PART 1 — STATEMENT OF FACTS
A. INFDRMATION REQUESTS T0 TRANS MOUNTAIN

1. On December 21, 2017 Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (“Trans Mountain”) submitted an
application for the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation to the National Energy Board (the
c“B0ard”).

2. On May 18, 2018, the Board determined the application to be complete and issued
Hearing Order MH-048-2018 setting out the process for the review of the Project,
including the opportunity to ask one round of Information Requests (“IRS”) to Trans
Mountain and the List of Issues for the hearing.

3. On June 28, 2018, the City of Burnaby (“Burnaby”) ﬁled IRS to Trans Mountain.

4. On July 13, 2018, Trans Mountain responded to the IRs 0f Burnaby, along with the IRs
of other intervenors.

5. Trans Mountain’s responses to the IRs 0f Burnaby are neither full nor adequate.

PART 2 — GROUNDS FOR THE REQUEST
A. PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS REQUIRES ADEQUATE RESPHNSES

6. Rule 34 0f the National Energy Board Rules ofPractice and Procedure, 1995 provides
the Board with the ability to direct a party to provide full and adequate responses to IRs.

7. Trans Mountain refused to respond to a number of requests of Burnaby claiming that they
are outside the scope of this hearing. The number of questions that remain unanswered
suggests a lack of good faith on the part of Trans Mountain in responding to Burnaby’s
requests.

8. With respect to the IRs that Trans Mountain did provide a response, Trans Mountain’s
responses often refer to ﬁlings in the hearing for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project
that did not consider a third pipeline through the tunnel, avoid the core element of the
question, do not respond to the question asked, provide partial responses, or defer the
providing of critical information to a later date.

9. The speciﬁc grounds for claiming each of Trans Mountain’s responses to the IRS to be
inadequate are set out in the attached Schedule A.

10. Burnaby requests that the Board direct Trans Mountain to provide full and adequate
responses to the IRs set out in the attached Schedule A.

11. The provision of full and adequate information in response to the IRS is critical given that
the Board has not provided an opportunity for intervenors to ask follow—up IRs of Trans

3
Mountain or to cross-examine Trans Mountain. This round of IRS is the only opportunity
to test the evidence put forward by Trans Mountain in this hearing.
PART 3 — ORDERS SOUGHT
12. Burnaby requests that the Board grant the following relief:
a. An order directing Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC to provide full and

adequate responses on or before a date to be set by the National Energy

Board to the information requests of the City of Burnaby as set out in

Schedule A to this Notice of Motion; and

b. Such further and other relief as the National Energy Board deems just.
ALL OF WHICH IS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED.
Dated: July 18, 2018
. - - "1‘? *jE»-*":F_“"T::-
ﬁ’ﬂ ‘. Gregory J . M'eDade Q.C.

Counsel for the City of Burnaby
Ratcliff and Company LLP
500—221 West Esplanade
North Vancouver BC, V7M 3] 3
Ph: 604-988-5201
Fx: 604—

Hearing Order MH-048-2018
File No. OF-Fac-OiI-T260-2017-10 01
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)
Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
ﬂ
1.1(a) Please indicate whether Trans This request is not relevant to the Request not addressed. As acknowledged by the NEB in reference
Mountain will commit to ensuring scope of the Application and is (i) in the IR, there is an existing deal to sell the Trans Mountain
that all successor owners of the outside the List of Issues in Hearing Pipeline system, including the existing Westridge Delivery Line.
project are bound by Trans Order MH-O48-2018. Commitments The ability of future owners of the pipeline to fulfill the
Mountain's commitments made are typically incorporated as commitments made by Trans Mountain in this hearing, including
during this hearing. conditions to a Board Order or those commitments that do not form part of the conditions for
Certificate of Public Convenience the project, is a critical issue that needs to be addressed before
and Necessity (”CPCN”) granted by this hearing proceeds. There is no point in Burnaby seeking
the Board, who provides regulatory commitments from the current pipeline holder, if they will not be
oversight over the compliance to operating the pipeline in the future.
those commitments. Please also see
response to Squamish Nation IR No.
1.2(a).
1.1(b) If so, please indicate the methods by Please see response to City of Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR No. 1.1(a).
which Trans Mountain will ensure Burnaby (”Burnaby”) IR No.1.1(a).
that all successor owners of the
project are bound by Trans
Mountain's commitments made
during this hearing.
1.1(c) If Trans Mountain is not willing to Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR No. 1.1(a).
ensure that all successor owners of No. 1.1(a).
the Trans Mountain pipeline will be
bound by commitments made
during this hearing, please indicate
whether Trans Mountain will
commit to requesting that the Board
adjourn this hearing until the
purchase ofthe pipeline is complete
1

and the new owner can participate
in this hearing.

1.2 (a) If the application to relocate the Trans Mountain commits to filing an Request partially addressed. Trans Mountain does not explain
existing delivery line is granted, application to decommission the why it refuses to commit to filing an application to decommission
please indicate whether Trans existing delivery line at an the existing delivery line six months prior to operational service
Mountain, and its successors, will appropriate time prior to the of the new installations for the Trans Mountain Expansion
commit as a condition of relocating operational service of the new Project. Trans Mountain refers to the response to IR No. 3 of the
the existing delivery line to filing an installations for the Project. The Board, but in that response Trans Mountain merely states that
application to decommission the rationale and the timing of the the existing pipeline ”is required to continue transportation
existing delivery line six months decommissioning application are service until the Trans Mountain Expansion Project is
prior to operational service of the described in response to Board IR commissioned, specifically, until the three (3) Westridge Delivery
new installations for the Trans No. 3 (A90591) that was submitted Lines (two (2) of which are authorized pursuant to Certificate of
Mountain Expansion Project? If not, to the Board on March 15, 2018. Public Convenience and Necessity OC-064, and one (1) which is
please explain Trans Mountain's the subject of the 5.58 Application) are commissioned.” Burnaby’s
rational for refusing to do so. request took into account Trans Mountain’s need to have the

existing pipeline operational until the new installations in the
tunnel are commissioned, but also allowed the Board to start the
review of the decommissioning of the existing pipeline so that
process may begin in an efficient manner once the tunnel is
operational. Yet, Trans Mountain does not provide an explanation
of its refusal to apply to decommission the existing line six
months prior to operational service of the new installations in the
tunneL

1.2 (b) Please provide the steps and The steps and procedures that Trans Request not addressed. The Board did not rule that the
procedures that Trans Mountain, Mountain would take to decommissioning was outside the scope of this hearing, only that
and its successors, would take to decommission the existing delivery the Board would need information and argument on the need to
decommission the existing delivery line are outside ofthe scope ofthis make decommissioning the existing pipeline a condition of this
line? Application, and will be described in application. Trans Mountain is best placed to provide information

a future decommissioning on the steps and procedures to decommission the existing
application, as stated in response to pipeline and the timelines associated with those steps and
Burnaby IR No. 1.2(a), and subject to procedures, so that the Board has full information before it in
Board review. order to formulate an effective condition.

1.2 (c) Please indicate whether Trans Matters pertaining to the future Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b).
Mountain, and its successors, would decommissioning application are
make an application for outside of the scope ofthis
abandonment as part of the Application. Please see response to

2

.__—
1.2 (d) Please indicate whether Trans Trans Mountain does not have the Request not addressed. Trans Mountain has the ability to request
Mountain, and its successors, will authority to determine the manner that the Board subject their application to a public hearing.
commit to a public hearing for the in which an application is considered
decommissioning and abandonment by the Board. Trans Mountain will
of the existing delivery line? participate in the process
determined to be appropriate by the
Board for its assessment ofthe
future decommissioning application.
1.2 (e) If the application to relocate the The manner in which the existing Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b).
existing delivery line is granted, delivery line will be decommissioned
please indicate whether Trans is outside ofthe scope of this
Mountain, and its successors, will Application, and will be detailed in
commit at this time to removing the the future decommissioning
existing delivery line from the application. Please see response to
ground after decommissioning? If Burnaby IR No.1.2(a).
not, please explain Trans Mountain's
rational for refusing to do so.
1.2 (f) If the application to relocate the The extent of, and the method of Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b).
existing delivery line is granted, remediation associated with the
please indicate whether Trans decommissioning of the existing
Mountain, and its successors, will delivery line is outside of the scope
commit at this time to fully of this Application, and will be
remediating the area of the existing described in a future
delivery line, including remediation decommissioning application.
of sub-surface utilities, assets, Please see response to Burnaby IR
infrastructure, sediments, soils, No. 1.2(a).
other earthen materials, plants and
wildlife? If not, please explain Trans
Mountain's rational for refusing to
doso.
1.2 (g) If the application to relocate the Matters pertaining to consultation Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b).
existing delivery line is granted, and engagement in relation to
please indicate whether Trans remediation of the existing delivery
Mountain, and its successors, will line area are outside of the scope of
3

commit to consultation, this Application, and will be
engagement, and City of Burnaby considered and described in a future
Information Requests to Trans decommissioning application.
Mountain - Westridge Delivery Line Please see response to Burnaby IR
Relocation cooperative planning No. 1.2(a).

with the City of Burna by to

remediate the existing delivery line

area to the standards set by the City

of Burnaby? If not, please explain

Trans Mountain's rational for

refusing to do so.

1.2 (h) If the application to relocate the Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b).
existing delivery line is granted, No. 1.2(g).
please indicate whether Trans
Mountain, and its successors, will
commit to working with the City of
Burnaby to remove the existing
pipeline and remediate the existing
delivery line area in compliance with
the City of Burnaby's bylaws? If not,
please explain Trans Mountain's
rational for refusing to do so.

1.2 (i) Please indicate whether Trans Matters pertaining to the Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.2(b). It is
Mountain, and its successors, will recommissioning of the delivery line relevant to assessing the risks associated with this application if
commit to not apply to are outside of the scope of this Trans Mountain plans to recommission the existing line (after a
recommission the existing delivery Application. Such activities would third pipeline is installed in the tunnel), increasing the amount of
line if the application to relocate the require an application to the Board, product to be transported through Burnaby with the concomitant
existing delivery line to the tunnel is and subject to the Board’s approval. increase in risk.
granted.

1.3 (b) Please provide the combined total The aggregate capacity of the two Request partially addressed. The capacity of the approved two
maximum capacity of all three (2) authorized delivery lines are delivery lines is directly relevant to the need for the Project — an
pipelines (if approved) through the outside of the scope ofthis issue in this hearing.
tunnel. Application, and authorized by CPCN

OC-064. Please see response to
Burnaby IR No.1.3(a). The
maximum capacity of the relocated
delivery line is approximately
111,290 m3/day (700,000 bbls/day).
4

The average throughput rate of the
third (relocated) delivery line is
consistent with each of the two (2)
authorized delivery lines, which is
approximately 33,390 m3/day
(210,000 bbls/day). As noted in
response to Board IR No. 1.93(d.2)
in proceeding OH-001-2014
(A60392), each line will operate
intermittently, and the concept of
an average annual (sustainable)
capacity for each line is not
applicable.

1.3 (c) Please provide a comparison of the The applied for capacity of TMEP Request not addressed. The need for the Project is an issue in this
combined maximum capacity of all was informed by requests from hearing. The request is directly relevant to that issue and Trans
three pipelines through the tunnel shippers and includes an allowance Mountain has refused to provide a response.
with (i) the applied for, or approved, for spot capacity, and served to
capacity with the Trans Mountain inform the need for the TMEP in the
Expansion Project; and (ii) current OH-001-2014 proceeding, and is
committed to capacity from outside of the scope ofthis
shippers. Application. Please see response to

Burnaby IR Nos. 1.3(a) and 1.3(b).

1.3 (d) Please explain why the two new The need for a total of three (3) Request not addressed. The need for the Project is an issue in this
delivery lines approved by the Trans delivery lines was described in the hearing. The request is directly relevant to that issue and Trans
Mountain Expansion Project with a OH-001-2014 proceeding. Please Mountain has refused to provide a response. The need for a third
total capacity of 1,400,000 bpd is see response to Burnaby IR Nos. NPS 30 pipeline through the tunnel was not addressed in the NEB
not sufficient to service the 1.3(a) and 1.3(b). hearing for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project. The NEB
increased capacity from the report explicitly stated that the Trans Mountain Expansion Project
expansion to accommodate the application did not relate to the existing pipeline and that the
decommissioning of the existing installation of a third pipeline would be part of a separate
pipeline without the need for a third regulatory application.
pipeline through the tunnel.

1.3 (e) Please update the evidence with The need for TMEP and shipper Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(d).
respect to the current shipper commitments demonstrating that
commitments for the Trans need are outside of the scope of this
Mountain pipeline system. Application, and was established in

both the RH-001-2012 proceeding
that established the toll
5

methodology for the TMEP, and the
OH-001-2014 proceeding.

1.3 (f) Please provide evidence of shipper The reference to commitments or Request not addressed. The reference to 2,100,000 bb|s/day is
commitments or demand for demand for 2,100,000 bb|s/day is not incorrect. Based on the information provided by Trans
2,100,000 bpd throughput to the incorrect. Please see response to Mountain, that is the combined total capacity of the three
Westridge Marine Terminal. Burnaby IR No.1.3(b). pipelines through the tunnel (if approved).

1.3 (g) Please provide evidence of the Simultaneous loading of up to three Request not addressed. This request is directly relevant to the
demand for three vessels to be (3) vessels at the expanded need for the Project. The simultaneous loading of three vessels
loaded simultaneously at the Westridge Marine Terminal was (along with the associated risks and impacts), as justification for a
Westridge Marine Terminal as considered in the OH-001-2014 third pipeline through the tunnel was not considered in the OH-
opposed to two with the currently proceeding, and is outside of the 001-2014 proceeding.
approved expansion project. scope of this Application. Please see

response to Burnaby IR Nos.1.3(a)
and 1.3(b).

1.3 (h) Please explain why a two Please see response to Burnaby IR Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
simultaneous vessel loading No. 1.3(g).
schedule cannot be accommodated.

1.3 (i) Please provide an assessment ofthe Risks associated with the loading Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
increased risks of loading three activity at the expanded Westridge
vessels simultaneously, including: Marine Terminal were considered in
i. increased spill risk; the OH-001-2014 proceeding, and is
ii. increased risk of human error; outside of the scope ofthis

and Application. Please see response to
iii. increased risk of incident Burnaby IR Nos. 1.3(a) and 1.3(b).
escalation or domino effect

1.3 (j) Please indicate whether the boom Matters pertaining to incident Request not addressed. See Burnaby response to IR 1.3(g).
around the Westridge Marine response at Westridge Marine
Terminal can handle a spill from Terminal were considered in the
three tankers simultaneously when OH-001-2014 proceeding, and are
loading at the Westridge Marine outside of the scope ofthis
Terminal. Application. Please see response to

Burnaby IR Nos. 1.3(a) and 1.3(b).
6

RATCLI FF & COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r s
“enagwrﬁﬁgaﬂ'

J uly 20, 2018
File No. 12—0005-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com
BY ELECTRONIC FILING

National Energy Board

51710th Ave SW

Calgary, AB T2R 0A8

Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board

Dear Ms. Young:

Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)

File No. OF—Fac—Oil—T260-2017-10 01 — Hearing Order MH—048-2018
Notice of Motion for adequate responses to Information Requests
We are legal counsel for the Squamish Nation (“Squamish”) in respect of their intervention in
the National Energy Board (the “NEB” or the “‘Board”) hearing for the Proj ect.
: Please ﬁnd enclosed the Notice of Motion of Squamish seeking adequate responses from Trans
I Mountain Pipeline ULC to its Information Request N0. 1.
Yours truly,
RATCLIF F & COMPANY LLP
,. . -'-?-_-::". :gf..'._ 3’ mun“..- ._

MICHELLE L. BRADLEY

Enclosure

cc. List of Participants

Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500. East Elevators. 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouverl BC VTM 3J3
01535364

J‘- 5.’ 1'- -‘*
National Energy ﬂu; Office national
Board 3*; de l’énergie
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Application to Participate Form
Step 1 — I am applying as:
An Individual -
The following describes the categories under which you may apply. If you want to apply as a
group or authorized representative, please contact the Board and request a form for that category.
An Individual is one person or landowner who may or may not have a lawyer or person
speaking on their behalf and who will represent their own personal interests. Apply as an
Individual if you plan to bring forward issues regarding personal impacts or property—speciﬁc
issues, and you are not represented by a Group. Use the Individual ATP Form if you have a
lawyer or representative but are ﬁlling in the ATP Form yourself. If your lawyer or -
representative is ﬁlling in a form for you, you do not need to complete a separate ATP Form.
An Authorized Representative on Behalf of an Individual is someone who speaks or submits
documents on behalf of an Individual. This may be a lawyer or other person. An Authorized
Representative will present the views and personal interests of the Individual they are
representing.
A Group is:
. an organization with its own interests (for example, a company, NGO, special interest
group, Aboriginal group, government agency), or
. a collaboration of two or more people that represents the common interests of those
people.
The Group will have a Main Contact Person(s) and may also have an Authorized Representative
such as a lawyer. The Main Contact Person will usually ﬁll out the ATP F mm on the Group’s
behalf and will respond to questions in the hearing on behalf of the Group if participation is
granted. A Group representing an Individual should select the ATP Form for Authorized
Representative on Behalf of an Individual.
Page 1 of 8

Step 2 — Hearing Information
Project Name: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC - Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Company Name: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
NEB File Number: OF—Fae—Oil-T260-2017-10 01
Hearing Order: MH-048-2018
Hearing Description:
The Westridge Delivery Line Relocation consists of upsizing and relocating the existing delivery
line to within the Burnaby Mountain Tunnel, adj acent to the two other delivery lines authorized
by the Certiﬁcate issued for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project. The Project’s delivery line is
approximately 3.6 km in length; an equivalent length to the two new delivery lines. The
pr0posed entry and exit points for the Tunnel are both within the fence lines of Trans Mountain-
owned Westridge Marine and Burnaby Terminals.
A simpliﬁed participant funding process has been approved for this hearing to reduce
administrative burden. Eligible groups have been pre—approved for up to $40,000, and
individuals for up to $6,000, to participate in this hearing. If you are interested in being a funding
recipient, please complete .the contact form available on the Participant Funding Program web
page at www.neb—one.gc.ca/pfp and send it by email pfp.pafp@neb-one.ge.ea or by fax 1-877-
288-8803 by 8 June 2018. For more information, visit the PFP webpage www.neb-one.gc.ea/pfp
or contact a PFP Coordinator at 1—800-899-1265.
The NEB has people who can help you to understand the Board’s process and answer your
questions about process. They can also assist you if you have questions about ﬁlling in this ATP
Form.
For process support on this hearing please contact by emailing TMXProcessHelp u neb-
one.ue.ea or calling 1-800-899-1265.
Step 3 — Important Information
The NEB will use only the information provided in this ATP Form to decide whether you are
allowed to participate in this hearing. Previously submitted information will not be considered. It
is important to provide all the requested information on this ATP Form. It is your responsibility
to demonstrate that the NEB should allow you to participate.
You must fully complete all required ﬁelds on this ATP Form in order to be considered. If
you do not provide sufﬁcient information on this ATP Form, you will not be allowed to
participate.
You should refer to the Guidance document below when ﬁlling in your ATP form.
Guidance Document on Section 55.2 and Participation in a Facilities Hearing

Page 2 of 8

The content of the ATP Form is ﬁnal once it is submitted.
Step 4 — Privacy Agreement
All information and documents you ﬁle with the Board as part of this proceeding, including your
personal and contact information,* will be part of the Board’s public record and will be available
on the Board’s online registry and in its library.** _
The Board is authorized to collect, use and disclose your personal information under the
authority of the National Energy Board Act (NEB Act) and the National Energy Board Rules of
Practice and Procedure, 1995, and does so in accordance with the Privacy Act and Access to
Information Act. By checking the box below, you consent to the Board collecting, using and
disclosing the personal information submitted here for any purpose related to its proceedings and
activities and without your ﬁnther consent.
Ensure that the contact information you provide is accurate as it will be used by the Board and
other Parties to contact you or serve documents on you.
* For Participation Portal users: the sign-in information (user ID, password, secret security
answers, etc.) you used to log onto the Portal through GC Key or one of its Sign-In Partners is
subj eet to the terms and conditions of that service and will not be used or disclosed by the Board.
** If the documents you wish to ﬁle in this proceeding contain conﬁdential information that you
do not want the public to view, submit them to the Board in hard copy along with a request for
conﬁdentiality under section 16.1 or 16.2 of the NEB Act. (Section 1.5 of the Filing Manual
explains what process to follow to submit a request for conﬁdentiality).
For more information about your privacy on the NEB’s website, please read these Important
Notices.
I have read and understand the above information *
Under the National Energ) Board Rules of Practice and Procedure you must serve a copy of
your completed ATP Form on the company who ﬁled the project application.
I agree. *

Page 3 of 8

Step 5 — Contact Information — Person Applying to Participate (Y on)
S'olh Temexw Stewardship Alliance
Name [Mr., Mrs., Ms.; First Name; Last Name]
Building 10 - 7201 Vedder Road, Chilliwack
Address 1 [apt.; street; city]
British Columbia, VZR 4G5 Canada‘-
Address 2 [province; postal code, zip code; country]
604-819-1467 604-824-0278 Dave.Schaegerﬁ'stolonation.bc.ca
Phone Fax Email
Step 6 — Contact Information — Authorized Representative
A11 Authorized Representative such as a lawyer or other representative is someone who speaks or
ﬁles documents on behalf of an Individual. If the Authorized Representative submits an ATP
Form on your behalf, you do not need to ﬁll in your own separate ATP form.
If you have an Authorized Representative, please provide your Authorized Representative’s
contact information below.
Name: Jean Teillet Shana RObel'tS
Address: Suite 404, 999 Canada Place 7201 Vedder Road
Vancouver, BC V6C 3E2 Chilliwack, BC V2 R 465
Phone: 604-681—3002 604-798-4062
Fax: 604-681-3050
Email: jteillet@pstlaw.ca Shana.roberts@stolonation.bc.ca
Page 4 of 8

Step 7 — Method or Level of Participation
Tell us how you want to participate:
A Commenter:
0 may provide views on the proposed proj ect in a Letter of Comment; and
o is not considered a Party (Intervenor or Company) to the hearing, cannot ask information
requests or cross-examine other Parties, and cannot provide ﬁnal argument.
An Intervenor:
. may provide evidence;
. responds to information requests or oral cross—examination on evidence they ﬁled;
. may ask information requests or oral cross—examine other Parties who ﬁled evidence;
and
. may provide argument.
Intervening requires a time commitment to the hearing process.
The NEB will review your ATP Form and decide whether you are allowed to participate.
Please select 293 of the following:
El Commenter
Intervenor
Step 8 — Interest or Expertise
The NEB will only use the information provided in this ATP Form to decide if you will be
allowed to participate in this hearing. No other information will be considered. When
completing the ATP Form you should consider the Hearing Description below and the List of
Issues in Step 9.
You should also refer to the Guidance Document on Section 55.2 and Participation in a
F acilities Hearing.
You are “directly affected” if you have a speciﬁc and detailed interest in the proposed Project
that may be affected by the Board’s decision. You have “relevant information or expertise” if
you have knowledge that will assist the Board.
Please select one or both of the following:
I am directly affected by the propoSed Project
I have relevant information or expertise _
Page 5 of 8

Step 9 — Your Connection to the Project Issues
The List of issues that the Board will consider in the MH—048-201 8 hearing is set out in NEB
Hearing Order — Appendix 1 and is repeated below. These are the issues that the Board has
determined are relevant to this hearing.
This is your opportunity to clearly explain to the Board why your group should be allowed to
pagtieipate. As explained in Step 8, it is necessary to clearly describe (1) a speciﬁc, individual
and detailed interest related to the, List of Issues and exactly how that interest is likely to be
impacted by the project and/or (2) the nature of your relevant information or expertise, as it
relates to the List of Issues, including (if appropriate) a summary of academic qualiﬁcations and
work history.
Please identify at least one issue that relates to:

i. How you are directly affected and/or

i. Your information/expertise that you believe is of value to the Board

and provide a brief explanation in the space below.

I: 1. The need for the Proj ect.

D 2. The economic feasibility of the Proj ect.

D 3. The potential commercial impacts of the Proj ect.

4. The potential environmental and socio-economic effects of the Proj ect, including
any cumulative environmental effects that are likely to result from the Proj ect,
including those required to be considered by the NEB’s Filing Manual.

D 5. The appropriateness of the general route and land requirements for the Proj ect.

El 6. The suitability of the design of the Project.

7. Potential impacts of the Proj eat on Aboriginal interests.

I: 8. Contingency planning for spills, accidents or malfunctions, during construction and
operation of the Proj ect.

D 9. Safety and security during construction and operation of the Proj ect, including
emergency response planning and third-party damage prevention.

El 10. The terms and conditions to be included in any recommendation or approval the
Board may issue.

Page 6 of 8

Limit your answer to no more than 500 words. You may attach additional pieces of paper if
required.
This application is made by the following member First Nations, under'the Collective of “S’élh Téméxw Stewardship
Alliance” (STSA):
1.Aitehelitz (conﬁnned*) 7. Yakweakwioose (continued) 13. Skawahlook (conﬁrmed)
2. Skowkale (continued) 8. Skwah (conﬁrmed) 14. thw’ﬁwhamel (to be conﬁrmed)
3. thwhé:y Village (conﬁrmed) 9. Chawathil (conﬁrmed) 15. Kwaw Kwaw Apilt (to be confirmed)
4. Soowahlie (conﬁrmed) 10. Leq'a:mel (conﬁrmed) 16. Cheam (to be conﬁnned)
5. Squiala (conﬁrmed) 11. Sumas (conﬁrmed)
6. Tzeaehten (conﬁrmed) 12. Sq’ewlets (continued)
*Note: conﬁrmed participation in the hearing or participation in hearing is to be conﬁrmed
The STSA have traditional knowledge and expertise in respect to S’élh Téméxw. The reroute will traverse areas within the
traditional territory that has not previously been assessed for cultural signiﬁcance in relation to the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project.
The STSA are a self—determining collective of families and tribes with shared language, traditions, laws, and history, and are
recognized as the indigenous peoples of S’élh Téméxw. The Stézlt') maintain a relationship to the land, that is important to their
culture and the maintenance of their community, governance, spirituality, health, and economy. The STSA maintain their
Aboriginal title and rights to S’élh Téméxw, including their unique relationships with the land, waters and resources within the
proj ect reroute that is within the traditional territory. STSA F irst Nation members wish continue to extensively use and occupy
S’élh Téméxw for activities relating to spirituality, health, economic, cultural practices, ﬁshing, hunting and gathering.
Issues that will directly affect the STSA include 4 and 7:
Potential environmental effects:
1. protected areas;
2. atmosphere, greenhouse gas emissions;
3. vegetation;
4. species at risk;
5. water and hydrology and
6. soils, terrain, and geology.
Potential socio-economic effects:
1. human occupancy and resource use;
2. heritage resources;
3. traditional land;
4. socio and cultural well-being; and
5. health;
Potential effects to:
1. Aboriginal rights and title;
2. S’élh Téméxw; ancestral lands of St6:16
3. burial sites;
4. Archeological sites;
5. traditional, spiritual & ceremonial areas; and
Relative Information and Expertise
The STSA has infomation and expertise listed to issues 4 and 7:
a. Aboriginal interests, Aboriginal rights and title, culture, spirituality & ceremonies of the STSA
b. the environment and socio-economic impacts within S’élh Téméxw.
Page 7 of 8

Step 10 — Access, Notification and Service
Select which ofﬁcial language you would like to use to participate and receive correspondence:
English
§ French
Signature
Step 11 — Review and Subunit
You are about to submit your ATP Form to the National Energy Board.
Before submitting your application, you should ﬁrst review it. You may also choose to print off
or save this version when reviewing.
You will not be able to edit the form after you submit it.
If you notice a typing error or administrative error after ﬁling, contact
TlVlXReuulatorwﬂfﬁceru u neb-one.uo.ca immediately.
Page 8 of 8

RATCLIFF & COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r s

J uly 16, 2018

File No. 120005

Reply to: Michelle Bradley

Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com

BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710th Ave sw
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young: ’
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)

File No. OF—Fac—Oil—T260-2017-10 01 —— Hearing Order MH—048-2018
Application for Conﬁdentiality
We are legal counsel for the Squamish Nation (“Squamish”) in respect of their intervention in
the National Energy Board (the “NEB” or the “Board”) hearing for the Proj ect.
Squamish intends to ﬁle evidence by the J uly 27, 2018 deadline. That evidence will include a
report entitled “Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study: Final Report — May 25, 2015”
(the “‘TUOS”). The TUOS was ﬁled on a conﬁdential basis in the hearing for the Trans Mountain
. Expansion Project. Squamish writes to request an order that the TUOS be ﬁled conﬁdentially in

this hearing, pursuant to s. 16.1 of the Nationa! Energy Board Act, 1985 R.S.C., c. N-7, on the
same terms that the TUOS was ﬁled conﬁdentially in the Trans Mountain Expansion Proj ect
NEB hearing, namely that:

a. Trans Mountain will be provided with an unredacted copy of the TUOS, so long as it
executes an undertaking that it will maintain the TUOS in conﬁdence that is satisfactory
to Squamish; and

b. Trans Mountain is permitted to reply to the conﬁdential aspects of the TUOS, but any
such reply evidence will also be ﬁled conﬁdentially.

Squamish is also willing to share the TUOS with the Crown, upon request, for the purposes of
consultation on the Project on the condition that it is kept conﬁdential and only used for the
purposes of this Project. A redacted copy of the TUOS is enclosed. An unredacted copy of the
TUOS will be sent to the NEB under conﬁdential cover.
' In granting Squamish’s previous request that the TUOS be kept conﬁdential, the Board noted in
Ruling No. 77 (A4R1Q7) that the requirements of both 16.1(a) and (b) had been met as follows:
- Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators. 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouver. BC V7M 3J3

_ 2 _
the Board is satisﬁed that disclosure of the information proposed to be redacted could reasonably
result in a material loss to each of the Applicants. Disclosure of this information may result in
interference with traditional use, resource use, harvesting or spiritual use. As such, the
requirement of paragraph 16.1(a) is met.
The Board also ﬁnds that the information ﬁled by each Applicant is technical in nature and
relevant to the Board’s assessment of the Proj ect’s potential effects. The Board accepts that in
each Applicant’s ease, the portions of the reports or studies proposed to be redacted have
consistently been treated conﬁdentially.
The Board has balanced the impacts of disclosure of the information to the Applicants which are
described above with the general public interest in disclosure. Given the harm which could be
suffered by the Applicants if the unredacted studies or reports were disclosed, the Board ﬁnds that
each of the Applicant’s interest in conﬁdentiality outweighs the public interest in disclosure.
Accordingly, the requirement of paragraph 16.1(b) is met.
The TUOS was similarly ﬁled conﬁdentially in the F ederal Court of Appeal proceedings
challenging the NEB report and approval of the Trans Mountain Expansion Project.
Squamish’s conﬁdentiality concerns with respect to the information in the TUOS remain. The
TUOS compiles or references evidence from Squamish elders, Squamish resource users, and
other Squamish community members, along with archival, archaeological and anthropological
data with respect to Squamish past and current use of Squamish traditional territory. The TUOS
includes maps and GIS information that show the locations of spiritual, settlement, resource,
travel sites and areas frequented by Squamish in the past and present.
The data in the TUOS of preferred hunting and ﬁshing spots, travel sites, settlement sites, land
resource harvesting sites, important cultural and historical sites, and archeological sites
constitutes scientiﬁc, technical and commercial information. This is information that Squamish
members consistently keep conﬁdential, as public disclosure of it could lead to interference with
their resource use and spiritual practices.
The disclosure of this information to the public could cause harm or loss to Squamish,
p‘rejudicing Squamish’s ability to carry out activities within their territory, including exercising
their Aboriginal rights. Disclosure of harvesting sites could lead to exploitation by third parties
. and disclosure of spiritual sites could lead to harm to or loss of those sites.
Thus, the Squamish submit that the interest in keeping the information in the TUOS conﬁdential
outweighs the public interest in disclosure and the requirements of ss. 16.1(a) and (b) are met.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP
MICHELLE L. BRADLEY
Enclosure
cc. List of Participants

RATCLI FF 8i COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r s
F.?.- Qq' r-i.-' - [j .
Michelle Bradley
mbradley@ratcliff.com
File No. 12-0005-008
June 29, 2018
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
Suite 210, 517 Tenth Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File Number OF—Fac—Oil—T260-2017-10 01
Hearing Order MH—048-2018
3 We are legal counsel for the Squamish Nation in the above-noted hearing.
| Please ﬁnd enclosed for ﬁling the Squamish Nation’s Information Requests to Trans Mountain Pipeline
ULC for the Proj ect.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP
MICHELLE L. BRADLEY
cc: Scott Stoness, Trans Mountain (scott_stoness@kindermorgan.com)
Megan Sartore, Trans Mountain (Megan_Sartore@kindermorgan.com) -
List of Participants
Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators, 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouver, BC VTM 3J3

Hearing Order OH—001-2014
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Application for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study: F inal Report
.-4
.1
I.
4 ﬂ ‘ ‘ ‘ J ‘ //. ~
' __ ‘ _ ' .,- .- v ‘ 4‘ -f_-f~<-~ 7; 7 - ,wa :51}. ,
. {v.15 ‘ A "
v 3. -‘e 61.12:: . 7 E R
('7; ..-..1.FT;_.‘-r 6 ‘. ?“31'1‘” ’ z“- - 7 i. 1 3: 7 1-, --_
‘ ‘1. ' ..F _ . .. - x “l: _ .4 :6 __*_:i:-"H‘ ,7' “‘1
Khahtsahlano (August Jack), his wzfe Swanamis (Marrian), and child in dugout canoe, Kimilano Indian Reserve, ca. 1907
(City of VancouverArchives, CVA 1376-203)
Prepared for Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council
by
Traditions Consulting Services, Inc.
May 25, 2015

, 7." J .
. . .
\_. o 0. v- . - ' V’ N ‘
4. - A A . ,A ‘ - ~ . ’. #4- "‘ .'::“;-}x -n. _ t .7 K 2
._- . ~ . - 1; as -;;g .\ ﬁa~ 5.1. {a
_ - ' ‘ ' ‘ A ‘ ‘ I ' Y
91~ "’- ’ ’~ W6.
, ’ a ‘ f- Jo” ”)4 “W - o
:0 *O";‘ 1“ ‘ ' v . f . -. ".A. [Ii L? {A .(.~ , - ' "
. . p . L? ,- 2,? _ ‘ ~ ‘ 1‘" -‘
I.“ “x“ __. _
tr. [“9 .. 0“ ‘ ‘ f
- :-Il ' t- V - . ’1’.
5 14/1. .33, --
‘2" ' -. 3.. 7 ‘ J‘ :— " -
p - - 4.. . . “3-- ‘
'yf‘ﬁ' '1 ' - ‘ ,
" v * , A
,I . . ”I “
#3“ 1‘ ‘ - “‘
r. ' - AW 7" m
f- a: [q , ‘
x - .
. ’ ~ P
-' K ‘r gr. 761m)
" ' ‘ ‘ ‘vé'
. ‘ ’ , ‘5' Jﬁ‘l. A
A' .l‘ '4 f: .. ~ . Q
1" ‘ ﬂ ‘
_' > 1: g ..

- - . 9
r . _ 7 - _ ; V
' ' 7 ‘ _ _ ' ' - . " I -- .7‘f_ _‘ V r
7 7, .7— . V7V--*Vﬁ.-Ine§s-4b --777 7. .7--. -.
7 3' 7: -77-7 - -1—7= 7..7 ‘ iffy?” -,_.;\'-:V—+--$- - Jie‘ “'7‘ ’ " " ' ' '
_ _V 7 V "‘ 7' -'w’ V 7 ; 7 7- ‘U‘ﬁ - __ ‘- _, - -7.,o ,_ V-- . _ 7 V
: ;_~V.’£7":;f;'} ' —_ ’7'; ~77 7’- .-€_'"_ 5; ._,_=”. Q.".‘ 7 Q?" 7 7"- V -‘ '77 ??km1337 $V———~ —— —--—V- V7 V V
v :71 2 '3 ";. £’.",‘j‘seV-f 7' W“€‘Erh~o_ﬁﬁse é; ' ' “- "' .77 “ ‘ - é. -- £33.; 7.39::‘1F’7‘ .' :
Z ' “'1""4 Q 7 V g—OgV‘ k‘J-'F—;—Fk ' 5. 7‘7 7 A'; “"‘t‘v‘ 1V_'V"'f—7'—-17¥ ‘V 7V) _ -
7 V V—VV-V—J. -—_-+7V__V 3.... 7v -.~. .523?» .z7 _ 7 77 77V 7 - 7 -. 1.7- -‘
-I ??:?:7: ﬂ — 5““.5 '7!” 0 -"i‘:’ “I 7*7' ’ 7 ‘57 ' ‘ mizki, .l—a-a‘!‘ a 3-7 .‘V’7V17 s
-V~ 7 . .. 7V7 ’- - -7 7‘._.h-f§” V7- 7..- —:‘. ;" 77:7 7., é.» M. 1-2.. -7;7.‘7V-._j V-V V
I.” - - ‘.-;‘- ‘V ° 3 :5‘ ?:Stﬁ ’_, V724— V ’7‘ 35.3":1 “-,»~'£:‘VV;V,: ’"-777:§¢<;2’7 ‘W :V 7‘ V1.7 V 1 V _ V
.b _‘ -" ‘ - ' _ r ‘ 5-. V \“ V— - 7 :7" ‘7 ." ' A :- f 3'" ~91 7:7 3’: _ ' 5—5 ‘1‘ 7 '«V 3’; "r- ' ‘L-3~— A 17’; 7V1" V
V - 1 i -. 4f 1 3" V V -\__7 a -_-V - ‘ﬁ,’ 7:13., v - . .r 7: ?N?V ‘ v.‘ 7 7:11: _: ’.Ed~ 7(7’ 7’7'
ipizra; ' 7"“ ’  ' E‘ V ' "3"? ’7 7 7g; ‘7-7 7-7- . "77—7- V. ??;LééiA-V‘ 77:21,}; V V ‘V'. 7"
W's? ' 7', V7 _ - V V - =7 7 7 .7 77 ~- 7" wan r7. ”777-7677771173: 7:77 -:7 7 2:77 7 7 *
,Q7 7.7%,‘347‘7? _—V‘ -4 . .V-t V ~7 J97 _ V ‘ J . 7- '
7 - 7 7~ 36d- ‘7 7 7' t V :7; -17» ‘3-)— .'_. V... V V -- -r 7 V ’ -
3V~ V4_ 25.7% 3-1}! aLr-_ -. “3.:1' _." 77‘ ’;;é$.ri¢‘~r:y ' 7’ “ ' 7 "7 ' f- : 7 V ~—_ .-
7 ~ "3 ‘ - 7‘ ""” ‘ gig? 61'5"?” 1a a ' ‘— - -7'- Va ‘3. 7 ' V -V V , ‘ 7’7?» V ‘7 7’
V._V V" "V -' - 7 ' 7‘4?‘ V" V.~ - ’ V':‘ m, $1:V;;VVV :ﬂx. 7-735-..177. 7_VV_:‘-V‘:V‘V‘V —7 :
- W—‘.ﬁ~' _ V.» ’7 7 ‘ V. 41-7’. 7 __ 7‘.--_,r- 7—2- 77.77. :,7-7V,V7 ». V 7.-- V
,V' ‘7' -.-"‘__.._§.' " ~ 1‘ «V n... _‘.-§,~s:.‘,:——‘-.'~Z"-_ x 7, -7.'~ Vft-V V -Vr.’ 7', 7 V I r. ' V’ . . ~_V 7
~— - 7 - .v ,' .V .-.‘ - -e~ :. V 7‘ ‘ *7 V 7 ’ ‘77 -' V- }" " 7 ” 7 - 7 ’ ‘ -- 7
7r- 77:57.79; 7*.- z-g; ~- V7 77— mas??'7zt‘:r7 ;-W V7 ”-7777- V—- 77 N7 V - V V
“7'“ «7* 7—- 7' 7 ' an- 77 7 ' 7 ' 7:77,; ~ 7 ’ 777-- ~77 M ” "‘°’7 7 ‘7' - 7 V 7*: f: 77 '
. - 7,-1*Ft“-—.¢3"§7’g§7_ 7 v3k..f.—_e: 7 ‘ﬂ»VJ::‘%f£—.qv_ 1%: ’ 5 3‘; ‘5", 7' ‘ 11?:- ‘V_., "T.V V» A‘ 7 _-_‘ . 7
'7 -¢r .,. '_V .1, “V - 7 7 " - "‘ '-—._ V .,7 ar‘v- «rm: -7- 7‘ — ' g‘ .a '77 - A_VVH 7
- -7 .27sz 777:7". “@3777 _V7V~V7 . 7...- ,V-V;7 V~V7V . V .77.“; 7.7.3377. .5- V .V VVVV, V- V
V'J..V V — ”.‘ﬁ; A ".14" 7 V ~ 7 "-. 7- -: ‘ ‘1'; ‘. -. 7 7FW~.‘:£_V‘~' “"s'~ 7 -(;'f1-7 7:1'5" 7 7—'7:_‘ ' J“ "-V '
3917." 73771.47. 79' ' 7:: .zm-IV'R‘: “'5‘: 73:??3,’7PV '-7 7 ‘.7° "#3.. _ '77“ g “1‘". 3171:;- . 5.7.. 7 V ._ '7; V 7'15; 1 ‘77 ‘“: 73’
7:7V.r :7. -_V‘-‘7'7777‘" x -' ‘ . --—- 77 7‘0”? u; 77, ~ - .77 c- ‘ ' r r V' —
V 77.5:7'727.‘ V-‘ma-V, 77'7 ,wv’gﬁb 3 7V%~,¢7.V€V 7..7 7J7 77 - . ' 7 ‘ -V7V . .777 '
' V VJ7 —- 4"—’--r . ~7 7-7:- . .,-..< “ . x... - 1.." T v "_- - ~, ; V'.- .‘~.V 47,- 7V __ .Vr ._ z" :5 7 —‘—V _ - v 7 ~ _-- -
‘7 V7 51“?“ #72:». '~‘ “4» 's’:.:3: 1,-4 .IV, a ~fo7177-7+r-§,V.V Vr3—.:.—V‘*7V;.-7*J- "V“: V V7 V .VVVJVa..-. 7 7 V V V7
, V . '- ~*2. ' 77 "" T ‘ J- ~ 7 —- 4F, “m"—’".‘; A. —— - 4‘ ' “ 7"“ " " ‘7 3v:— I V _:A7 - ‘77 7
i: ' ‘ - -v p‘ ' . V V f ‘ ” 71" - _ 77 ,-. 7—. 2.7.1 7 9.. _ r&‘_-’. 7- V “" f * ‘47", i‘- V ‘7'; - v ‘
11" - 7C. : _ -- V ‘1 v13?! ! :3 '- .. 7‘ ' ".7 -,_7. ' VV’.,‘;V ‘V .g; 7’7 7 ‘V _*"‘¢ ’ 7‘ .7VV77V
"‘2 VA ‘(d' -‘r:{" f(- _. Vé,V 7. V - r ‘ 7*" ' M V ‘ "Va" ’ ‘ ‘;~.-«; '7 J. ,V :- 5 "7 7. :Li"! 7:7: "“7 ’ 5' ”-
- _V‘ V <—, -_. Eel ' _ - V ' 7- V V V V ‘7 7 ‘ _ - ‘,_.‘.‘ ﬁ'rV ‘ JV“ 'w—Vr-L i ‘_V " :7
7 "‘ V -- -- V _ ‘" f. i-W 41m ‘ _ —- 1-» _~;§:V.V V7 -1'
""*~‘=:~¢ 316$"? 7' 7 7 --7”._;:VV—7- 7 2 ' "--7~.V-- 777775.;7 ' VVV 7
9 r 7" .. V ’ 4'r ‘ ' ’V‘ -77 V_ V ’ » - , ﬂ.- . :'--'L}rr§n_i:+ ' _. ,.'_- r- ._$- -“ ‘ .. ‘ ' ’ _ iﬁf:.ji‘u. 7 . VV_
"’ W472 V A 7 Msﬁ - _ -V "’ _/-7 "t.§ ‘ ’ ‘v’ggér" Vg‘ ' *7"? _-.3 —7 7}- 7V4_.‘ far‘ » (7,—— . vﬂ- 7 H; V ‘
'5’!" V. “‘ -:'2¢.'F:<~7 ’ 77 ' 2%»? ,zgrm .2 M47 7’ " ‘Z§"i’371;7 ‘ '~" ' 7'15“ - -
V- ‘:.- ' " 75; 517757.. 17} 7-,7_‘t _ ,—7.- . _V_ V -. ‘ ‘-.' 7:77‘ cm
WV ’7 . ; 7 . V i : 77.5.7 77 : 7-7.7..«V 7.7 - V V7 V:V:. VX:V,.VVV-_ V7
.7 .. V . 7), —,—— V—_.r-::; .7. W7 V, ' yr" ,- . - _ ‘ ; i '39-: 7 -. :f;:‘ V" > I
A V '1 'K~-. '>.Ar ﬁﬁ' ‘_ ' 7 VJ; - v V 7 W 3.; 7”." "' 7:71 -' L—"IV ' w:?.‘éw‘s bit" 45.7 '
. —V, .‘ —- ‘ - V . _ ‘ ‘ ’ ’ V4 :' n . _, 7V 7
. ’5 A! 4 A. .ﬂﬁf V, V .V {5‘ 7; 7T ‘\ 297—”-1-(1‘, V V 7 V :5: "" ;_V
.V ' $237 -‘.rV ; —7 . .V .7 v _ g“ ‘7;__‘.‘;‘__ ﬂ”, y‘n,.-t. -- .w‘.‘ _ 7‘ ~ -
. «x 7- 7 r: "' -7 ’77 7‘- " 7 k r ~ . “'- “' " gﬁ ‘ ‘ ‘2
V ‘ '7 ”’7' "'57 7“” —' $ﬁW¢7 7' "7-77 77 7'“ " 7 “ 7 V
'. V -7V‘» V 7 775,... ,2: > 1‘ 77 7 V_ 7 _ 7‘»? r_ ‘h , ????,f 5 71-7 ‘7 7‘ V - _-
-V" 7 c 3-7 V; 7.74. V . , V V ‘ - V ,— ._ ’7 V "'71.? _ ’V ’
M .., 7,-7.7 V..7u..__.a?’~ rﬁ-J 7—7-V7-w- VV-V7 - ,V V
7 .3" -;.’- ’7'7 V .4; .; ,_ :V- ':V 77" ” ’ V ,7 7 ‘ ‘ '
7 7:.vxrixcng'ir' ' ' 7"“ V , I ' ‘ . 7 ' . 5‘
r174 " ’ :‘V {'QVVN-awcw~ 77.77 V1 77 V
. 7 -7.‘£ 7 3 7 V: :‘ v > ~‘ ~ 7 ”V ' .‘ 7 V .. 7
~57 " s“ ' ’ ﬁ~h - Q ’7" " 3-; J‘b7'V1l’"/V 7 -1 7 ' ' V
. 7-3 7,V \_ ~-V_ 77VV_77 V c. F 7 .'-".V 7-7— "
_ V 7 V . Mﬁm ‘7—‘f7‘_,:: ‘gg‘ - 1:?1r‘7 :ég'g; 7-7_ . 7 .7 =3 - A- 2* V
7' ' ’ ‘ ' ' ' 7-7 .': V“ “ z i' " ""ﬁ-7 ' 7‘4 77': " 7 7 277-
. '-“‘V _ u?" ‘ ‘ 7 .. - 7 ‘rrx_V,.«‘-7LP ﬂu»;
'7 =7 { V7’ =7 - ._ - Arr?" - - 7
s V ‘ 7 - " ‘ _ “n. .— 77 ._7 W1 . ‘r’-_ Vr-v; ’
" 7 ’ VﬂV 7 . ‘V - : . _ V 7 7 V- t”
V . _ . m 1'. . — ,7 I
V(VV V . . ' ,".'.;. ’u - . "4L ' . V ‘
., 7. ». v.:.-‘ 7 “.7.“
7 V V " - u' n V, , -_- ,v :7‘ ~ch
,7» V7 _ Vim?» ~ V «2:734: -
V r ‘ V 7' . ‘ >’-.af3"" 7...)» V ‘ vf-A _
$5.7 : -_ ' 53;: 19""
I

ﬁgure 1: Map oquuamish Traditional Territory, Consultation Area, and Study Area
*3 I" 3-. ., 2‘: .(- ..‘ ° ‘- “WI"Z' 1‘ 1‘9“ 7—" -' ‘
,; 0L ' f—* .3. ’1 ..|‘ J»- '3' .-. .
oh...) I ‘ ‘ ' “L- J I.‘ . W ‘ \‘ ’ 0 1-. 01"; ‘ r 4‘ t" . I I
-‘ . o. L ‘ . (1 L g, ‘)+-IW ‘3‘;— u5 r...' J].) ‘
.' ﬁr, -z s VI? ‘ . ‘..{' 539W" . ‘-%".¢7 ‘1 '4' _ , -;
Iv ~Y4 I 1 ,. - “. ,
5 L . 31' f“ . 3 .o ‘1‘?! J‘Ef‘fé'ml‘h“ " 2' - "'7‘.- L)‘
.1 ‘5‘ V.‘ . — f". - l". )w ' / .L: ‘,-".\//‘,'-.«;'L’.° J. *, r. ..
,- 3  A a ' ,xz'. Lw- r. ar-
;‘ "l” x}: O rw n‘f h“- ;. A ’. "v'. r ' ‘I “‘ I " ‘Q. v -
‘ #371132”? ‘- =" 2: A z; j" :za 4n "-1
r7170"? '1 " ‘ ~4a“ L‘ A "J’v": ' ‘ .
,-,-L - , #3 ir- ~ w .....,. .
"“".‘~. ’3‘ . l; J” :3 ‘ mg“ ‘L " 5"” {ﬂ ‘~'1-' ‘ , ‘\ '." [1‘
"l 123": ":P-J ‘ . gdt’x ‘ ,z ("3“; 1.70"; '. ° €I'L'\'° I
.. ‘ " A-TJ '." '.‘ ‘.‘-y,‘{0. -/
v w , .. Lew”, ‘3" vi“ ' :‘(s L» .“
“6 ' 7- : " F“ n" 1' " if .I' ﬂ‘ ‘ '3‘ «- ~13"
_ i .L' L ' ~..‘,‘ /- L II \. . (tc’, "
3" r ‘ 5".“ Lazy -‘..~- "£‘?- I .. [1“
}.VI 7 ." 1?" r; ‘ L L'. I " ‘l’- ﬁ” .i‘ J‘ ‘96 I'-- "- ,‘T a _ 3’"? HI? 0 L
. ‘ - .1 g 4 gr“- (‘1- ‘? 0 Q7“; 1'! r_.»_ .. ' ‘
.t.’ " ~ 1’: 4'1, «'3’ 5 3}... .L
' _ ' ' _.~'I 'ﬂ‘ﬁxl ..; ‘sb-g .. 3' q... - ‘1' d1. ’ .
. ’ I 3" - “ . ‘1‘ '13": 71'. .‘J 1:193)- V ‘ﬂ'. 1 " ’J .‘ f q
“ ' (”L f ‘\ " “ 1" " v 1r." ‘i‘ o“? ‘ :“ .V L
3 _ 7““). . - .. R ‘r , A .' ‘I ‘-‘L|I‘-’f"-' . L 1"" 3-. qf;t’..o. , , 3.1;}:
,. .‘. ,, ‘ L ’ ~s. .L ' ' ..';
.‘ , " ‘K ' 3' ,‘ , ". x....' . .L | ‘. ‘.
. _.' ' 1;-“ .'_ _ ‘l ‘_ ‘< 11333;“: _..:'.. pf
; -. - : . > _- , " ,- H ‘: ”15:"..- __ . IL“ A ~V‘ri—L ., ,. 131,,1’:
. ~ .46 '_ ‘ f 01:,“ bef
"“7 *tsvt 3 ° LLL:;+- 5‘1"
’V‘W'LVHL‘ . ‘ :"S‘ ".'_.V. 3”...“A:
\L 37;??i ‘ f3: 32".35‘53’i11 L?" ' .~
72:37 r“..‘:;_'_io' .'I‘q .. ‘-
‘Péﬂfﬂﬁ 7‘ ¥ 1% K‘s}; ’3}- 03
“";EI},"¥$ ‘11: j ..
I. "in: l—V“ ‘~ 9 'R A - r" N 1 ,
- = - mat . - - -5MVA'°3
‘.-*‘ «'L ' mam L '-
_»‘-y . 1 Kﬁgrgga‘ \ 9 SqmishNaIimTladiﬁonalTenim
3 '3' ‘ “x '5' L .. k.
y; 31:" ‘ 3 - 6‘2... Lg] 9 Squanish NdionConsuhIion Bounday
.'I/L£1§L‘E¢ “1"; $\Eyf.) .5.
-= «La
J ‘ .r- "L
3 f . 4,;-
‘ ‘ 3% o 5 1o 20
' Nu. :—m
Squamish Daditioml Useand quxmcy Study, Final Report 4

I—
I—

I—

Squamish T radirional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 8

r ' 7L . 9 . . A l'
.- "'
Wk :-
, ,_ . ‘
J _
. p' - \ -.
‘ ' ~ .0 ~‘ '"w ‘ T‘\ “
“’3' ' v u": r’ _ , .
-Q "’ '. ' . ~ I i'” ' r; ‘-
— ‘ . ' 'u o ‘ ,
1 v. ’ . ‘D‘J‘. . ’5’
v _. ‘ ~ ‘ , ‘ I I “ ‘
- .. w“; .;‘ - w ., ~.'
~vt "V‘ qu- ‘ w I cu ‘ I
w. $54}- .g, 3;. ""5; » u ‘»
§ _ : l~ ' . . ‘ 7‘ ~
, u .; ‘\‘$ f i‘. , . IA ‘
A ;t- _ .3 .ﬁ . \f‘ | ‘ .‘ .5: b. l
.«R 1-, . 3w, 3‘. > t; . ‘ 3 ‘. v
w! ‘ > “ rc‘ ‘ ‘ - ' ‘ ' . -- ilk.
" .' - J '1 ‘ , ' t," . . - {W x' '
£7 ’. i ‘ ' V ‘ ~ ’
. ;_ -‘l .' Nf‘\ ..‘. 'I' ‘ ' ' ' »
'Tf‘l' L." 'V , . 4 . ‘ 1 ." ‘ '
3w . A .. .. ,4 - +> w;
‘ ‘ ‘ P ‘ ‘ .' - -   ,"x >.‘\. ‘ ‘
‘ - . V ‘ \L- ‘ ~-‘ ' .. '
. . ‘3 r ‘ 3" ‘ ‘ “7‘“ KIS‘K ‘ ~
’ \‘A- ' V . 'Cxu‘K‘ -x' * '
. a - . 1‘ ﬂp‘. PI Il . - - Cpl . .5 ~ Y ‘ -
" "ix ‘ ‘ ' ' ' ?}W
, " f k» 3.: 'w'f'm.“ @. ‘
u ', p? - ‘.(WW|an—fl‘ (11m ‘ H 1:5, 3‘3}... .' .. qﬁ’ﬁ‘ngw f”; ,A
. \ ‘ ‘3. ,' ‘ '3’ ‘ "(¢ :4. ‘. - 0).} ’ > I, .0. \ ¥ - “f N
, ‘ ' ‘ .—‘r . ‘ " '. "" -' 1 - .
— I _ x- .. - ‘ a o". $ 7 A ~ A ' ‘2 . ‘ . ‘O .n ._°§ A‘
_’,‘;- “o ‘« ;-- ‘ V '7 ' ‘ '0
. ‘ ‘,. .‘o“ . H? A ‘
4., 23‘. v ‘
F...“ - ,- - ~—

,V'

‘ ' “ii"; ‘ 3 i ‘ i ‘ ' ' E ' 7 i   E Z r I V 9 'E ‘ ‘I ”1,71411.1w.1.1..1.,.1 E E 3 "|~‘RI‘1'|' '3 5‘ ‘5‘ I?‘ V: ? -: ; V i V ‘
1 1 1’ . ¥ 2.. 1 1 .1“ t; ”I , “2’ ., 1111111; 11
’1 11111111 1 V - r): 1— 11.11 1~ 1 "r x '1. Agrr
. 14-91:: , E; v j - g .2
_ « n . - s w. .
‘ ‘ . .- . . 1‘ . J" ' - t“
1 . . Is? .33“ -$ 1.“. ."# 2 ,1
1 ‘ .11! z » - 1 1‘“ V '1 ' A v 1.11
V- ‘ ‘l G. , - . V 11' 4‘". ~ - ‘1 A ’ ¢‘ V' $1,142 .i. -_ (nk’w!
.1 H ~ V ,. . {?fr'f’ I :1 1 11 ‘1 x . 1" ‘ 1'1 1: 1‘1” 1 1
‘ r: 41”! .- ' ‘r' \ ‘. - 1‘ ' Q ‘
m ' , .' F . ., - 7 ‘ ' ‘ ‘ . ‘
. W «- '.' '1 "‘"’ "1 L '
l ‘ r ‘ v) lér .1 »' r 1"; 1. '1, 1 1" “ x
. 1 .3” 1 . 51
_ 1 1_ 34' 1, ‘
SKII-MISHATII 1.. 3 ' 1
- .1 " L(' I -_" i I, "" ‘ l. .‘ ‘(f
11 mm om: ./ .1; 4, _ ' , 1??
V . ’- - I . ‘ ‘
SQUAMISH INDIAN ' f’ ‘ ’. *5” I .
r'. 3,; 1‘. 'iLJ-nw 33‘
" k ‘ r r“ V "'1. E" r' 1
am PEOPLES ' "TIIIIIII VILLAGE: m MIMI!“ “
,_ V . 11‘ 11 -, 1.111, ,. '1 .‘ ’1‘ £1 ,'
1 V m "r ' .5» g , 4'.» 303mm: INLET ’ ,V
f .1 ; ; 'E - Q 4. ,1 W .; AND now: scum: ._
3-K '- \- ”ﬂy ‘ I 11 ‘ 1V - ‘\ “a
r ’1 V, ’ ’ V n ‘ “
”Ari, ‘0 ~ in... h 2 «d f; Inlet. the Whitman! Como *" l
1 1, _ 1a \ u 1 1-4. > : . w '1
" J’s “~43 7.. | I . V + f; 'I f '. u
- -.;,~ ,2». .. : mg. I 4 ‘
4": 1 .‘1 » 1 1 z ‘ ,1; .g 5 u-un'u-uma-po-u—ua
~ -‘ ~‘ .7 V ‘ 3- ~ ,r; ; : ﬂ-v-O- ww-mg 1
:_ ”(1 V. ; . 1 1x 1 V .. 1. 51 p—ﬂ- oﬁum. 1)
v ~ ,‘ . I :~ ~- -\ 1 """"""" - .1" .1 , . -
V ' ‘r‘ 1 1! 1 \ A- *5 5,3. ‘7 ..#M%.. 12-»
- A _‘ ‘. 14' ’ . f \ ‘ *1 -muww. nuns. ' . 1k-
‘ tt a‘ . n .V' 21* 71V ’1 1 _ I 1‘.1!‘ “\
i :'- 1 r ,‘ f .=' ' "" mmuw 5 ' "r. 1‘ "
V . 1 r - ~ .. , .
1 , ‘ ,1 ~ I V I. V? - . Ema?” _,.<l_ NV, 3“-
‘ ' :kA V ‘ . ‘ ' ,.\1 (‘l' m @g‘" {I 1§~.1t¢‘—‘— .‘,
‘ ‘ ~ 7 I‘ll -- ‘ r} .u..._..... -' x :- /
§- 113 1 ‘ ‘ .7 1 1,14 J: r“; 1 1 I . u *.w£ 1 V f 1 11’/
3"”. v_ Air ‘ |D‘ "1 'f w A‘, :Ul- A mt“. ‘ {z ‘ 3‘ It.
.’ A 1 l y _ 1 '\1 ',‘ J "1 1 1 - * 1,71; ‘1’“ 1} . . u
‘ - \1 _, 39%;. r -- ﬂ .»,.-»:9 =1 . .
1 ‘1‘. 13.11921.“ :3:g§-..:ffxru( g“ '1 1 «';_+ ‘ ’. e; 5‘1“ ,.»,. 1" _ E . 1 1 Jlr'v’ly’ilfk ,1".:§1.;\£91
~ .- » v i . ‘ .. .».;»;v- *4 ~ -.. ' 2-1; V ‘
1 ‘13! -12 1111.11 - _ :3 ‘. r, 1‘ 1 . 1 I. . w. 1 ’ :11» , / 1 \_* , "1" .A
‘ " . .1 .i<" .. 1 ‘4 .j ,1 'th); w _ .. _ . V; 1. -
‘LJ ‘ f' Hi. I ’03?“ ‘Q ' ' x -. 1,1111%. ‘ 3' - ' x’”], Q I ' . 1". .fé.“
1 - 1‘ .1 r 1, $ . « w n 1 »
11 v . 1 ,I: ’5‘ 17 v" 1 . .11.; i1 '1". ' 1 1/ _,.I .V 19 Z ‘ k." .1 N
. ‘ “v“7‘ .1 > .‘J V > - -‘ ' , / ‘ V ‘ 0 I > ‘ ' — ‘ l‘ ‘ “
4... . m .x 1r"; «a .n- .~ . r ‘ — ﬁx a
‘ ‘ V a ’ ‘—- .~ "" .».’ . " ' ' ‘ a ‘m
" \' 1; 3414-: _ ' 1. -V ‘ 1114K- ».' _. t; " g 3 7 ‘ 11?: 1-; 1.
.1 >1 “7. 1 _1 . u: I .1 , g 1 1
'~ 1‘ 3‘5 ‘ v» f _ "L '1‘!» . .,_,‘ “ .' .2363!”- tt'; , r.
--. ,, - —- ' _ - 1 ,3 , - , Vr~ . - ‘1 sac.»
\. V . 1—.--.~ " q. .. ; -. ~ ,1
“'~' :5 ”V - :4
. 'u 5 1 '1 ~ 1__~1‘._ J" _'n,
‘ l ' 'I ‘—|, 4" . 1 .1‘. 11 1
I’% 1- 11’ , . ~ 1 . 1;;13 1 11 1 “7“x 1 1 635
“ 'r l 'A ‘ , 1', ' r; H. 1 ~' H; I 2 7 :1;:4 2;, * ' "2", '~ .‘ - . ‘f’air f, ('5’;/‘ I l 1.. 11" I: 1
“ A ‘ r ; i ‘7 -. 3"=e~;:~c.: ' V
1 ‘ g 1 a» )7 . J: K r ‘2'..' ‘ " ?
h .. _‘ uw—sc—‘n‘ﬂ '( , A " ' . W
l .v' -- V ._ (A- .
1' ‘V‘ ") \V "1 2:“ ,
~, ‘ , . , 1 ‘ \ ‘ r
i - .. “ , 1 #3? ~ '- - ' 1'
@VhM—m- ,..~ 4 ~ “W " ' “ ‘ " “ , V f X 42-1 1.41 ‘ ‘. 4‘ .- 1.

. . . . . . 80
laughs much, 01‘ plays near 1t, 1t W111 ram” (F 1g111e 5). —
Figure 5: George Gibbs, Sketch oquuamish “stone image” at Squamish ﬁshery 0n the F raser
River, 9 March 1 85 8.
“ ' ~‘- " ‘ - -~';..;. v.” "’rt".‘-..'-" 2"”.m" "- . 5'1” ‘ '7 , ,v ‘ . .m' {:7‘ La ....;. ., 3;; -_
‘- '. » ‘ ' ‘ -;Y‘?;§g‘- enixsggzai'ﬁvﬁ‘ﬁ' "Y, m... :aﬁiﬁ’ifusﬁ‘m; f,~,-,xu:;3'.§v‘§12.~..3‘f
- ' ' -: ‘ - .. 1 t '..*.~:~"r:>‘. ’- . . .;- ' . ' ' ”gm; ‘ 3‘"? :3 Vi '- "- r .‘
. ‘ ‘ ‘ r " «a ”#95 .. w 33?? 'Kéf‘nf ~rt"-ra:':-"~.‘.‘~;'?~"3c‘3~.. a"
‘ " " ‘ ' ' ’ -‘~ - 1» - 1:..5’9-2 u
7 A . I . . " - " -'-ér‘?«~1‘.«é ?
-L,‘ ;. l' . “l";-‘A’f.1‘..."a.'t 9.‘ . . . : ' 0’ ‘.AI.: .. ">‘."; :34? ‘3’
1' "5 ‘ I ' ‘ ‘3‘! 'Of..t"|v..£ 7.! 'v‘. £311." ‘- l 1' :fti' . '13:???‘1
.‘ ' " ‘6: l' ”'7‘ :"":" f‘ '1 'f . :O-‘O. 7 _".-'." 9.. “f 3,531.51} ’3'“)?
-. ‘. . ' ‘ ‘ ~~ ’3 ' «1‘3 1 ‘ " .7- ' 2.5I'.‘f-:’r‘§;_11~.-'3‘.
. a , ,- 4 n. » ¢ .17.». .4 .;‘.,-.,,~ : ~43
. ...~. Lr.”'P.:“-‘thz. ‘ '..$r*a‘.-f.‘ 'f . . i. 3.. 1:..'( u. :f.'-.; \;$‘...}
'0 ‘7 ~ ‘5’”: . ' . .. V ‘ - ?J’JCX 1' V ‘8. . ' . h.“ . -. .. "ttiili‘. 1..."
_. 7." ‘ ‘ 4")" ’ ‘ m “at ‘2': A ~- "I": «c’~?"’.‘.~:;:i'.","":f ‘ W ' ;.-“r-.§?‘:.‘3L 3}:
. ‘ '~ -.-. .1 .. . ':-’*—- ' ‘ “ ...-“1'5.-'77“."
' Jinn. (6.0“ l r " -- ' :'-'.“.£‘A:.~':,‘.{ ‘359 z‘ #7" ‘ ‘ " 1 .:‘a -"J;‘ " 1.. " '
‘ . L. _ . , -. 1". In wt 0 o . ‘ “'fffﬁ - .‘-" . . ‘-
" 17¢ ' ' 9" / J 10-79%». 1A5; mm 4- 'Aé‘...’ mﬁwm‘w
, ' m ‘ l? ““7 Mo. ﬂaggm’ u: ‘ "a '5; '5 ' 12¢ . i“ .1
1" ' ' ~ ~' ., ',’F' "7"" M' o é‘MM
ﬂab! HI. . . - -‘ . f‘ ‘ .-’::-‘.'-";.x
' , ' . . . . ‘ 1 :~ 5. 1‘ ', ‘-’ I ‘I. ":e‘.‘:‘f:»_.',:l."1 . 3
‘. ' . _, 1. .3 ° 1 ' ' '1 Z' ' , Z 1;! 3" ‘i;"v'-?.f€‘u _2 .‘
80 Gibbs, G. (1858). Sketch: “Stone image of a S’houyahm, at the Skwawmish ﬁshery on Frazer’s River,” 9 March
1858. State Historical Society of Wisconsin. Archives Division, Gibbs Family Papers 1743-1918. US. Mss Y, Micro
1117, Photo Lots 3696, 3697. Madison.
'—
Squamish T radin’onal Use and Occupancy Smdy. F inaI Report 35

" ‘7 _ ' I:;‘ ’1'; 1' 32mm- -‘L..-r". u.“ u“ -_ "ii?”
-.--.+ ; - m1; —' >2. . W _ .
5*} 3. 1‘ “9 (43334": p. '
I ... \ ' , .v .« ' '1 1'" H3 “ .
: I ‘ I . 3 1 ¢a ‘; , \ I ' ._~
‘. ‘ ' " 3 -‘ g} ‘ ‘7; ~
.5 ‘ ﬂ ‘ '1 g ' S’I‘P . .
r I . ‘ : 1 v . " ‘ " '- r‘ 4
.‘_ 1I- o ,7 , l- b - " ‘ I [1:5 "lh'x- I
- L ., . -... n f- \ .1 3 m “3331‘ f
.‘I ‘ d . ' ‘ -I .u .1 ,~" _~ ‘3 U", f ,
z ..9 “ 3.- 2- 2, j .. v“, ‘7' ‘ -3 ‘7" ,
- 1. . -.. . - 35.»: - .. - - . o .
1 .1“ , , ., __ _—1 . .-_ q . , . . .. ’ ,§ :1‘ . . 1:1. r; . I
I.’ "'r ‘ ' ’-. 3 o. .- . f ‘m . ' ‘ 3 ‘ 1 % r _ ‘. _‘_.Cr‘ ‘ ' _ f‘, L- 1 ‘ ; ‘ .
i". f . ‘.‘ w lbw. J‘“ ’ ¢ Ep’;“' _ g a . . ‘
.“'-l." ~ ‘ . . - ' ‘ 3.. .' L1. 3." .. " . . ’ - ' "
r 3 - - - - . . ;< , ,. . -
' xx». . .
. J- .' _I\‘ _& <,‘ 77 1-4;1‘. ‘ﬁy 1—,:— " _ .. ‘7‘? 7“. :-5 I . a
‘ *' .~ x 3 .3}: . 4—7-1112. " 7.31:3”, - ¢ .1. . 3 - 9;... I:
Mr _ .. . 7‘9 ‘ 7; -. J19. . 3 ;A J «ﬁ l§
3 {a m . 3V _- . 4 . -3 1% _ I}. 1. ’5‘ . 1* . s . ff f. ‘ ff} -
r 1 "v ”317"“ 7‘ ' 3 r . E _ o q ‘ ‘ I..‘,"*~:; I T" ‘
a . ‘- .1 , 1 ’ - ‘
J II -w ' . ‘ 3 41"," ‘_ .1 , .9: -‘_ -_ '.‘ ) ;
l ' 1 i - I #415114}; ‘ i a ﬁ‘} ,‘g
.9 . 77’: . ' ‘ _ _.
t . a _ ‘ v ’ _‘ .1. _ 3 , l
i ll . l‘ 1'. .1 ﬂy 43% ”'12:? ; ‘ - 1:1; 1' ‘ i
. 'v ‘ "' -‘ .x’f'i. ' w’" 3
.‘ ‘ ‘ _ ~ 7 o ' ' ’3‘ V I
#743334, F _ :9 _ 91).“. 3 3 3 if __ I gi’z'fb
‘ 1.". ' I - ﬂ“ ’ J . . ‘ I | . - L15? ' ‘
r . v" :i‘ .‘r'- - N 1 - _ l C‘ . - ‘71".Lg . 1
-. 3 ” "x , b N*«er J - J
'~. . . . . .- c f!» “'“=*2:t ' . . ' ' I '
g. __ "‘1‘.‘ ?(?v '1 I .33: . \ a - J . h
V .~ A H h ‘3‘" l - 11:11; l ' _ _ - «I
' " . '1’ - -- 1-14” 5- ‘6..le - - ’7 *   ‘_'.'- 1-_ ‘r f :2; ﬁt”‘ri__ , ,; __, __‘__VL=’- 3h
3 - _ ‘ .. .. . .~ ~~""“L . M—J _ ﬂ.»- 1 1534

I —
Squamish T radirional Use and Occupanq! Study, F inal Report 40

In March 1863, G. Turner surveyed the Government Resewes at C oal Peninsula and 011 the
north side of First Narrows (C apilano River). —
Available records indicate that the C olonial Government created four Indian Resewes in
Bun‘ard Inlet, though there is later reference to a ﬁfth (at Seymour). In Febnlaly 1868.,

J oseph Tmtch wrote to the C 01011ial Secretaly recommending that two Resewes be

I —

' —

' —

' —
Squamish T raditional Use and Occupancy Snldv, F inal Report 41

.7' ﬂ "£7 !- . ‘
‘ﬂ - E? M
2.’.‘ ‘
‘ ' ' 6
k g
‘ r-
. ‘3‘ .
V‘ ~ . O ‘7' ‘ '
5 L9 ‘ ‘9 “ 4 ’4 w-
, 6‘" < , ' ﬁ 6&3
I 21") ‘q , "I. 3‘ ’1.‘,7 '
:pA r - I ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ I.J-.
- -$ ‘7 f" .
“x
,‘ . . a"
.»- , r. 7/4" 2.» ~77 ,
7' ‘ ’ +A*A‘A¢ “ ' -‘ ‘ - l . 1‘ 4
; 7‘.’ ‘- . " ‘. V.V -’ w
A ‘ ’ ‘ v1 . 3"", :~ §(‘f5l \ " c l! .7' ,
. V“ ‘ ‘ 3 " A "77‘; “A .' 4;
- , I 9’94 ‘- "" "j ‘,f~. ,
«~~- _ a»;- «I, ‘ gr : . w sx~¢¢ .. ;
, '..r-v. ‘,_,d " ,‘, ‘, ~ ‘ .\r ‘7 . ,.
‘ ‘.‘ ' -'¢. 9L$ h‘. ’3“ r ‘q y’QIv’,f“ , 5 , / ‘9 r’ 1"
a "- ‘ -- " " ' V ‘2‘ N w i
k 9 "'r " ' "4‘“ "( . _,‘
1': ,- . “’4’ V -' . i‘d‘-'{
. “vmﬁ-ﬁmhﬁr ‘ 4': ~.
D V \7 $27) ‘1' '.*w 7 ‘5 ’7

- , m ‘ -_ . § . ‘ J 1‘ '
- . 7 . ”I - 3..
\ M v‘f,‘ ’ ., - ,
‘ . i a _
"V I l
‘.‘,: Ji. I ‘ .
I ' - ‘ »’ . -
w s . ‘ ~
I , ‘ L ‘ ‘
. , , ‘ v .
‘ I. ’rr 5 a ‘
' '1 ‘ ‘m ‘
- y--‘ - , -- ~ - '.. I
"‘ f. ‘ ‘H. , ‘ ‘
.1 n _" '1 V .- :r
’ ‘-‘ [43-3 ' ‘ ’
x l ‘ ~
\ I - . I ‘ ‘ ‘
'1 w 1‘“ > N
T I 1 1 r“ ‘
r o ' 5‘ ‘ h I I
y'V' ‘
Q . 7 - _ _
O .
.“ . . I ' I l
‘ . ._ ‘
\ ' I p
, ‘ l ' |
‘ ' ‘ — 0 x ,
w _ y 5
‘ ‘
‘ ‘ l .. A ‘ ,__ i '
, t ».n s . -, w ‘K‘. * g ‘ ‘
9’1 ' i ’. _ ' .. . .
‘ A! . 1 2' ‘ ‘ 4.
‘ ' ° '1 l \-
, .u ‘ _ ‘n
4“ "i , , ‘_‘_A _ ._.o‘ i i h
. c -' , . "I -‘~ . '3‘
. x I 7.4 - ~ - -
' - ‘ m It 1' f
w I _ " . n. , . _ V .
1" o ‘ _ ‘1' . I , .
' .' ' l \ I‘ ." A ' .
‘ ‘3 ' 3' L -
‘ ‘.

F igure 11: A House on West 7" Avenue, the Granville Street Bridge, C.P.R. Kitsilano Trestle
Bridge, and Indian Village 0fSnauq, ca. 1890 (Photo by W Chapman; City of Vancouver
Archives, Van Sc P58)
‘ . ‘ '1‘ ‘ f ht. . -I'. 3"?" --"‘ ‘r-- A ~
4 -' C ' -‘ _ ” . ,, ,-
" . ' ?‘A'H‘ . -r‘ H ' "HI m I'M |1!‘ ‘ 'v'p1l“";v -~ v~-‘-v—. LT‘ ‘L‘n‘aq
'K‘ﬁi i. ‘ - g V _. -. .4”.r ‘n.’qﬁmm‘wq-“mmmmgﬂ' ‘ ~. '-. . m; "t ‘1 'v. . 3' tr Inmwmawor.
. , \ _ ' ﬂi ‘ ’ 3 '--
' G
- * 9 "~ t. «.49 “11,;
‘ «f: a ‘1- 3-“ 7833].;- -4 if "n .
r 7‘ ,433 B '4 ’ -—%» ‘ " ’ ﬁ'r ,.__ ' _ - 4v-- .
“ 1.7‘:::_- ,7..._.-:I. j y 4'7? ; " ,. _ “ ..,. ‘
, ._ " ' _ ' 4 ~......a"' , *' _ - , . - " V :
'—
Squamish T raditional Use and Ocatpancy Study, F inal Repon 48

A - ,. -‘H.‘ ,_, ,‘ w .z r - ~ '- '. V. ‘ ‘4
1/. J ‘.-’\/. V .' “'I‘ > \y .2 ~ ‘ I ‘1')" V I . ‘:’: ~ ‘ [’3‘ \- W V“ .’ ‘, ' ‘ ' I ‘ 'ﬂvs‘ I
.' x: ,/ .. .- , :Ezt'w—St ' ' . 1 a ., R . N , Q . .~ ‘, .1 n ; .
g ,, \YJ . ‘ (.3\ o k h ‘ . ' L ‘ ' .. ‘JU dar‘ V't ‘ ( , . ‘ "
L" ‘ 1‘ z ' 0‘35 ' . . ~ - s - eVeu l ; 1 ‘ ‘ 1 1’". / 1/ \. ‘
‘* l AC} hk'eM-f‘lR‘d-E ¢5S/* KGIM, , < . , ‘ "I \ 't ,A’ ‘ ' "‘
7 h V ' \Sl‘tlu‘ '7 . : I I ‘1'?)1 _ . ‘ ’ru' ”Ox ~' K? {uﬁn- I} If t ,/ " '. 1’ v ‘ f "r
. / , "AIW'CVQE , , . . p. ‘ “1 a , ’_‘- ‘- n 3’ MW.‘ 14“ c L} . 4”
.'/ h- 3 ." .- ”"91 :- ' drmwbt .7 ' , A ‘ .
«3'». ‘ {I ‘A N.-. f ' :“h l I J; i ‘ "A; "~ . J. A ‘ ‘- | ' 'V. y) I
J 0‘ . \' .h- é(j\- r“ Mu ii ‘. ‘ A‘" I U Dir. ,»_\t r ‘ i" a .. . ‘
A) ' _ .0 s ‘ ‘ > U x x ’ .v "iEf r“ "—J_ k - r l‘ﬂr — P ‘1
_ \gO . - l ' v _. ‘ ' ‘ O ‘ ‘ ,7‘
/ 7 «2‘2“: ' 3 '7 _ C. ‘ ‘F ”xgﬁg‘ mm- ?ey "Oh’rpk
. /.v. 7 grid (“[81 '91-‘75?" ‘ ‘ ‘ro' »," (L ~ I "W '
I‘"" ' .“JV ‘1‘ A, $ 3 r U) . - . “L La 7
— r/ ~ {£53. .. "p v] ' .—— 3 gm. ,9, ~' 1Map|ewood
- A’ ‘ , ' S ‘ . E“ L, - ‘, 1 -; . E ‘ ‘- ' ‘ a .
M _ 41h‘8}:‘£ﬂ~{ ”0‘ \A ‘ t. '.'7 — ‘ny: .- "r ; (P ~ " ‘ ‘5 ' ‘ ‘ g i . ‘
‘ | ;“°_ -,_. L, . b—rmw G':S\’-',U"St«v~U-2 ‘0) ‘ J ‘7 l V I
x - 1 ‘1." 2'2 "ar+—1~-~s «L: A . ‘ ) ~ g ' -- -
~ ’0‘ z - r ‘ _ ‘ , , , A, ’ _ p ‘
‘3’ ‘- -'r< -—~ C QﬁAh ' '- (:3! 3 "Rd p‘er,t,S : --. ‘ ‘ : i L u
> r - ,onomg ,4 4 . L4???” L, ‘ ‘ gm --. ~ + - —- ——~ ~ U
T\_ ‘: "_"x‘ , > ._ ‘ POI. \ A ?Cx {FL}; w k __‘_ ‘ K ’ inc?” ‘ "I ‘ . ‘ ; .' ‘kh‘
¥.,_‘\ ‘7 _ , _J‘ ‘v 4 ‘4 A “’ ’ ,v " ‘ ,.
~\ V. .I . . w . , z‘ = .w- 4 ,4. . .t
‘0"; _ _ - x l .7 4"- ". ~ _‘ v I ’ A v4 O‘VS‘K‘A‘. . - ﬁv ’1 . ‘
‘ . \_. . __ v,._— —_ . “—‘<~.‘\ - “\.."V-( C» " ‘I - ‘ t - 4
7 -. - ““1 m yum \‘ .~ , 4 :1 .4; '
A . ~ , w, ~. -- - . .r~. '» a v 4'» ‘ ‘~r ‘
.‘ { 7-,.‘9, ' 7.331. V \_ " ,. . '14, ‘ ,7 M a ! EVDOA'al'fsrxrfivb’ ', :3, 1 O.
. _ . 'i- .3 ‘ ,-‘ '5 j . -. v . 1 "r. ‘ I _‘ .... ; .
‘ “n - k 4?; ' 33'; "f-‘g'ﬂv‘SL u ’ '. .a" a ~~ ’ ' " L 3L" '1 ‘ ' ‘
‘ r C' ‘ . .x f: "’2‘ _ A y f - . - '\
’ - > 'm‘ ’ ' :x‘.’ Ohms ‘ '5 C - '9 / " l' V ' ‘ ' "¢Q ‘ ‘
_ _ .043 ._- , wag. 7 .1 .‘,‘ .. x, 1 .30 ' - - \
, . . m / t . f r 3 V- / ’6. . ~ J. ' u. a
. ‘ "r" x; a ‘ ‘ » ‘3-“ » ‘L ‘ . ’.',«;:J-‘" \ 7 - '-. ,*,-' .2
,«g .‘ -. gg- ., 4 1‘ - t :- x g pr“ w 4 L
-' .' .’ ‘ l" U '},‘L-|f - 1 —-v;' “ - " r 3 ‘ Q3” . R w . . - u _ A_
’7 ,r ' ' 1' "(2’ ." |#9“ rm“ 3' .mk r- 4?) 'W‘Uln " 9"?! 53° 3" ‘ "9 " ’1 : ' ‘ 4
«’5. .m." i: . ,~ ‘ r d Gown‘bla'sa - ~ “4 . . 35‘ pan - 7 w' ‘ i' ~ '-' . v
c. - ,(« 1 ~ ‘ Q ”:1: ~. Ma . ' ‘ '
“*- rv .2 4. «M. :26 9 .-. 2 a v ,» 7 W
‘._ ‘; 'J' ,1 'LL' 'Y'Z .:- jay Sta 1 SE... <A_.__J‘ ‘l v "_ r. ,’
-, u r‘ ‘ '3 ‘ -‘l ,' .‘ ﬂ, X L < : . X .
‘. »j'" &_ ‘ I L “e 1“ "ﬁ'. A. J 0, '.\ 7‘ '1‘ l) i H . 1 4" V . I
~_ _ [V1, I ‘ V. . i‘. " .. ‘ ﬁ “ ,‘ S 2" V. {a f v
’A "I ’ - ' " S A” “ ‘J .‘Q‘m a X ""1"
[I ‘ .’ - 7.? . A Q.' 5 I ‘ k l 1?, (-1) ' i .753, a , \
' ‘ . . 4, . n ;_ , Qt _. ff; Ir.
9! I- 3x... .,. 3 —, \«2. ”,2.“ . \ *‘ ~
0—“. l. . ’ "A _ 1’ i ‘ (7, ‘.I ‘ -E?“. 1. )1'? i) . _
_ - ' VV " n' - w 7 ' ' I - ; é.“ : . " II ?o!‘ ' ”"1? .1 k.‘
7 Q " .. ““4“ _'v ‘ﬂ J 14' . (”o‘- ‘- 5". 5 7» ‘.
'N=‘--“'~ d ‘f . . r ‘ g‘éa ‘ ‘ .. x14
‘ “"S'I-A “-«—';~4 w 9" . :3
‘4.“ 53 :1? ?'I31EI Gucg‘e '. (x ‘l x -- , Th
753p~ {D ' I\)()\ k Hi i:
I—gw—y Image fl 7531 5 P'Q‘." "Ct": 3f R'msh Cniumbé k
re
“.a 2000 7 Ir‘r‘xagery Date: 4‘ EHZIZIEIQ Li: L: 4915:3319? m E 546364.05 m H rate»; I] m 936 alt 3.2-1 er

River, in the general area of the Squamish Nation C onsultation Area, are also included in
the SQKM TUOS Analysis that follows. Other archaeological sites located along the
lower Fraser River (including the 150 m buffer) may also have been used by Squamish
Nation members dming travel, trade, or other activities in this region. For reference,
archaeological sites that fall into this latter categmy are identiﬁed by site n1nnbe1‘(e.g.,
Dth-4) and are listed in Appendix B; they are not portrayed on the Proj ect Maps in
Appendix A. —
—

Archaeological site infmmation for the SQKM TUOS was obtained from RAAD
(Remote Access to Archaeological Data) of the Archaeology Branch, Province of British
C olumbia, and added to the TUOS database and GIS records.

The SQKM TUOS project bibliographic records include digital copies of archaeological
site record forms obtained from the Archaeology Branch. The SQKM TUOS GIS
mapping for archaeological sites is also derived from shapeﬁles obtained ﬁ‘om the
Archaeology Branch —
—

T UOS Information Source Analysis

Table 1 presents infonnation for sites included in the SQKM TUOS Analysis, presented
according to information source. Although information about most TUOS sites was
obtained from one infmmation source categmy, some sites inc01porate infonnation from
two of the source categoﬁes.

—
W

T able 2: T UOS Database F ields

Field Name Description

SCHS# A unique catalogue number for each TUOS site.

Field ID Other identiﬁcation number(s) associated with a TUOS site, such as
an Archaeological Site designation (Dth-6), a site number from a
project interview (SQKM_04:016), or a site from a Place Names Map
(BK:2 l).

A verbal description of the geographic location of the site.
The Squamish name of the site (if available).

Site Name The English translation of the Squamish name for the site (if

Translation available).

Activity The classiﬁcation of the site at the “Activity” level, as described in
the “Site C lassiﬁcation” section (below). An individual site may be
classiﬁed as including several “Activities.”

Entity The speciﬁc resources or items f01md, harvested or used at the site, or
associated history, as described in “Site C ategory” (below). A site
may include several “Entities.”

Site C ategory Categories for Theme Map(s) for the SQKM TUOS Analysis, as
described in “Site C lassiﬁcation” section below. A site may be
included in more than one “Theme Map” category.

Information Source categories for where site information was obtained; limited to

Source one or more of: Archaeology; Interview; Written Reference; or
Map/Archival Map.

Reference Citations for sources of information about the site. Example:
Bouchard, Randv, and Dorothy Kennedv. Squamish II-Idian Land Use
and Occupancy, F inal Draft Submitted to the Squamish Indian Band
Council December I 4th, 1986. Victoria: British Columbia Indian
Language Project, I 986.

Map ID Interview maps or other mapping data where source information
about the site was recorded. Examples: SQKM_02; Dth-6 Site
Form Map; RAAD Shapeﬁle.

C ommentary about site beyond that included in other ﬁelds.
618 expression of a site as one of: Point; Line; Polygon.

Study Area Study Areas that a site intersects with or is located within.

Date on which the most recent data entry occurred for a site record.
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F inaI Report 69

Project GIS and Maps
The mapping of TUOS sites for SQKM TUOS Analysis was recorded:

0 during previous Squamish research and proj ects;

0 from SQKM TUOS proj ect intelviews;

0 from the proj ect’s literature review;

° from place names maps;

0 from archival maps; and

0 from infonnation obtained from archaeological records.
—
—
—
— The
GIS data was checked and cross—referenced for con'espondence with previously existing
database records in the Squamish TUOS Database. All TUOS site locations recorded in
the project’s GIS are linked to sites recorded in the project’s Traditional Use and
Occupancy Site Database by the “SCHS #” ﬁeld.
The Proj ect Maps presented in Appendix A were produced by — and
portray the TUOS sites in the SQKM TUOS Analysis. The Project Maps provided to
Squamish Nation as project deliverables, described in more detail later, are listed in Table
3.
T able 3: SQKAI T UOS Maps
W

SQKM TUOS Analysis Results
T UOS Site C Iassiﬁcation
The cun'ent project focuses on SQKM TUOS Analysis sites in the project Study Area and
along the lower Fraser River, as previously descn'bed. - sites in the SQKM TUOS
Analysis have been classiﬁed based on three database ﬁelds (Activity, Entity, and Site
C ategmy) for the pulposes of data management, site analysis, and presentation of
inf01mation on Project Maps. The project database can be searched and queried based on
any of its ﬁelds, but most importantly on one or more of the following classiﬁcation
ﬁelds.
Activior
“Activity” deﬁnes, at a general level, a type of occupancy or use categmy for each TUOS
site. An individual TUOS site may include more than one “Activity,” as it may satisfy
the criteria for one or more of the “Activities” listed in Table 4, below. “Activities” at a
TUOS site might include, for example: Dwelling; Preparation; Burial; Traditional
Histmy. Each of these tenns describes an “Activity” that occurs, or occun‘ed, within the
defmed geographical TUOS site b01mda1y. The “Activity” ﬁeld pennits quelying of the
database for the number of sites based on a speciﬁc resom‘ce, species or use category.
— Table
4 provides brief deﬁnitions of the various TUOS site “Activities.”
—

ﬂ ﬂ
W

Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study. Final Repon "f

ﬂ ﬂ
I:_:_
I:_I:_
Site E n 1in
The TUOS sites have also been classiﬁed at a more speciﬁc level, as each database
record also lists the various “Entities” recorded for a site. The “Entity” database ﬁeld
provides details of the resom‘ces hawested 01‘ features located at each site. For example,

a site classiﬁed in the “Activity” ﬁeld as a Fishing site might include the following
entlies in the “Entity” database ﬁeld: Sahnon; C oho Sahnon; Trout; Hening; 01' Prawns.
”4 Crabs can be associated with either Fishing or Seafood Gathering Activity. depending on context.
W

The “Entity” ﬁeld also pennits quelying of the database for the number of sites based on
a speciﬁc resource, species or use categmy.
T heme Maps
All TUOS sites have been classiﬁed, at the most general level, according to six
“Themes,” or Site C ategoﬁes, that facilitate the presentation of infmmation on the Project
Maps. Table 5 lists the project “Theme Maps” and the “Activities” associated With each
Theme Map. TUOS sites are often multi-pmpose, may be classiﬁed lmder more than one
“Activity,” and may appear on more than one “Theme Map.” The Project Theme Maps
are provided in Appendix A.
—
ﬂ %
|:I| '. |=
E A
I —
I —
—
I —
I —
I —
W

'—
Squamish T mdfn'onal Use and Occupanm' Smdy. F ma] Repon 75

Sguamz’sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Smdy. Final Repon 7C?

Sqlumn‘sh T mdfn'onal Use and Occupancy Snuir. Final Report 77

S'quamz’sh T mdfn’onal Use and Occupanqv Smdy. Final Repon "F

RATCLI FF & COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r 5
J uly 18, 2018
File No. 13-0010-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.c0m
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710‘hAve SW
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File No. OF-Fac—Oil—T260-2017-10 01 — Hearing Order MH—048-2018
Notice of Motion for adequate responses to Information Requests
We are legal counsel for the City of Burnaby (“Burnaby”) in respect of their intervention in the
National Energy Board (the “NEB” or the “Board”) hearing for the Project.
Please ﬁnd enclosed the Notice of Motion of Burnaby seeking adequate responses from Trans
Mountain Pipeline ULC to its Information Request No. 1.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP
4"?"1-5-
MICHELLE“ L2} BRADLEY
Enclosure
cc. List of Participants
Phone: 604-988-5201 o Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators, 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouver, BC VTM 3J3
01535339

VIA E-FILE
June 8, 2018
National Energy Board
2nd Floor, 517 Tenth Avenue SW
Calgary AB T2R 0A8
ATTENTION: Sheri Young – Secretary of the Board
Ms. Young:
RE: Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC Westridge Delivery Line Relocation – Hearing Order MH-
048-2018
We represent the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance (STSA) with respect to the Trans
Mountain Pipeline ULC Westridge Delivery Line Relocation NEB hearing. The STSA is seeking
Intervener status in the above matter. The STSA is the name the First Nations wish to be known
as for the purposes of this Intervener Application and is composed of the following 13-16 Stó:lō
First Nations:
    1.  Aitchelitz (confirmed)
    2.  Skowkale (confirmed)                              10. Sq’ewlets (confirmed)
    3.  Shxwhá:y Village (confirmed)                      11. Chawathil (confirmed)
    4.  Soowahlie (confirmed)                             12. Leq’a:mel (confirmed)
    5.  Squiala (confirmed)                               13. Skawahlook (confirmed)
    6.  Tzeachten (confirmed)                             14. Cheam (to be confirmed)
    7.  Yakweakwioose (confirmed)                         15. Kwaw Kwaw Apilt (to be confirmed)
    8.  Skwah (confirmed)                                 16. Shxw’ōwhámel (to be confirmed)
    9.  Sumas (confirmed)
                                                                                              2
Please note that three of the First Nations listed above have not officially confirmed their
participation in this application. We will clarify their participation as soon as possible.
Please find attached the STSA’s Intervener Application.
If you have any questions, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Jean Teillet, IPC, OMN, MSC
Pape Salter Teillet, LLP
cc. STSA, TMEP, Interveners
RATCLIFF 8t COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r 5
mi; E$ﬁfi p. _ 1. EUR - ﬂ?! _..' .11:
3"“; ism} .- n -. ﬂﬁg hm???
Gregory J . McDade, Q.C.
gmcdade@ratcliff.com
F ile No. 13-0010-008
June 28, 2018
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
Suite 210, 517 Tenth Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File Number 0F—Fac—Oil—T260-2017—10 01
Hearing Order MH-048-2018
We are legal counsel for the City of Burnaby in the above-noted hearing.
Please ﬁnd enclosed for ﬁling the City of Bumaby’s Information Request to Trans Mountain Pipeline
ULC for the Proj eet.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP
?'H ,H'"
_.- ffff-
f
FOK.‘GREGORY J. MCDADE, Q.C.
Barrister and Solicitor*
GJ M :mt
*Gregory J . McDade Law Corporation
cc: Scott Stoness, Trans Mountain (scott_stoness@kindermorgan.com)
Megan Sartore, Trans Mountain (Megan_Sartore@kindermorgan.com)
List of Participants
Phone: 604-988-5201 ' Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators, 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouver, BC VTM 3J3

        Squamish Nation
     Information Requests to
 Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
           June 29, 2018
 1. Aboriginal Engagement
Reference
    i) C319-27-2 - 1-1. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study - Part 1 - A4L7E3
         C319-27-3 - 1-2. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study - Part 2 - A4L7E4
    ii) A88837 – Westridge Delivery Line Relocation - A5Y6R8
    iii) A91555 Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC - Westridge Delivery Line Relocation -
         Response to IR No. 4 – pg. 6
    iv) A88837-7 s.58 Aboriginal Consultation - A5Y6S4
Preamble
Reference (i) states that the area in and around Burnaby Mountain where the pipeline is
proposed to be relocated is known in the Squamish community as lheklhukwaytn, which
when translated refers to the peeling bark of the local arbutus trees. This area is greatly
valued by the Squamish Nation and continues to be used by the Squamish people. According
to reference (ii), the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”) proposes the
upsizing and addition of a third pipeline to the tunnel under Burnaby Mountain, which Trans
Mountain admits will increase the risk of failure frequencies within Squamish territory
(reference (iii)).
Reference (iv) notes that Trans Mountain has not engaged with Aboriginal groups in relation
to this particular delivery line, beyond engagement activities in relation to the tunnel and the
installation of the two (2) delivery lines described in Technical Update No. 4 and
authorized by Certificate OC-064.
Request
    a) What is Trans Mountain’s understanding of how the duty to consult and
         accommodate the Squamish Nation with respect to the Project will be discharged?
    b) Has the federal or provincial Crown delegated procedural aspects of consultation to
         Trans Mountain with respect to the Project? If so, please provide Trans Mountain’s
         understanding of the various roles of the federal Crown, the provincial Crown and
         Trans Mountain in discharging the duty to consult and accommodate the Squamish
         Nation with respect to the Project.
    c) Has Trans Mountain assessed the potential impacts of the Project on the Squamish
         Nation’s interests in the Project area. If so, please provide that assessment and the
         material on which that assessment is based.
    d) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain incorporated any of the evidence, including
         the testimony of the Squamish Nation witnesses and the expert report entitled
         “Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study: Final Report”, put forward by the
                                                                                                 1
    Squamish Nation in the Trans Mountain Expansion Project National Energy Board
   hearing in developing the application for the Project.
e) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain has developed any accommodation measures
   to address the impacts of the Project on the Squamish Nation. If so, please specify
   what those accommodation measures are and how they will be implemented.
f) Please indicate how Trans Mountain has addressed the concerns raised by the
   Squamish Nation about the ability of Trans Mountain to respond to a spill of diluted
   bitumen, particularly if a spill from the third pipeline reaches the marine environment.
g) Please provide a list of the steps involved and the equipment that will be used in the
   response to a diluted bitumen spill or leak from the third pipeline in the tunnel,
   including the available equipment to respond to a spill that submerges in the marine
   environment.
h) Please indicate how Trans Mountain proposes to address Squamish’s concern with
   respect to remediation of the existing pipeline if the Project is approved.
i) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain will commit to apply to decommission,
   remove and remediate the existing pipeline six months prior to operational service of
   the Trans Mountain Expansion Project.
j) If not, please indicate whether the Squamish Nation’s concern about
   decommissioning the existing pipeline is one which Trans Mountain is unable to
   resolve.
k) Given that Trans Mountain has not engaged with Aboriginal groups on the Project,
   particularly since information relevant to the design and construction of the tunnel has
   been filed as required by the conditions for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project,
   what is Trans Mountain’s conclusion that there are no issues or concerns from the
   Squamish Nation with the Project based upon?
                                                                                          2
 2. Government of Canada Purchase of the Pipeline
Reference
    i) Purchase of Trans Mountain by the Government of Canada - https://www.neb-
        one.gc.ca/pplctnflng/mjrpp/trnsmntnxpnsn/prchstrnsmntngc-eng.html
    ii) A92041-1 NEB Letter - HO - Trans Mountain and Squamish Nation - Westridge
        Delivery Line Relocation - A6E5W0
Preamble
Reference (i) indicates that the Government of Canada has announced that it has reached a
deal to purchase the Trans Mountain pipeline and to complete the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project. The NEB notes in reference (i) that “[a]s details of the transaction could change, the
NEB will not speculate about what the applicable regulatory requirements or processes are.”
The deal to purchase the pipeline and expansion project will not close until after significant
steps have been taken in this hearing.
Request
    a) How will the roles of the federal Crown, the provincial Crown and Trans Mountain,
        in discharging the duty to consult and accommodate the Squamish Nation with
        respect to the Project change when the Government of Canada purchases the Trans
        Mountain pipeline? Please indicate whether Trans Mountain will continue to play any
        role with respect to engagement with the Squamish Nation on the Project.
    b) Please indicate whether the Government of Canada, and all successor owners of the
        Trans Mountain pipeline, will be bound by Trans Mountain’s commitments made
        during this hearing.
    c) If successor owners of the Trans Mountain pipeline will not be bound by Trans
        Mountain’s commitments made during this hearing, please indicate whether Trans
        Mountain will commit to requesting that the hearing for the Project be adjourned until
        the new owner of the Trans Mountain pipeline can participate in the hearing.
                                                                                                3
 3. Condition Compliance
Reference
    i) A88837-13 s.58 Condition Mapping - A5Y6T0
    ii) A77045-1 NEB - Report - Trans Mountain - Expansion Project - OH-001-2014 , page
         82
    iii) A81936 – Condition 26 - Burnaby Mountain tunnel option – design, construction and
         operation, pages 3-11-3-13
Preamble
Reference (i) indicates that Trans Mountain undertook a review of all TMEP preconstruction
conditions as applicable to the authorized Westridge Delivery Lines that would have
application to the installation of the relocated delivery line and that Trans Mountain “will
adhere to the requirements of these listed condition filings for the installation of the relocated
delivery line, as listed below, should an exemption be granted.” The conditions listed are as
follows: 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 28, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51,
57, 58, 59, 62, 63a, 64, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100,
102, 103, and 104.
Trans Mountain does not list the conditions referenced in reference (ii) concerning tunnel
design, construction and operation that were imposed by the Board for the Trans Mountain
Expansion Project. The Board stated as follows in imposing those conditions (p. 82):
    The Board is not aware of the use of the concrete or grout-filled tunnel installation method for
    other hydrocarbon pipelines in Canada. The Board is concerned that damage to the pipe or
    coating may occur during installation of the pipelines or grouting, and that there will be limited
    accessibility for future maintenance and repairs. The Board is also concerned that there may be
    voids or that cracks could form in the grout. The Board would require Trans Mountain to address
    these and other matters, including excavation, pipe handing, backfilling, pressure testing, cathodic
    protection, and leak detection, through the fulfillment of Conditions 26, 27 and 28 on tunnel
    design, construction,and operation. The Board would impose Condition 29 regarding the quality
    and quantity of waste rock from the tunnel and Trans Mountain’s plans for its disposal.
    The Board would also impose Condition 143 requiring Trans Mountain to conduct baseline
    inspections, including in-line inspection surveys, of the new delivery pipelines in accordance with
    the timelines and descriptions set out in the condition. The Board is of the view that these
    inspections would aid in mitigating any manufacturing and construction related defects, and in
    establishing re-inspection intervals.
Reference (iii) indicates that the interior of the tunnel will be filled with Low Density
Cellular Groupt (LDCC) which eliminates maintenance issues and that Trans Mountain is
investigating an external to pipe leak detection method.
                                                                                                       4
 Request
   a) Please indicate why Trans Mountain has not agreed to adhere to the requirements for
      conditions 26, 27, 29 and 143 for the Project.
   b) Please indicate the information that is currently outstanding with respect to the
      conditions for the Trans Mountain Expansion that are relevant to this Project,
      including but not limited to conditions: 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 26,
      27, 28, 29, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 57, 58, 59, 62, 63a, 64, 66, 69, 70,
      71, 72, 73, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 102, 103, 104 and 143.
   c) Please indicate for the conditions where information has been provided to the NEB,
      those conditions that the NEB has not yet determined to be fulfilled. If the NEB has
      outstanding information requests with respect to a condition, please specify.
   d) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain will commit to requesting that this hearing
      be adjourned until the information has been submitted under the above-noted
      conditions for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project and the conditions are deemed
      fulfilled by the NEB.
   e) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain has engaged with the Squamish Nation since
      the filing of the information under the conditions on their concerns with the tunnel
      based on this new information and the addition of a third pipeline through the tunnel.
   f) Please indicate what the proposed leak detection method(s) is for the third pipeline in
      the tunnel.
   g) Please indicate the accuracy rates of the leak detection methods proposed by Trans
      Mountain with respect to the pipeline through the tunnel, including the accuracy rates
      for detecting leaks that do not impact pressure or flow.
   h) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain will commit to installing the external leak
      detection method described in the filing for Condition 26 on the third pipeline
      through the tunnel?
   i) Please indicate any emergency response measures, spill prevention measures, leak
      detection methods or remediation techniques that Trans Mountain did not consider
      reasonably practicable to implement with respect to the third pipeline through the
      tunnel.
   j) How will Trans Mountain access the third pipeline for future maintenance and
      repairs?
                                                                                               5
 k) If Trans Mountain cannot access the third pipeline for future maintenance and repairs,
   how will Trans Mountain be able to deal with any deterioration of the pipeline before
   it results in a leak?
l) Please provide an analysis of the lifespan of a pipeline located in a tunnel such as the
   one for the Project.
m) If Trans Mountain will not be able to access the pipeline for maintenance, will Trans
   Mountain commit in this hearing to decommissioning the pipeline within a period
   determined by the NEB as the end of the lifespan of the pipeline? If not, please
   provide the justification for refusing to do so.
n) How will Trans Mountain determine if voids or cracks formed in the LDCC in the
   tunnel after it has been used to fill the interior of the tunnel?
o) If voids or cracks do form in the LDCC in the tunnel, how will Trans remedy those
   voids or cracks?
                                                                                            6
 4. Burnaby Mountain
 Reference
   i) C319-27-2 - 1-1. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study - Part 1 - A4L7E3
       C319-27-3 - 1-2. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study - Part 2 - A4L7E4
Preamble
The area in and around Burnaby Mountain where the pipeline is proposed to be relocated is
known in the Squamish community as lheklhukwaytn, which when translated refers to the
peeling bark of the local arbutus trees. This area is greatly valued by the Squamish Nation
and continues to be used by the Squamish people.
Request
   a) Please indicate whether the area in and around Burnaby Mountain will need to be
       disturbed if there is a leak or other emergency event in the pipeline in the tunnel.
   b) Please indicate how a leak in the pipeline in the tunnel will be remediated without the
       need to disturb the area in and around Burnaby Mountain.
   c) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain has mapped groundwater within the vicinity
       of the tunnel. If not, please provide the justification for refusing to do so. If so, please
       provide that evidence and the measures that Trans Mountain has taken to protect
       groundwater.
   d) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain has assessed the potential for a leak from the
       third pipeline to contaminate groundwater.
   e) How would impacts to groundwater be determined and remediated in the event of a
       leak from the pipeline in the tunnel?
   f) Please indicate whether leaving spilled product in situ is a remediation technique
       proposed by Trans Mountain with respect to the pipeline through the tunnel.
   g) Please indicate whether access to areas in and around the Project will be restricted.
   h) Please indicate the rational for Trans Mountain maintaining a right of way through
       Burnaby Mountain if the pipeline is in the tunnel and surface access will not be
       required to address leaks or spills.
                                                                                                   7
 5. Third Pipeline
Reference
    i) A3S0Z0, Application Volume 4A, Project Design and Execution – Engineering, PDF
        page 5 of 7
    ii) A77045-1 NEB - Report - Trans Mountain - Expansion Project - OH-001-2014 PDF
        page 21
Preamble
Reference (i) states that the two Westridge delivery lines for the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project will have a capacity of 4,635 m3/hour (700,000 bbl/d).
Reference (ii) states that the Trans Mountain Expansion Project would increase the capacity
of the existing TMPL system from 47 690 m³/d (300,000 bbl/d) to 141 500 m³/d (890,000
bbl/d) of crude petroleum and refined products.
Request
    a) Please provide the rational for requiring a third pipeline through the tunnel given the
        two delivery lines approved with the Trans Mountain Expansion Project can
        accommodate the increase in capacity for the Trans Mountain pipeline sysem.
    b) Please indicate whether Trans Mountain is willing to decommission the existing line
        and not add a third pipeline to the tunnel in order to decrease the risk to the Squamish
        Nation. If not, please provide the rational for refusing to do so.
    c) Please indicate whether any assessment of impacts of the Project to the Squamish
        Nation took into account three vessels loading simultaneously at the Westridge
        Marine Terminal.
                                                                                                8
 6. Emergency Response
Reference
    i) A88837 – Westridge Delivery Line Relocation - A5Y6R8
Preamble
Trans Mountain does not provide information on emergency response to emergency events
related to the third pipeline in the application for the Project.
Request
    a) Please provide an emergency response plan for the third pipeline through the tunnel.
    b) Please list the equipment that Trans Mountain would need to respond to a leak in the
        pipeline through the tunnel.
    c) For the equipment that Trans Mountain would need to respond to a leak in the
        pipeline through the tunnel, is there any equipment that Trans Mountain currently
        does not have access to and is Trans Mountain planning to purchase that equipment?
    d) Please indicate the emergency response measures that are available for the existing
        pipeline that would not be available if the pipeline is relocated to the tunnel.
    e) Please indicate any leak detection or other safety measures that are not available
        because of the addition of the third pipeline through the tunnel.
    f) Please provide a comparison of the risks between putting two pipelines through the
        tunnel versus putting three pipelines through the tunnel.
    g) Please list the potential emergency events for the third pipeline through the tunnel.
        Please provide a risk assessment for each event, including an assessment of potential
        event escalation due to decreased pipeline spacing in the tunnel.
                                                                                              9
                               Hearing Order MH-048-2018
                       Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)
                             Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
_____________________________________________________________________________________
                                WRITTEN EVIDENCE
              Of the intervenor, S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance
___________________________________________________________________
                                     Jean Teillet, IPC
                                  Pape Salter Teillet LLP
                                 460-220 Cambie Street
                                Vancouver BC, V6B 2M9
                             Phone: 604 681-3002 ext. 1152
                                    Fax: 604 681-3050
                                Email: jteillet@pstlaw.ca
                    Submitted by legal counsel for the Stó:lō Collective
                                                                                    1
 Background:
       1. Who are Stó:lō?
       Today, in continuity with thousands of years of history, the Stó:lō (People of the River)
       occupy and use S’ólh Téméxw, the lower Fraser River watershed of southwestern
       British Columbia. As Halkomelem-speaking Coast Salish people, the Stó:lō are culturally
       interlinked with many Coast Salish referring to themselves as Stó:lō or tribes of Stó:lō
       (e.g., Ts’elxwéyeqw). Stó:lō are culturally spiritually, physically, psychologically, and
       economically interconnected with the land and resources of S’ólh Téméxw, as a
       longstanding and deep-seated relationship with, defense and protection of, and
       continued management and use throughout their territory, S’ólh Téméxw.
       Stó:lō occupation of S’ólh Téméxw extends back thousands of years. Evidence of
       thousands of years of continuous occupation by the Stó:lō and
       their ancestors is documented through a range of disciplines including oral history,
       written history, ethnography, and archaeology (Schaepe 2006; 2009) as well as a wide
       range of sources including scholarly publications, reports, maps, and oral histories.
       The Stó:lō maintain a wide range of political, socio-cultural, and economic ties, including
       occupation, use, and management of the land and resources within S’ólh Téméxw. The
       Stó:lō-Coast Salish have a long history of defending their lands from unwelcome
       outsiders (Angelbeck 2009; Angelbeck and Mclay 2012; Richards 2011; Schaepe 2001;
       2006; Supernant 2011). Stó:lō identity and societal health, including an interconnected
       set of spiritual, mental, physical, emotional relations are linked to and dependent upon
       the integrity of the land, air, water, and resources constituting S’ólh Téméxw and the
       Stó:lō cultural landscape (see Carlson 2006, 2010; McHalsie 2007; Schaepe 2007;
       Schaepe et al 2003). The activities of Stó:lō within S’ólh Téméxw provide a holistic view
       of economic, social, political, environmental, and spiritual connectivity; one cannot be
       successful or healthy without the other, for all things have Shxwelí (spirit) and all things
       are interconnected.
       Their longstanding socio-cultural and socio-economic relations, values, and behaviours
       are factors of their deep connectedness to the ancestors, land, air, water, resources,
       and cultural places of S’ólh Téméxw. Stó:lō identity is not limited to tangible heritage or
       a geographically grounded place, but is based in enduring activities, such as fishing,
       language (Halkomelem), stories, songs, and storytelling, protection of cultural practices,
       and the protection from 'others' (i.e., non-Stó:lō). Many aspects of Stó:lō intangible
       heritage and traditional cultural expressions, including transformer narratives, songs,
       spiritual and cultural principles and practices, are shared among individuals and families
       of Stó:lō living throughout S’ólh Téméxw creating a collective identity that has both
       spatial and non-spatial linkages and connections. As a result, impacts to Stó:lō people
       and culture cannot be assessed or understood simply as a factor of 'spatial proximity'
       and direct spatial relations between the location of a resource or place of practice (i.e.,
       site), an area of impact, and a particular community (i.e., reserve or Band).
2. Who is the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance
       The S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance is a group of 16 First Nation Bands who share
       common interests and traditional territory in the Fraser Valley Regional District of the
       Lower Fraser Watershed. The communities who were a part of the collective, upon
       application, included:
    1. Aitchelitz                      2. Squiala                       3. Chawathil
    4. Soowahlie                       5. Skwah                         6. Scowlitz
                                                                                                    2
     7. Yakweakwioose                   8. Sumas                          9. Skawahlook
    10. Skowkale                       11. Leq’á:mel                     12. Cheam
    13. Shxwhá:y Village               14. Tzeachten                     15. Shxwowhamel
    16. Kwaw-kwaw-Apilt
        The S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance was granted intervenor status on June 18, 2018
        through Hearing Order MH-048-2018, October 3, 2017 through Hearing Order OH-001-
        2017 and in July 2014, the 16 First Nations work collaboratively for the purpose of the
        National Energy Board hearing for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project (OF-Fac-Oil-
        T260-2013-03 13 OH-001-2014).
        For the purpose of Hearing Order MH-048-2018, three of the 16 communities did not
        confirm participation in this hearing process, these include Cheam, Shxwowhamel, and
        Kwaw-kwaw-Apilt.
3. Participation as lntervenors
        To date, the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance have participated in the following
        Hearing processes:
        1. Full participation in the Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)- Trans
            Mountain Expansion Project Hearing- OH-001-2014
        2. Full participation in the Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain) – Application
            for Variance to the approved Trans Mountain Expansion Project Pipeline Corridor –
            Chilliwack BC Hydro Route Realignment
        3. Participation in MH-048-2018 Round 1 Information Request to Trans Mountain
4. Working with Trans Mountain:
        Communities represented by the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance have been
        proactively trying to engage with Trans Mountain to ensure Stó:lō interest are heard and
        potential issues and concerns can be avoided or mitigated since December 2013, when
        Trans Mountain filed their Application with the National Energy Board for the Trans
        Mountain Expansion Project. Outside of the hearing process, as a result of reviewing
        technical and supplemental information filed by Trans Mountain, the Stó:lō Collective
        have written and met with Trans Mountain to express concerns regarding several key
        issues, including, but not limited to:
        Process
        1. In following the work of the Stó:lō Collective and, with the TMEP Certificate (OC-
            064), the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance have worked with Trans Mountain and
            Provincial Permitting Agencies to develop Terms of Reference, which outlined the
            procedural aspects of consultation and engagement pertaining to Provincial
            Permitting. The Terms of Reference was signed by all parties on May 12, 2017 and
            is in the process of being fully implemented.
            The Terms of Reference was developed to formalize commitments to the Stó:lō
            Collective (thereby the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance) to directly involve
            Stó:lō technical and cultural experts in project mitigation and Environmental
            Protection Planning (EPP development), emergency response planning, and
            environmental work to mitigate concerns pertaining to traditional fisheries,
            spiritual and cultural sites, wetlands, old growth forests, communication
            protocols, capacity development, economic development or emergency response
                                                                                                3
             procedures.
            The Terms of Reference was developed to ensure that Trans Mountain fully
            engages with the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance in the Provincial permitting
            processes and to ensure that all National Energy Board and BC Environmental
            Assessment Office Terms and Conditions of the TMEP approval are met. The
            Terms of Reference does not include processes outside of the Provincial
            Permitting processes, nor does it preclude the duty and obligation to consult and
            accommodate on such matters therein.
5. Evidence
Traditional Ecological Knowledge
        1. The S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance has filed Stó:lō Traditional Ecological
            Knowledge (TEK) in Filing A4L7A2.
        2. There is a continued absence of Stó:lō Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) included
            in the TMEP technical review of the Westridge Relocation in application of the Trans
            Mountain Expansion Project Review and the potential impacts therein. They have not
            provided opportunity for application of the TEK within their project planning and
            mitigation.
        3. The S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance is concerned about the cumulative negative
            effects of such developments on their cultural practices, spirituality, and Rights, as a
            result of the increased developments and potential increase of environmental
            degradation within their Traditional Territory. The area has significant cultural
            connectivity that has been greatly impacted due to development; as such, the S’ólh
            Téméxw Stewardship Alliance demands that the NEB respect and protect their
            Constitutional Aboriginal Rights within their Traditional Territory when considering this
            application and future development within S’ólh Téméxw.
Dated this 20th day of July 2018,
Jean Teillet, IPC, OMN, MSC
Legal counsel for the S’ólh Téméxw Stewardship Alliance
                                                                                                      4
Hearing Order MH-048-2018
File No. OF-Fac-Oil-T260-2017-10 01
IN THE MATTER OF
TRANS MOUNTAIN PIPELINE ULC
WESTRIDGE DELIVERY LINE RELOCATION
NOTICE OF MOTION
Name of person brining motion: Squamish Nation
Decision or order requested: 1. An order directing Trans Mountain Pipeline
ULC to provide full and adequate responses
on or before a date to be set by the National
Energy Board to the information requests of
the Squamish Nation as set out in Schedule A
to this Notice of Motion; and
2. Such further and other relief as the National
Energy Board deems just.

Lo
8
13C
'52
Hm 013'
ON 50)
C13 H5
8: 0'0
m
on Sf!)
'ON ram
'— 0)
SN .5;
Cm I'U-l-F
:1: E“—
02 :0
2% (238
U} -|-'
:8 ",2
EU C>~
|—.,_ ﬁg
15° "“
cu“ '3
U13 U0
m-H (DU
ru mm
CU“ m _
130) L50
U UnI—JU‘
ru-C 13:0
>~'H moo-
_-l-" o
75.9 “CL
.—— 00:).
t“ c._
4-! HUI
ru-- gran
Q'E aJEo
1:; 3»;
$3 are”
3—6 m.—E
nc.E
V: IT:
4—! hu—v
:9 w "I
E 01:: U E u, o .
(D Em >~ l i m 4-: E 20
'D .E 8 C 4-: g C '-
.2 SE a; .9 g .c E .9 E
C (D D' L (D
m.‘;’ 9-H q} 0 :3 :10 DD 0 .2
L__: 4-‘0-1 L— _ u L :2 4—- E
*3 213 u. NC” on O to C to
.E'~ 95 EB 02 C “h ?:D .9 3
H C l; E '- H U
83 .53 ES 33 m 3 CE 3 m
DU} 0, ru : E c .100) CD 0
. ._H C+- 9,: c._ m to U, L .._.
L. ow o ow 4.. CUE :
u - _>. CD 4-! _ E (D
U100.) 10-0“ 3‘” (I1: I11 "CED '— In
(uztn -- 0 C: m m1: ”1 C
Mo CC £0) .— an an '_W'O CU D.
2—9. 80) 2-5 "'52 B E Ema; :1 8
gnu: are (US oz 0 5 iz-m 8 _
x‘“‘ 0.: :3: —m 3.’ “.513 L :
UEﬂ 15m :2 g: .c 2 32°- tm ru
“33.: OJ (UN _3- 00 GJ rap: C 4"
.om-u-a 2'5..Q: m3 'f L: u.m-- =60}:
30.8 “—956 >m .. -- ""3 GEE
C-I—I mam.... ”66 Q 1-! mOH to.—
C 4-! :cuOan N Cm Ln £0“ ““2
H22 9.— : cC-Q‘: c 000 352
os- $76950 OOHO .9 --'-':- 04am
ma: L-‘c-C-Q-— ._._;g-; 3: 3.4:...” “L
£mu a at: ﬁ_H% u nuvmomk
H—GJC on'c>~'cs'c 'D'Doccuc cccccmm
oi-o <:"-“-':3::C*-“:":h L’o °°°"<u:w
mu ._,h_4 DOCOOQOCUCUUUBLQU':
c.. gh'o UwuuUUcu .9 mm.—
oc'c oCUU ._ L 4.. L H0)
._-—0 2:: E “D m m UOJ""U'|
“m+- —4..a.: W o “- m I--"=’ﬂ=I
ru-I-I_'|: 03— m |- ._ 13050.:
~35 mm"" m 1:; *5 'g gI—U‘L
45.10% 5:0) 2| lLJI-—l III
sz I—n—v-D" a) >-
-— >— c u
3 OJ 35:58 L
m “4.. m .: 13-—0JE=D0 o
4: 5mm“ ': '5; .22): mg-E'CU'EECU
-|--l QJLIJ'cq-J CD (D “O m:ncuqdch
h 4*}qu 3mm 0-— :5“! 3
DZ U'l (Um CD CD
00) WHQZ o- 4_, CD.” HmHom
$330,500 03$ wBQE‘Eﬁwcw'o3
35:45.9:4-12 L453. .EEﬁQDOEH-DHL
83:0't$““ts':ngw~ E>0WOHLE°BEQ
I— 04-3-0 wtl—n—Q: __UH-°EH .—L|_.|_JH
13‘".— 5-5: 'c-Hmo. mo 0°91: u,
:CHUOm'—-d:‘°m-—>- mguzmmzzmmmg
--.9'°°JUu_1EcuruEL-t'5: QDx-HCD-Eﬁgfuo'o
GJ.+_"EEOJZa-J=*J,"-£-°U wuwa’egccmwec
mthpm "—HOHCQ —UmE L_._'__h__.—
I “:0000“"—_3‘*—-—OQ_ a_ru— |—
Eo‘Ehﬁﬁg30_EBum
lu__Q-I—'H q...
E
'8" "I
U H
"I
\—|

CD
4561';
I28 D f“ I
'0 L cum 0
.EE gags- Z ,
4-0— OH'Qqa-l-lm I 0 FN
0-: 4" E“— — z
:13; o J:
C? C-— o
GULF In D:
CUOJ '43:!- u— CD E .C
EH Lacrﬁ‘ﬁs’w ‘7 m
C {D}; U‘)
c£- $ﬁ£<§c 4-! g
3: C...a+-C¢u.. CD; 0
O._ ONDOEL m0.) 4-!
2(1) QUO'IJWGJ C4-! 0‘
: mﬁsmw: Dru mn.
Cw L._ hm: U1 -|—l
ru - 30—4.. 0:15 011:
5—2-0) 0"" mo. L-C Q;
l—Q: 120-5: CD 0:; U1
. = l—CGJoEL 0 0'0
GJSQ “Um._ “0 00 (D3
m-l-l._ mo'UCC-l—l 'u'j :0
WH—D. m m'—O '5”, L
300, m'OEguC 3m l—cm
13:4: Emmczg “'3 '63
130“ ‘UHL—smo w a;
mzu— nqmowt .52 me
“too MHnEEﬂJ .5“ 3'0
:2ru o_=>"><.f_“ c '0'“
OJ -: (U Om
mfg m_wEme ‘1’ 4-1:
3 :: ‘DECJC'OC "“0 Om
5'3 3m=moco 8'5 :cu
“JO” 0'30 D.S'- 3"“ 4_.o
m5; MUQGJmot; 5-2 0113
H mm'a-CCUL <I- cu
Hhm< QJ_ 3"“-
. . 01““.
'5 ”r6“ . “H
H "I—II' A
U: wt .2.
H H <1: ._:.
5 c5 H .3
z z 0' V.
E E Z ‘1
Of. 0
> _C _
.o m Z
n: l— J: m
c E .2 _.
:5 :5
CD a- m .2
m 3 E
O D'
4—- o m "3
CD "" O 3
U1 (u 4- U
C U1 U)
o C 0“ 0
D. o U) 4.:
In Q C
cu m 0 0"
L (D Q W
C L m C
I— E w o
n: ._ h D.
E’ {3 .E 8
3 C B L
O 3 C
C .—
2 § 8 s
m C
C m E :5
E E W o
|— L C 2
cu '— “3
L In
a 8 |— C
a) In (D . e
W <1: 3 |—
N U'I OJ
cu m ‘1’ (u
CL — I'D
CL 2 cu
: CL 3
m (I) 2
0.154: rt’:: 0.
:8”u+;3_ ‘H 8
4—: cu '-
wz-zggEf—jcmge g: g 8 B.

'-H L: 3 '_ 5- —
gweUOmcufﬁ-H >. ru-Cwm ":45 2:0 .9
._.I: :L-a-IQ_'-_U1-o_o Eﬂ: OJ . ma)“ 4-!
p-HCIJcnn-m'—'_3'EC (Um 3':— 01:0)wa C
L--O=('.|.J_{:'- _-°Omc I'D mLH_'- O (D-H 4—: -I-'-:
0. cu: ":""<1.u<1-'4-'I:L Pﬁcwo“ “-013 H 13‘” °“O

.tn “:4: .H ....:'i-- 4.. O n._'UrUW:.._.U'I Q 4_,

- OJG.Q'C*-'—"":tu-° CDC-ol—CN’C‘U‘: >C£m3mcm E
UI)..Q_=°QJCC'—Qjm 'ach._ -"-'-'u_-‘:°°oru+-'-C ummmow L-
ru— “*m-—=-DGJE-OH'_GJN;C—“ZSHL WCE%;££L.CBO
EgthOmeHmCl-ucc8:45-0.G_'mme8QJ-—DDC C'F’q-zru-IJ
n_ “'CCEFUCUEQJ ng-I-IDC-—w'o_gcwcn_3 __L-a-wa:ru

m0._on_m;m£0100¢w 3>C-5”"5m Dcﬁmmuwm-Q'—3
+'ng COH3‘U'Um: "14-1: —9- 13
Q-BEH-CDLmH—CU'—cu “rows“ m:
m e, ,___ aazmgzoh
- u “Una
H q: '-—-'

H A

“- 'o

H u—r

‘r.

H

I am . m
o 0.0 o E *5 s_cu
Z 2-5 2-5 'UCIJ .: 0.:
_ C m_CCU-H 4-!
c: ac: n: 4...: CD
.2 .2“ 2-; g :'—,£ru 32
E EU Era uechq-a=2
ru r03 ruCIJ O_c-—ru:5H 00
3 3'0 3*- LHE o “03::-
0" Go Um QOJQ'EI 2: to
W mL mo q- -—x2.'43-°
0. Co. mOJO
O o 04-. H: ",UJU'IH.—+_|.|_p
4-. 4-0-5 #3 Om'U3-COXo-.
3; 31% mo). 'T'EEEEQQ’CE’
:3 :5. 28—8 SQHGJPIEE'C
on: on om“ oOmwuhOHrum
0-; Qh. QLU lmmmcwgow
U) ma): U1CU'_ CU-— OJ .C
'D L IWCL .: m '
Cl) m_c-- m_c-a-I ._ LH'D
L_C LHQ Lgm 00-4..”‘0 -—<u>*
3 m (u 2 COJCW L
0J0 CDC” tumL (u "5-— c—Co
l-uo I—Bua I—gg I—.:—w.£2~uﬁ§
I I I I W“: l—
133 1334.. '53: ufoﬂweggmg
CUGJ (U(UC OJQJ'_ OJ“; 6: C (Um
ms... mgcu mg; m Bo-—o 3L0.)
W13 WU> “1'0 WDD--u1 “'O-q;:s
2'0 213w E1313 EcawBEE-‘iwc
r0 l'U tutu 1.3mm _Q u—rum
15*5 UH: "o“0 330888“ “1
m l'Uo-H m0!— ru ‘D-C scam
: s: cc. 9.:ng
4-. 4—! C 4-! 4—! “O_Q'HOCIJ-C
Om Om'- Owe.) O&GJ-C'UHDD'EW“
CCU C0): CCU; CmﬁﬂimoCrUH—DD
Ho Ho: “0"" uhl—B C'-‘-’°C
U113 UI-UU'I ln'D-o Ln-U- CU DOq—o':
cup... cu..—..C on: w'O'FJ'aj-D'UOJEUOJ
:Jru :ru.- 3m :10: “-I—GJL—m
c-u—r O—n—m H: CCWDU "“3
<r d'q": Uq-o UHCCDOOQDm
CU. 0.1.0) QJ.L @033 .CL'LDC
OCH mt—l_ OCH“! ICHHEmQ-l—amﬂl
E E E U,
V. v. V. w:
H H H 3m
I I I wk
0 o 0 cu"
Z Z Z _EC|J
=5 E m :34
.C .c _: “OJ
.2 .2 m 88
E E E '52
to ru ru ‘09-“;
:5 :5 :3 to
U) U) m Ecm
o '-H
4.. B 3 £3.
OJ OJ (1) “—0J0
U1 U1 U) 002
C C C HO
0 o 0 :LE
0. D. Q. 0J0.)
U) U} U)
a; cu cu EV-D
L. L s. (UF'II'U
C C : :05
I— n— I- :N
m ru cu '3
4-! 4-: 4-: UHCD
c c c we
:5 3 :5 L(:30
o o 0 Bi;
2 E E “0‘"
U) U! U1 '- C
c c c 00.10
m ru ru ”'59-
L l— L (DHU)
8 8 8 8135
U) U] U] ._0Jm
0’ 0 w 45:9“
U1 U1 U1 LL:
ru m m U:
a) 0; cu CI""‘0
_ _ _ .ccu
n. 0. EL H132
n:
B 3 cu min 3
U mow m--_C"" oCcu 0L0.“ OJ 4.10.1.1: CD
to _cL—_: C om.“ H53 _::-—:._ ”‘5 (J_CU ::
QCU-OHH—d-l DD": 4-: 4: U10 H35cwpcmHm -__—__
.05 x CIJc-HoQ-COOD CIJmh= 654—10): ._._. Q cu
E mCm.E 4.1-—U._.o:4_::5 4-! (U'— (D >:_—_-:ruoOJ
"3 '_0J r""78::""'Lc:>-n-a<2) '08 3 f9..0J_ -":-|-'L"-"°tn.9-
uy'o'o—CU ,gm‘oﬂo. UL 2gb“ >L.E°°E”3!=D-‘°U:o_
—rU°-'°Jru.E 'oEO'OmEﬂJ-C “DruCU'OO——CU 3:13:03
EBCEH—‘a ChawﬁmQH :L”08‘*g_g>n°o°'_|ﬁ5
._'_ .I— mm l— 'q Q—._ :0) I— m ' I
BE§U3.9%mgU§-EEEE$mg'EEKmED-S‘UBEEEQ‘UEE
aswwcacEEEEEtzmcgzaaEgovHULEmowﬁsw
OOHEOchmg=ruu HQCQJLOJOJWQJB.=OJOQFUQ—Ubhot;
Ihwm>£:—3Qmm>~'§-—3— L_caJ—ruLLBD-Lxuco >-
UD'ULCUHHD. U)._.|_J.D QHCLEMHLQLHHHrul—mm_q_2m
E E ’63 7-?“
<1; <1: <!- m
H H H H

OJ CU 330: mm
45"“ 0L 13m '55 _._:13 E
U o L'— H I- m
-—""" =H— whomru gru-I-vo-—|—
13m H- :3 an ma;
' CUCIJ O can: Q.._ .
CH:Q_ 0 50-00:“ .C cu —W|—un
"-m'aw no “’0. >-—--m>:m m2w2_w:
30m : c 54.. QHHCmu353m-—° cu':
czmme a “-- ﬁ'cﬁcvcvm 55:2“:
$_wue 0.2g); Egnaomg £33883":
— n— C :
ruccuw 3:5“ “ECCWCEECOQ’C 4:...»
ms—uw-S 0)ng EmHQg'UDO.—L_m33_c.g
egomo g-cgm >au8mr=eﬁ°8=o§m
C —- ‘- .. 3
OOCML 3504-! Qme)=CE.CL'H:*: CL—C
I_ 9.0 H U'-_LHO‘O En—Lm
2H_CIJO Em._c meCCL “_u— 3 my
WHBUL m_c m 02-0 ._QJm -—'C-U::m
C”! “’0 w-chu DMNE’EL-I-vc-ccwruggﬂ
EH.2-°.4: LOLO acgwmmCOG-JOE;OED
I-c:5=3t F352 igaEgEgﬁE%g-zga
. I- . HI— > ‘0 I—n—
132333 ?>ng Bmea’hcuaogwwmao
$mcm; $>_E-l—' mLQEDQ._gQE-w§.$g.°“
m—JCUm UICIJ>C m.ﬁw'-°"'..o :H
"m E0 L_CO "OH“:mE—nozLJ'DH-Hm
'oEmo: E--o m_OCrqumw Cmczi’
mmC'SC'o UIH—m Lc'_‘°ohcmmmH4—|Hw
HDNNWT’ EEC: Bwoﬁ>uoo£2 C>+-'::L
gmclt-UCO cmOE- CEBUH=”—B:UBCC--ﬂ
LLo--—-I-I Hggkw HmU.a_J.‘r53°DU'E$u4-'m¥w
ﬁmeB‘m “>8'2 “EEOC; .EE’HmcgEgm
‘U-C-CE'U'E ”<1;ch gSHE'ECB’CL‘Usﬁ—g
S.EEOmg 30-4—5129. 5—2 Emccgwgczmc
gw_cUQ-H— 0Em§8 0:0gEOEOEELCUD'OQJ
mEBgSE MH.24—IL. MBUHHmCI—U mama)“;
C I I
-I I— OJ H
(U 4—: mm-H m0. -—-
H TU'_O >513 CCU L0_
”20' £380 :00.) ".c: H
2 EOGJOJ ‘Dm'—4—IO-D '
I _:m w: CH—L O
00—: I”Can't: “LG; 08 Z
05.0 m -|-' 0.ch —
_._ (U U! (UC‘U (D
” C~°’cu u s-mmuc -C
'C‘: '-°°'°*- owm_c_ -'-= .2
'2!— LC'E _ED “0'90;
:5 rU-—.._._E OJ 13:0; E
E cu QE
ED 2133‘“ L Com __ m
m 004-: HEN CGJ-I—I 3
3.8 0J8 : ‘Ucu-EOJZm c-
"‘3 33th scmaag‘é o
o: :Q'UE 4_’=E><L':.~-"“ ""
28 3°00"! :'E%ﬁcmm 8
oh Uﬁa; £m>g%t£ a
Q: Q’Ho .CClJ—l—ZJ U1
m._ _DQNCIJ C-H-ochu-c OJ
cum 0"” ru 3: L
LIE C'ﬁ‘” EECNEEE C
"3 '-'o<v ._
'ED 0-603 m£>~hmbw (U
('00 x 'm m'-_l__,m CU 4.1
4" CUQJICU CBCO-Cruc. C
gm SHLO'“ D—mth‘m'cg o
2% “.EOC'FB' $_Egggg‘5: 2
s- E “—01.4 LWUHmH‘Jm— U!
ml— UU‘I._ >II-JOJO U103 5:
Ca; ‘n‘UCU'H' UCLHU‘ENC ru
‘00) thmo COMU<HCO h
hm 'E-gm.gz QULOJ-H'_U '—
|_o 'o-Gﬂgn: nomut'Wru-ow cu
(Um rucu—Q— L_Q-—._CcumC OJ
mm 28-“ _o E=3_Q-H-Do-|-' OJ
001—4- (U .23“! mBmSEEEE m
WWQ mw_-C: CU) '— OJ ('0
mm” me-HL 0)er CUru> CU
mmm 0035*: _CC—CUQ.>CUQ. _
EEH >3Hom |—=D__DOrD'OO a
U! ”113:
o . x m ._
O O :0.)
“ BZ“oS% EMS E a E 22%
WchEHE-S - Q—EH‘” 4-!(1’ c: 4-‘ |— O.)
E; zuxmo o Eoce ms maEc HE—
EHUwL-Ezhhmm '--I-'.9.Ct:u)>v-L wm'—°D msru
0w :CCLOL 9-00“ *HHHCL—nm m5: c'J-COO
“Cgo‘u'— qu- m onU-O—‘"- 79:.“0 54—- 4—-
mm ._ QCQ’U‘I _'5 >‘ 1332 q); 4-! 3
”LEW” '_-:'-mru .BC“.°"ZC O 3> 4: "" 'D
._ mC'U—HE‘“ 015mg“ 30300;,0‘4-5 “CC:
UI—C._._LCU wC-n—a CUE'COO m_LC-I-I'H _Iﬂm._o
CL'EE_ECgmﬁomEa-JEQﬂU—C-omamhcu. _Em
'EEHEEDHCI-ug.‘ECmLWGEuﬂ-S'C.Ewmq9.sﬁ 30.45%
““go'ﬁmggm‘sem““8zmm335EgﬁcTﬁC r0339
EgoU-‘L’T’wumcmeEEW‘HgngOEwEng 05-00
_ OJ OJ _ mu— __ _ _._ _
a.gz'oggﬁ'oﬁtﬁen.BMOW.E>mBI—Q_CUQQ_.H o.cuE.“
33" E :3. .2.
Ln '4'! “Q ‘9
H H H H

(D
E O
O
CHE H
all)“: 0: Q:
L. 4-! _
CU: H o 0
6:5 m g 4..
C'Cltu g m (U
who. c u,
5.00.9. o o
CIJCD mm D.
(D-I-IQJ In D.
E<I.J_{:CL q; 8
OJS-l—‘OJS L L
—I—m>m J:
ﬁ-mCU'— U1 J:
m£>~E '— .2
m.gcum E E
"5 CIJU'
Emgmm 5' 3
J: L m CT
0 :SCUCU tn
LC”DEG" cu (u
0.4: (/1 Q)
L4-IEIIIJ. u') g
mhmot I '
H—wcgw 1:: .5
“Jilin: ‘n ‘11
"omh'Utn m u;
|_COJ U) U)
CCl’Um-U 13 E
'0 HL-l—l fUu-L. _
C:_Q-HC 213 0"”
"' H—
Emﬂifﬁ H: :‘g
CEH'UﬂJa—L mu: 4;;
DUI u...— 3 0),...
o.._ 9.0- :1: Sn:
Emma“?! 5'25" on...
§._.QuncH CD. to
n:H C”-
Eli'q—I
E “'1‘ .4.
m 3 .59.
H 3 “:2
c5 6 *1
Z Z O
D: D: 2
-C '— E
' E a L
E '- .2
ru E E
:5 EU
I o- 3 I'D
| m D- :I
m 0'
o m
4" O
4-: O
(D 4-
In (D
C 2 3
O
:3. o S
W D.
(D U) Q.
5. OJ 8
.s g ._
3 '5 .E
C 4-! m
:3 C E
o g :3
E E o
2 u, 2
(O C 2
L ru
|— L. (U
|— L
“J |—
cu 0’ 0.:
U1 cu CD
3" 3 w
I'D In CD
(U m 8
a g 2
CL
.1: C .L' U1 (1) 2 01
OD "'" C 4-1 '— OJ “-0 OJ
:1 E'ru "2503'“ 4-113 3 cu‘" rum ._2 13¢,
‘3 cuE' 3‘ cu": O: .1: 5:0) 4:: >~ 3-9 5.;
L [00 H C Un' 0L Hm C mm '—.|_|
J: E: 0L5“: MCLHHQTUQJQJ> rui—tu: .3:
+-' °°—-‘:"'C'r_uWO'—::C0Jm .CCm-u-‘o’ Ocuru “J:
.9- "" “In (:IJ-l-a“:I (u-chHH-— 4: OJ >0,qu
q; 2 I'll ._CU4-' HQ. ('0 (U —q_;aJ-|-' “CE 3
:-—= 3 "50‘”..Ecoms: EULLLCUDC ﬁlo '54:;
:0.) O'MGJHC— D'Clhgo .—>..|_JOD_ =0 U._>4_;4_a4_ae
(DC 0:0 =w.90)on.EUUmH—'—Hm“ L6"L',"|-'OI-|—I-|—_c
' Q“ “Csa'aﬁwwﬁﬁw‘awaeaﬁctansngwﬂ’mog-
CL. : —'——cu hm:-—.__
22 520mmm>mL>nggwg'ﬁﬁDLBCQA‘metﬁg
-|-' 0 ma; e: _(D .C -—3
E E. A
“°- “ .93.
H ‘9 LD
H H

H
H
a_: n:
O O
4.. 4-
0.: <1:
U) In
C c
O O
o. :1.
U) W
CD CD
L— L—
.C .c
.2 .2
E E
to m
3 :5
c' O'
m to
<1) OJ
cu a.)
m m
'6 1:5
(U a)
U] U}
U'l U)
cu cu
L. L
1:: 'CJ
1:. '0.
ma ”A
.._._Q 4...:2
OH CH
C2 C13
c
"Stu "'Ja'ru
wﬁ ma
:3 33
3w: 8&9
n:H n:H
.-=- E
E. uq
"Q H
H .
. O
0 Z
Z n:
n: _
— .l:
E .2
to E
c to
L 3
. 3 0'
CD U)
0 O
4-1 +4
a) a)
U1 U)
c c
O O
o. :3.
U1 U)
0; cu
L— L
.E .E
to ru
4- 4-:
c s:
:5 3
g 0
U3 U?
c c
ta ta
L— L-
l-- |—
cu <1;
<1: cu
III In
a.) (u
U'I U)
n: ru
2 2
n. o.
00-: (D _'
5°” 4: a w 4: w
“:5 .._. 13.: 0:: (DC
0H2!!! .C 8-5“ t“rt: :C
r5535: an m-C-C ‘U 3::
0. Han Lu” 4-! my
(DH— "“3 3 L OJ Cu-ccu
'UOCWaJaJo wOJOJDqug-—00J:O.<u
-— cum h .CE-Corum '0 ".c
>Ccuc>m£ 4- HLQJ'—4-’:I4-'>-°D'-H
00 -——‘+-' HwL-C—‘C—Ca’c'o
L.EEng-m .2700“°-'°‘”E"”Tuow-E
QEOE-Cm84—‘stg;“’EiE'z-‘S‘Ku‘m
. $QDQ=.E=0$CH=UE$H$C£EOJE
(1:! U1 “chmmcmc>mcmwms—u
QEJ‘OGJ'HQCQ'H‘UQCOW‘DUIHUUM
_O.gg:3._3_0>._35m>m0m09_
QULHHQQHQQOJQHQNOJMQ‘UUW
3:. 2
K9 K0
H H

2
PART 1 — STATEMENT OF FACTS
A. INFORMATION REQUESTS T0 TRANS MOUNTAIN

1. On December 21, 2017, Trans Mountain submitted an application for an exemption from
review for the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”) to the National Energy
Board (the “Board” or the “NEB”).

2. On J anuary 15, 2018, Squamish wrote to the Board requesting that the Board carry out a
full assessment and review of the Project, given that the installation of a third pipeline
through the tunnel was not part of the application for the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project and the Project would potentially impact Squamish traditional ten‘itory and
Squamish reserves, particularly Seymour Creek Reserve No. 2 (ch'ieh'elxwi7kw).

3. Squamish further raised in their J anuary 15 letter the need to consider the
decommissioning and remediation of the existing pipeline as an integral aspect of the
decision to relocate the existing pipeline to the Burnaby Mountain tunnel.

4. The Board issued four sets of Information Requests (“IRS”) to Trans Mountain, who ﬁled
responses on 30 J anuary 2018, 20 February 2018, 15 March 2018 and 27 April 2018.

5. On 18 May 2018, the Board determined that the application is complete and granted
Squamish’s request for a hearing on the Project. Given the comments and concerns
raised, the Board also granted Squamish intervenor status in the hearing.

6. With respect to the decommissioning of the existing line, the Board noted that “typically
the Board would allow a company to make any application for decommissioning or
abandonment when the company deems it appropriate to do so”, but that if the “Squamish
Nation requests the Board deviate from its typical practice, and direct Trans Mountain to
apply to decommission the existing pipeline at this time, the Board would require
information and argument to justify such a request.”

7. On May 18, 2018, the Board issued Hearing Order MH-048-2018 setting out the process
for the review of the Proj ect, including the List of Issues for the hearing and the
opportunity to ask one round of information requests (“IRS”) to Trans Mountain.

8. On June 29, 2018, the Squamish Nation (“Squamish”) ﬁled IRS to Trans Mountain
Pipeline ULC (“Trans Mountain”).

9. On J uly 13, 2018, Trans Mountain responded to the IRs of Squamish, along with the IRs
of other intervenors.

10. Trans Mountain’s responses to the IRs of Squamish do not provide the information
requested.

3
PART 2 — GROUNDS FOR THE REQUEST
A. FAILURE TO PROVIDE CRITICAL INFORMATION

11. Squamish is owed a duty of consultation and accommodation with respect to the Project,
given that the Project has the potential to impact Squamish’s Aboriginal rights and title
interests, and the almost direct proximity of the Project to Squamish reserves.

12. The duty to consult and accommodate First Nations requires that First Nations are
provided with “all necessary information” so that the First Nation has an opportunity to
express its interests and concerns with respect to a proposed project.

Mikz'sew Cree F z'rst Nation v. Canada (Minister ofCanadian Heritage), 2005 SCC
69, paras. 54-55, 64; Gitxaala Nation v. Canada, 2016 FCA 187, para. 235

13. Trans Mountain has refused or failed to adequately respond to a number of the IRs of
Squamish on topics that are critical to Squamish understanding the potential impacts and
risks of the Project and to developing accommodation measures.

14. Trans Mountain failed or refused to provide critical information on potential impacts to
Squamish lands and waters, leak prevention and response and potential accommodation
measures, including the decommissioning and remediation of the existing pipeline.

' 15. Trans Mountain claims that a number of the IRs 0f Squamish are outside the scope of the
hearing, taking an extremely constrained View of the topics that the Board will consider
in this hearing. Such a position in Squamish’s view is inconsistent with the List of Issues
for the hearing as determined by the Board.

16. In other instances, Trans Mountain states that the information requested was provided in
the hearing for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project and does not need to be updated
for this hearing, provides partial responses or defers the provision of critical information
until after Project approval.

17. This is Squamish’s only opportunity to obtain information from Trans Mountain with
respect to the Project and to test Trans Mountain’s evidence. As such, it is critical that
Squamish is provided with full information.

18. The speciﬁc grounds for claiming each of Trans Mountain’s responses to the IRS to be
inadequate are set out in the attached Schedule A.

19. Rule 34 of the National Energy Board Rules of Practice and Procedure, 1995 provides the
Board with the ability to direct a party to provide full and adequate responses to IRS.

20. Squamish requests that the Board direct Trans Mountain to provide full and adequate
responses to the IRs set out in the attached Schedule A.

4
PART 3 — ORDERS SOUGHT
21. Squamish requests that the Board grant the following relief:

1. An order directing Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC to provide full and adequate
responses on or before a date to be set by the National Energy Board to the
information requests of the Squamish Nation as set out in Schedule A to this Notice
of Motion; and

2. Such further and other relief as the National Energy Board deems just.

ALL OF WHICH IS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED.
Dated: July 20, 2018
ft? "7.“???
.. -' /" a _..__
Michelit: L. Bradley
. Counsel for the Squamish Nation
Ratcliff and Company LLP
500-221 West Esplanade
I North Vancouver BC, V7M 3J3
Ph: 604-988—5201
Fx: 604—

8 0‘" H
”Ha: I. |—
HOEO gm C'H 75$
NHHN II” mm (D — mm
$h3o Bl—Hma'a 015$
ogow C08>0=c c"’:'--
'NEn: QJ.C-—rucu'— 00‘”
cmq’ (U .CCo 4-0:
2 C: -- I-a—‘DC "'L Cm-—
th‘U-- (u-H'_C—IQ_ '_Ch-
._-I “0 f0.—
w._+—,. LCO'—r'0 “ °
'25“; 5.9556: Egﬂ
003:- -—.:__1__.._. ”‘5‘":3‘“ ° 0";
CID I D: . 4-!_ (D :5 —— "" no
u u; M. 500016” 20'-
.EEQ’Q .“_"..'.: :h-Ucoh ‘Oh
'61:”'.i-.o: 00.10 U1 m
u.=cu ---"'. §__4:-; U '0 cynic
woman I'."'...- ma.) roll:
I Q'O ”.1313 mC-QH—UH— L'. '2
. ._ -: L'y: O -. o "C (U |— -: E
Oﬂ.“ I'I'1-‘J- CZHW'H-C .U
2:“ “'cuUHV’H '°'_'°
mI—w r.:.r. L mom 0;:
._.I'U _ :__". I—C-Hm >.. 3
mu; m --.-__- -" 0 0.3.0 3 °-
LL: 0 "Iii: “ELM mam
: an ..‘1,E-.-! aJh-n-ru.2§"' L_OF
O I: -.-i-I m3:_£H 13—:
E O r. 80.92:.8 2.90.
u. 0.. L'C’mzso-a ESE '
C m ._f:-__ Umc'oH—h >“._
n: o 'r.': '5‘- "JaJ-Ho. =‘°
l: I... Ex; :1: C 0. U -— a E ‘5'
m I2. 403x00 tEc
-:-_ DouJL-I-‘a’ m—
l-Il ..'-'- CLCQ'O: r05:
H-I IEZr HU'_La-’d:' Q“;
o Ii: lm—BOJ-l-‘H- 1.730
[.113 Imgcsguouc w'o‘d'
>3 ._~': SUD“ OJ; :u—m-o
U ;-.-. U-oo‘U—a-"S'o >"‘w
:- -.= m0: 3130.0 :3: Big
0 '— '|!
'3 |
E Id 2
'- 2 BHSEJD
1:: 1763000
O m .CL‘Ht'C
m _ UHaWD-H
1- 1“ :: cxm‘"
~ NE U1 (Um
: _: o-—-o C
0 u: L 'UL 30::
E -_ OIEUUB L
m E 'CruCCfO-DF
o 3 0' ~"'::::ﬂ.2>.
o ‘ U1 COMUHD-o
.. .. a = oz'wcm‘“
1 O ...... '4: aJD-mcc
‘H c ru>-'UEOL3
1- 2 2.0 -—C=o
“ -l-| mom m
:3 h 2 -2‘-m4"0.)q56
'5 V' IL Eg'EngwE
q
l; -: l.g' SUBEEIE'E
s: g 'E “:35‘0“
: “1 WDL L
1.: a HELQN)CL
a 0 o- rum-COCU'“
E m cu '-*-'cu“'.:
.E O 5-0:;th
a 1n 4-! mC--GJOJ:"'
a C cu gmBCEH-C
DD cu m 00:5 03
h Ili- C m-—3ru '-° 5
o D. Em: -Q-I—lfU
Im "cu torus:
' (U mg U -—
< CBC'_'L';OJE
o 8 JCEUMUE
I —I U) °'_|_C|JL:|—
:1 u,- vaach
0 m2. EOLCLCD-E
.I: “3““ mm OHL
| o IEFI Ecﬁfﬁ’ﬁ'wm
m . I—OL-I-ICIJ'DE
I _ .c . —H ‘
E g a, cu '0 >_ ﬁt; .90 o
3 to V’ 500: 4—: 3.951393. F“...
m; ‘- h r“ .C ”C3 (U .“ru 'L-ru
. o ‘U OJ H— .C — 0 mo
1;. CO.) |— _ O'H-I—IC'TJ LCLHHLS'lg-J:
;..-- "530 0.: 0. un‘h‘g'E‘” Hongoﬂ-mmm-H
'F' ILOE H.4:CU-tn cocoruc'DO-J'ﬁwoo-OJ"EE“J
'ri'u QJLQ- C350: ._U'IgL4-’-I-ICE€U_C m_CEaJru-o
~_- “DU 0 “Wru~m'cﬂoucmru ZHELHNH '5
aJ—-oH--- o“;L C 0—5 '5 “-35“
. knacwsg I—.EmEUmo-E:0£°wHOU'—Uo
I {-r -—Hmmm “- m4“ '— DD: chv m-wh
CIJU 4—! 4-! (D —02 E._ mm —\Q.
. 'LcmﬁEEUUUEﬂgmc EEEEEEgHm-‘Com
“S‘afwmzsgﬁ'53005'sgsoomd’l—mggoam
"10—0.:0 ooo'U'C ”U 0mm “'_ m
TULOJIDO WLL C 1:00:19, 030) mn. Hm
IQ'omuEEmnﬁzmeL'—oucmmmEcm£2
_ >&pQF—‘UHMWLIM._OZHQ
3 ”C3“
._ ::
H 1—?

N
3 4:
m In
Um.§
"c
220::
._|_:,
4" C"
Ohm
CCUH_
'Co
”1-H .
QJQJGJ-nL—IJ
04:00
'Cgc._.
c (DO
A L
'EU'En.
4-»:>m
C-qJ-c
3004-!
oZLL.
2 4-'o
Musu—
“—
c£>g
(Ulnc__
s..-— 4-!
l—Emt'u
'm-DE’
13:00-
31’0"“,1
amen
OOCU
EH9;
mcubﬂ
“DEE
on Q
CWEo
17:25.3
OJQJC>
3:30)
Guo‘o
$52.5
'U
H I
C
E 8 "5-5
H u—uq—rwlﬂc
OJ >>‘Ho:::-|L7;m
fU-l—l o H LL13
Q!“ o-—-_ C m
E Qmm'CS-B‘CQNE:
45'; CC'_“°"G‘” * o .4.
OJ uwmcwmm mmﬁn-H
ms: CEDN>U£'Lm4-ILU_
I 0 CIJL-Z.C>~C) _:
E'un .0 >G-03
(U. CD. :5 (Do:
fU'—-l-|m£n._= NLDCML-C
H—U'ICO-DH> Wm—g-u:
:0quru_:::3 —aJ-C ”Hum
DULLBB.ECUUH'°ECCCI_
”BFMB‘Eng-Mme
I». ._ m'— m
ES'ECQ‘CE'EEmm.HB:
“”“ED-Ezrngmogmc
cgoﬁew°3>cvlﬁgo.am
EEEUMEEwcg3—>~ELB
Fhﬁiﬁ=>~38__mm-Q am
~wanncon 96.5132qu
OH", '— EH3 '—':-—Lq_o
hqs‘cm533233q—otI—OQ
C” 5 1111') -I-' m
Ec'gﬂnmm“lwwﬁszzm
OHC<CquH_:_° h
£l_m'_-°E£mom3~m:9'owm
szgme-EB-ﬂtcmeea
._ _ _ Q
lEEﬁCEmCEmo'EBEa-Jom
“WE“ mum: Umwm
cc :o_L> -u: :>
3-—moa$m=t¢Eocow£’
om: >mﬂJOJLD 200130.
Ume- c”'CJLJCJB u U (U
ESW<MO.L — Lac;
4-: "Ca: _. C (OCH
CD: 3.: E-— O'_L
4.: u— zoBtOJ-—m_,_.mg_o
I'D. O mzr‘coﬁc-H8>_H_
4:13 >- mCLCEruo. OC-ﬁmgc
OJ-Hq; C LOHOJNQCU>3=°L C)
'DL-D mm cpu_cCJz.vL-,o_‘:‘l_‘,mL quc_2
cam .2; HCH>£QOOEmﬁEot—U--E.
m : Ul—EEwwcmwe'EUWE--m'acg’at
HG: :Lruo'UcoPa“ CHOELCO-—mcu
0:;qu .622Q'SEEEmagmgq—mF—azaw_a
_ .—f‘U
ESE gﬁzswauggncgzgggxggﬁa
mhg mzouwugc._staam+‘m
mww _ C'CC-u—amga).
I Q’H‘n 0.32._.|_0._
Ull'U
U1 m
mEru
Fill-
E
H'
H

(1) U1 4-! m
f :1: mm (U
(U 3 _:E .2
Eu); q, n: H—‘Dm
O-CHOJ: —_ 0)me
4.:
H&H‘F-L: CCO
OO|— O ._._ o
='Hm a 'H EEC“
mCUCh> tn CUCULC
(“>ch O (”OJOQ
‘96" ~15 8 “:‘Uo
—L'UWQJ L 20:”
fU>~C--I-I .c "ru
Ezmhm U} 13:-
CIJQJx'd'Q E “50
81:5th_ 3 588m
U1
dJ'—_0:JU”‘,_:: m gELE
(U H—0 (U CUOJ'_O
|_C'DOJON (U ILL
'ccw ' Ln .0“;
0.1.... ”mo 13 -CQ'D
Ln Mg'co (1) 1503 ‘-
E'C'E'-EI Ln mCQO
.c-HMEQO a) m_oca
nCaJrum L 8:00;
'_.£:3I-o—C 13 0""
CU -— 1:5 13.- .C
CD o'o ma)...
0:; ECU 4.. m.__,_,2.
Cm-o-nC U! 0 “ECU—
oaJU) o I'D
“QC cu C 5130
ml—l—HEW H C |_|-
OJQ'UIUWUI m “0WD-
3-00)me OJ. MUS)
ULD'S‘Uq—a 3a: aJaJOJ-I
“Eml—ao c--—— :13 L
CEHE'CLruc (DP! mem
05H 04:03.:
0:ng
E"— m
CUO :CE
“5.20 -I-"_rua) H_
mﬁg' ui‘ w “”885 o ‘n
4533 cu 4.5 £20.11: Em E
B'Ocu £5 >. 225%.. gm E o
q—CUS >C¢D TJ-—'HD_&D 3V 2
O-I—l-l—a LCUFI CE": N quaJ
_8H— (on-U -—L:':u'l‘-l O-I-'C:>-t 9—:
=00 >MNE ”(1132 “EN: ._._
9—0.1 24...,” N}_ |_"3 130'5 :
m0) whrl 13 C CEHaJ >~
LU cu 'O 00) (um Os.—
m 'Uom ._C=_Cm O‘D ,_:_ to
0134-“ O’CIC _I"'H—-|-’ 0.0: q—
cu L N m; : ._.— c
'O-COV‘LmOU 022° L30 ' 3
ow..0:g‘”va mw=oo szo ' =—-
%£E$‘°~£= Egg'ﬁ'ﬁ cwH'a 2° >-
cu meO-JCQ E-—-DE'-5 '55:: _Q
LEEL.._.E'-> 33:0): “3°03 E “3
0° unm—g-a) CULanCLO C :5: E
w¢g£=ama gquU 3580 ﬁ =
.EE.=a'aw'~om¢03woO gmgus'g en
ru >om.2<|'ru._uo.a,D-+'+-I c 1:: q.
HQC—q_—LD V, OL— ._ULQJI'U O
C CIJOO < 04—: ._C Cuba.) 03
Otngﬂ¢ﬁw>EwQ3 Lﬁgmlm 1:)
2>—':£°’°"3-Cgru'°“e I—Shmmo
Ira EEOWHOJADD'CZ ”'—'°E":“ o
In L 2 4" OU'U “(U H
:wEoWU mmmmccn : m
ru_ H_m00ru:s_w_ >~._..fUmOU1 OJ
L30) cl-"—-|--'--c;"'CIJCCUOCI'J 3:...) “C ”1
|—.2 Cmcum > =DEE =c—‘DCO C
.CoUIL coE _ .c: 0).: Q 0
H—t-H-—I'U Umhcu>~”"- <1">-|—-° 0-
OruLn'H (“Q- Q. h°m>.mE--— '5‘"
waULHDunQ. tn mzwgc-NL a;
2:05; mmw— |——°’m2:I—_ Es. cu
'— m CU-UC OJU ._._. .0; OJ
.00 c1. -—--- -— Ha-JH ‘D m (U
q; Cl.) '00 CD C
mﬁhq 13:01; s_m'ou 'ULQJ._GJ u,

3.: L we.” a; (Una; .
0J3<Utn — Um cu (IJ-UQ +1 03“" 0J.—...
.th" UUO L-OJ-—.:m DEOQW “”013
I—n=£,C£‘5_£ .C.c+-'_:<u =OLQ2 “5""

'— l-I-J-l-Jm-l—ILI-OUQI'UQ. 2n!

O.H
E ‘1’ u—
C "U (U
33 H q. H— _: O: 13 C 2-2 '
O_c >~ 000 =C|JCU grow (114‘: .Do 4-: m
4: J3: “=-O-Q-.C ='C‘°a.:""m‘” £0. :3 W:
C 'cso>‘::'—:”"—C .: 32o. ._ “’0 a)“-
82:.2memEtLEH gOCC 0'0 mL H:ﬂ).--°:
._D-HrquuC 3>Ecul= ._>OJ'_m=.L—‘mO4—I§:E'E;Bmo
1" ULLmSOH—ch >CE'Do'aEOJLHm-—_UC u
comm OHEL “E o-- OJHmHCHHLm>._ Om
-—2mc.2£§-o 2CD”, LQOm : C-I-anC'DD'H'~
0" “LE 5'03me QD—‘SDmC‘l’mezmmCOW-ﬁ
mU'IECU HU‘OGJUHLO WQO'CIJCCU'CH-EE'_LQJ'_EGJ'-
m: U‘U3CQ-H'5EU: m“ QOE'HCU'D Q” C” mE
I—mumml—L'Dautha) E-C-C'Ewtecgc'ozmi’eeg'
H“ L'Dq_'—-—OJ-l—IU'IED.|—Q_m
E A
r! 3 E“
H H U
H "!
H

CD '~ mm:
cu'o)"-"-"" hos: 5.:
a‘CIJC'H'“ I_Q':3= 9‘ (Di:
E‘o-D'_-2: 13900.) — D: m“ .23
cm 3-50 0’qu O — Lu EH—
0 ECHEDDJ‘ '—.E "" 0 Q0
vomzyzcg-ﬁmQ-L OJ -|-' 2.5 -|-’
C'Ooomuo'i s-Cunw m cu ammo)
mom aJl-rumtvﬁcu— C U) LHDD
.04.- Ecru I‘D; -—o o :: #5135
m (U '_ E'C'Hl—H Q 0 3-—_
m;m_-° “’L'ﬂ‘" U! >~oLOJ
LPHCOJCQJ'Uwa-l-l (D Q .0 451.0.
CJm run. .o: vzuU L V‘ E .—
'CV'L.'—m 3-: r0 (U 13 “Q
gaﬁl—D—CEE Ema. _C ._ cum;
-—oaJ4—-cm_Qg:C_:-CE ﬂ .: no: 2
Cl—JUCH ._O .._.__ E .2 “Dean“
Oncwﬁm£°:;ww E EFIE
'agm-tmE.£D-o.+5.c g m 30171.13
”1 ht'_ .—:'—H I-
E'5°Ew”E§£E8°’° m 51' §:wm
EE:m_¢:_o-:L:EE 8 (D ”Em:
8020.?“9WO-282m5-m a, 3015?,
C._- - U1
cu“J .20=~.'°.Em-oE.2-o _ <Bun
'C-O-c-H-— “L scm Ca)

mUmC'tnfUaJJ: VIE“) “U 15—._:_

H—meE CT >E m m ”113—:
D. 1:" CIJO omit"L (D In ou—
: DEEEELL-m'ﬁ U113 L mung“.
.QEUUQO HQSUlaJc-O '5 E.E._o
“oﬁn'-u mooc-—_c m 1:: 4..->
80‘ EOBSHHWEHOH I'D g-QEH
Q-choazc'awo“_ :: o no.0
o.“ :I-l-H “‘4’ huC-H'H cc>ru
mct_ o “'5‘” mm 4- row
EzmrEC mud)»; In 4-» OJ
>0)“ "33-D-O>:3_: CD..—'.. mU'IOJL
L!“ Q- -I-" m ._
IUB-HktruHDLEO_QJQaJ_ 0"“ :h_.
.—.m HBLNEH mr‘! 5038.0
EH §:-—.E
4-10.__|
.|—l
O
C n:
é 3
'1 as
H C
' S
E m
'U
E c
m A
RI" E :9.
Pi m “E
' 3 H
O o- .
2 m 2
0.: 3 m
E 3 E
m E .2
3 8 I'D
an L g-
0 U')
“I IE 0
(U
U! 8 _,_,
C _° OJ
0 '5 2
Q.
3 E 8.
L D. U)
(D u) (D
(U C' L
m 02 6.4..
In I'Uru mg
m “’2 cu"!
(U L-_ WH
_ kg m_
EL 89' 20
a; m a_z
15- .t' on _C a;
OJH_'U E 'E — C 0.2 m:.E
_c-—<D "HUI U) "" to
4.: > E m m 0 rug :0 -

OJ I—-::C-_ U H Hm
OH‘CE O X-I-l rum ._ru _2r_‘>
“0:0. mmU .. wC.9-—c 13:: no 3_
5599- “:= C <v°*"'—r° CG; .5008
$0.9": 8mg .9 .CEECU? Emu :ész “a:
QBD' ht" ”‘13“ ‘1’qu (D: .90.; Lrt: r0
mm '2 UFCBﬂcw-EQH 84:0 QOou‘D'E'O
cu--°D+.. CL" ”Hmo‘h‘: cu-Hu U1-—:4—I'_-:0JC
LUCU '_°"°3‘E r"cu 0" —L '-o.ru 134.» m

I w'—q’ OJ 4—! OJ-_ 0. N.o- m E LOCL—E
.l: 44. £CQE>UC CIJ-I-I-H CU“- un|_—._ ..
HEL‘S‘ $“3Qoow=“u:U-£CHEC .0 OJcm
ENE wﬁomueeaB'SB-é—‘H-hozsgHag

_ 0‘” ._'—“ C “Ou_£-— tum
_ DmgI-D-Bwu
H : A
{—I """" .D
l H u...-
H .
H n!
H

ui '0 : L”
E "'3 30533
500) (UNU
0::CIJ n: _2-:
"'“8 _ “oﬁoc'
.EE-Eh O CNUO
SCEQ E :Lci‘m';
CH-CL 0 mac“
._mum a. “3.9m?
55mg 3 5:50
3 '_..-— .: '-:-
0‘5“: w Bogs
Emu“ '— :U a.
(Do E 30‘"
mash m oﬁcs
CtL‘E 3 20-93:.
EEa-m C- Lt;
J: a.) :43:—
>‘O-l—J-U CD @125 (U
DULOJ U) s_mom
U13
0.100% - |—o_
'otn“—cu 1:: 154..“0)
ruOU'IL- (D (D 0.0
Ecc'U In mUﬂJo
4-‘0'0 ”1 V166.“
'-I'U 0’ mm
$110+! L LLLGJ
I- a
c.5139 '0 13°13 >
aJ'oc-Q '0 15'“er
E300 ‘0 ”FL:
—U-|—I 4—: Od-IH
4-1:.) 4—:
":mm 0 05h“!
E-—_c'O C £8.25
EUB-ch 171' ""'_:Mm
0:”58 0...: gpqh
U'E-l—l-l—l 3—D ='-H3
Q’I'DLt-u CT" U>~-O+a
3N u—o '0
o+-' *"
‘1’ O 3‘0"" .2 >.-C
>3: .omco _ ._4—-
L“ rurUfU-I—a 4-! (Do
"" Lwhat“ fucru':
003.: HammmC‘J-U'C
.— H I'D =5— UH
4-34-10) CULDD ,_3: Q
"3mm“: 0-: m_
D H‘“— ._ mam C
. aggcogq-SLSH—2:
*5- (: wcmgmﬂoE-CE'
u—r QNEO :mﬂ-hl-LH
' H OJQN '50.] m“ —m
' J: ‘_C DW‘ tuO—>
H Hmmuu =CCLLLIU=
I mNmEoQ'Q.Qw-Lw
0 BC jj-I—I'HE-H-HQ-HO‘D
Z Hogmg-oozagOCH-T,
'_ CU QDOJW
CC C.*:ObDo-—U'Uo. ca)
— “J'o'z-EUEmNEEEoE'
3 Eguaw::E.—gﬁpu
C (U 0 EHMEEHQu-J
3 H2 “.ESNOJE cw
CD NHdC: 0min OD.__:
U o J: I-Iruoc
"" .Es-E-‘L'HE (HLQEL
a: D—‘G—Uﬂggwma’gEﬂ
W QCE-CCU moq-d: ._:3
g mowo~_~._‘—n—uruzm.2
0- 2?.2U-Eghccﬂc-Ct‘
tn :m—mm:.Eoomo“w
'4: I—o'O‘DGJ-UCC
OJ -—='D_Em "CCHC '-
‘U 'Oruw CEtgooCoE-o
m C>.LJ-OOrU:UU'-UHC
0" QHZLOJB'HL 3 9-K!
W UHO'U--C+-n.n_ m':.
n: czs'ozmmmﬂcum
w EGSUS°S§§L“8E
_ tn
0. l—Em.EuEul—l—>.E'OL:
2 H5 3:ng (u
“- 3“"0. 42.0 Ix“
o-EOC'OMEEGJ %‘ EH“: >mL-SN
an 0 row
eSn-amcwgn rug: Eggs” cu ﬁﬁzc‘w
wgwyg':cc+.-m E'E ggaccc _: Ecummg
csncmmgzoc mmwm_-ch=5“-— 4.: m_quNL
go_=+.-<Uoo‘=m Hw“c=m.c-o“-r° C Hwommo
02:055h2=‘mC-‘:SW;C“@EEC'- 3244:“
hwzzwﬂo '§'_~:0J_2:5,::5‘5503ruw 63-03200
mcwc-H'H CCU-Drupp... ru‘” :5 wm.: QJGJ-oH_
mm: '_ (Dru -H'—' “JHDDDOBE Qm'_ZLL 4.;
L to MULC-U Dom; 1;.q c.— :13
I 8H%;ECUI—ﬁcgECW-I-agg-E'DOW'22-EgngEOC8
--:5 -—mm to COJ-H tuC Uru-—
3_:_>~o:s s_o 03—4: GJQJOJL..9'I‘UGJEMO ‘-
mpnnu'otpanEUUQBEBLQCI—Qasmtcgemi
2— E
n! «2
H 1—!

RATCLIFF 8t COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r 3
Michelle Bradley
mbradley@ratcliff.com
F ile No. 12-0005-008
August 3, 2018 BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
Suite 210, 517 Tenth Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File No. OF—Fac—Oil—T260-2017-10 01 — Hearing Order MH-048-2018
We are legal counsel for the Squamish Nation in respect of their intervention in the National
Energy Board hearing for the Project.
Please ﬁnd enclosed for ﬁling:
(a) the Afﬁdavit of Deborah Baker made August 1, 2018; and
(b) the Afﬁdavit of Richard Inglis made August 1, 2018.
Yours truly,
RATCL]FF & COMPANY LLP
MICHEL ‘E . ADLEY
Encls.
cc. List of Participants
Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 0 Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500. East Elevators. 221 West Esplanadel North Vancouver, BC V7M 3J3
01544015

Hearing Order OH—001-2014
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Application for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study: F inal Report
.-4
.1
I.
4 ﬂ ‘ ‘ ‘ J ‘ //. ~
' __ ‘ _ ' .,- .- v ‘ 4‘ -f_-f~<-~ 7; 7 - ,wa :51}. ,
. {v.15 ‘ A "
v 3. -‘e 61.12:: . 7 E R
('7; ..-..1.FT;_.‘-r 6 ‘. ?“31'1‘” ’ z“- - 7 i. 1 3: 7 1-, --_
‘ ‘1. ' ..F _ . .. - x “l: _ .4 :6 __*_:i:-"H‘ ,7' “‘1
Khahtsahlano (August Jack), his wzfe Swanamis (Marrian), and child in dugout canoe, Kimilano Indian Reserve, ca. 1907
(City of VancouverArchives, CVA 1376-203)
Prepared for Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council
by
Traditions Consulting Services, Inc.
May 25, 2015

, 7." J .
. . .
\_. o 0. v- . - ' V’ N ‘
4. - A A . ,A ‘ - ~ . ’. #4- "‘ .'::“;-}x -n. _ t .7 K 2
._- . ~ . - 1; as -;;g .\ ﬁa~ 5.1. {a
_ - ' ‘ ' ‘ A ‘ ‘ I ' Y
91~ "’- ’ ’~ W6.
, ’ a ‘ f- Jo” ”)4 “W - o
:0 *O";‘ 1“ ‘ ' v . f . -. ".A. [Ii L? {A .(.~ , - ' "
. . p . L? ,- 2,? _ ‘ ~ ‘ 1‘" -‘
I.“ “x“ __. _
tr. [“9 .. 0“ ‘ ‘ f
- :-Il ' t- V - . ’1’.
5 14/1. .33, --
‘2" ' -. 3.. 7 ‘ J‘ :— " -
p - - 4.. . . “3-- ‘
'yf‘ﬁ' '1 ' - ‘ ,
" v * , A
,I . . ”I “
#3“ 1‘ ‘ - “‘
r. ' - AW 7" m
f- a: [q , ‘
x - .
. ’ ~ P
-' K ‘r gr. 761m)
" ' ‘ ‘ ‘vé'
. ‘ ’ , ‘5' Jﬁ‘l. A
A' .l‘ '4 f: .. ~ . Q
1" ‘ ﬂ ‘
_' > 1: g ..

- - . 9
r . _ 7 - _ ; V
' ' 7 ‘ _ _ ' ' - . " I -- .7‘f_ _‘ V r
7 7, .7— . V7V--*Vﬁ.-Ine§s-4b --777 7. .7--. -.
7 3' 7: -77-7 - -1—7= 7..7 ‘ iffy?” -,_.;\'-:V—+--$- - Jie‘ “'7‘ ’ " " ' ' '
_ _V 7 V "‘ 7' -'w’ V 7 ; 7 7- ‘U‘ﬁ - __ ‘- _, - -7.,o ,_ V-- . _ 7 V
: ;_~V.’£7":;f;'} ' —_ ’7'; ~77 7’- .-€_'"_ 5; ._,_=”. Q.".‘ 7 Q?" 7 7"- V -‘ '77 ??km1337 $V———~ —— —--—V- V7 V V
v :71 2 '3 ";. £’.",‘j‘seV-f 7' W“€‘Erh~o_ﬁﬁse é; ' ' “- "' .77 “ ‘ - é. -- £33.; 7.39::‘1F’7‘ .' :
Z ' “'1""4 Q 7 V g—OgV‘ k‘J-'F—;—Fk ' 5. 7‘7 7 A'; “"‘t‘v‘ 1V_'V"'f—7'—-17¥ ‘V 7V) _ -
7 V V—VV-V—J. -—_-+7V__V 3.... 7v -.~. .523?» .z7 _ 7 77 77V 7 - 7 -. 1.7- -‘
-I ??:?:7: ﬂ — 5““.5 '7!” 0 -"i‘:’ “I 7*7' ’ 7 ‘57 ' ‘ mizki, .l—a-a‘!‘ a 3-7 .‘V’7V17 s
-V~ 7 . .. 7V7 ’- - -7 7‘._.h-f§” V7- 7..- —:‘. ;" 77:7 7., é.» M. 1-2.. -7;7.‘7V-._j V-V V
I.” - - ‘.-;‘- ‘V ° 3 :5‘ ?:Stﬁ ’_, V724— V ’7‘ 35.3":1 “-,»~'£:‘VV;V,: ’"-777:§¢<;2’7 ‘W :V 7‘ V1.7 V 1 V _ V
.b _‘ -" ‘ - ' _ r ‘ 5-. V \“ V— - 7 :7" ‘7 ." ' A :- f 3'" ~91 7:7 3’: _ ' 5—5 ‘1‘ 7 '«V 3’; "r- ' ‘L-3~— A 17’; 7V1" V
V - 1 i -. 4f 1 3" V V -\__7 a -_-V - ‘ﬁ,’ 7:13., v - . .r 7: ?N?V ‘ v.‘ 7 7:11: _: ’.Ed~ 7(7’ 7’7'
ipizra; ' 7"“ ’  ' E‘ V ' "3"? ’7 7 7g; ‘7-7 7-7- . "77—7- V. ??;LééiA-V‘ 77:21,}; V V ‘V'. 7"
W's? ' 7', V7 _ - V V - =7 7 7 .7 77 ~- 7" wan r7. ”777-7677771173: 7:77 -:7 7 2:77 7 7 *
,Q7 7.7%,‘347‘7? _—V‘ -4 . .V-t V ~7 J97 _ V ‘ J . 7- '
7 - 7 7~ 36d- ‘7 7 7' t V :7; -17» ‘3-)— .'_. V... V V -- -r 7 V ’ -
3V~ V4_ 25.7% 3-1}! aLr-_ -. “3.:1' _." 77‘ ’;;é$.ri¢‘~r:y ' 7’ “ ' 7 "7 ' f- : 7 V ~—_ .-
7 ~ "3 ‘ - 7‘ ""” ‘ gig? 61'5"?” 1a a ' ‘— - -7'- Va ‘3. 7 ' V -V V , ‘ 7’7?» V ‘7 7’
V._V V" "V -' - 7 ' 7‘4?‘ V" V.~ - ’ V':‘ m, $1:V;;VVV :ﬂx. 7-735-..177. 7_VV_:‘-V‘:V‘V‘V —7 :
- W—‘.ﬁ~' _ V.» ’7 7 ‘ V. 41-7’. 7 __ 7‘.--_,r- 7—2- 77.77. :,7-7V,V7 ». V 7.-- V
,V' ‘7' -.-"‘__.._§.' " ~ 1‘ «V n... _‘.-§,~s:.‘,:——‘-.'~Z"-_ x 7, -7.'~ Vft-V V -Vr.’ 7', 7 V I r. ' V’ . . ~_V 7
~— - 7 - .v ,' .V .-.‘ - -e~ :. V 7‘ ‘ *7 V 7 ’ ‘77 -' V- }" " 7 ” 7 - 7 ’ ‘ -- 7
7r- 77:57.79; 7*.- z-g; ~- V7 77— mas??'7zt‘:r7 ;-W V7 ”-7777- V—- 77 N7 V - V V
“7'“ «7* 7—- 7' 7 ' an- 77 7 ' 7 ' 7:77,; ~ 7 ’ 777-- ~77 M ” "‘°’7 7 ‘7' - 7 V 7*: f: 77 '
. - 7,-1*Ft“-—.¢3"§7’g§7_ 7 v3k..f.—_e: 7 ‘ﬂ»VJ::‘%f£—.qv_ 1%: ’ 5 3‘; ‘5", 7' ‘ 11?:- ‘V_., "T.V V» A‘ 7 _-_‘ . 7
'7 -¢r .,. '_V .1, “V - 7 7 " - "‘ '-—._ V .,7 ar‘v- «rm: -7- 7‘ — ' g‘ .a '77 - A_VVH 7
- -7 .27sz 777:7". “@3777 _V7V~V7 . 7...- ,V-V;7 V~V7V . V .77.“; 7.7.3377. .5- V .V VVVV, V- V
V'J..V V — ”.‘ﬁ; A ".14" 7 V ~ 7 "-. 7- -: ‘ ‘1'; ‘. -. 7 7FW~.‘:£_V‘~' “"s'~ 7 -(;'f1-7 7:1'5" 7 7—'7:_‘ ' J“ "-V '
3917." 73771.47. 79' ' 7:: .zm-IV'R‘: “'5‘: 73:??3,’7PV '-7 7 ‘.7° "#3.. _ '77“ g “1‘". 3171:;- . 5.7.. 7 V ._ '7; V 7'15; 1 ‘77 ‘“: 73’
7:7V.r :7. -_V‘-‘7'7777‘" x -' ‘ . --—- 77 7‘0”? u; 77, ~ - .77 c- ‘ ' r r V' —
V 77.5:7'727.‘ V-‘ma-V, 77'7 ,wv’gﬁb 3 7V%~,¢7.V€V 7..7 7J7 77 - . ' 7 ‘ -V7V . .777 '
' V VJ7 —- 4"—’--r . ~7 7-7:- . .,-..< “ . x... - 1.." T v "_- - ~, ; V'.- .‘~.V 47,- 7V __ .Vr ._ z" :5 7 —‘—V _ - v 7 ~ _-- -
‘7 V7 51“?“ #72:». '~‘ “4» 's’:.:3: 1,-4 .IV, a ~fo7177-7+r-§,V.V Vr3—.:.—V‘*7V;.-7*J- "V“: V V7 V .VVVJVa..-. 7 7 V V V7
, V . '- ~*2. ' 77 "" T ‘ J- ~ 7 —- 4F, “m"—’".‘; A. —— - 4‘ ' “ 7"“ " " ‘7 3v:— I V _:A7 - ‘77 7
i: ' ‘ - -v p‘ ' . V V f ‘ ” 71" - _ 77 ,-. 7—. 2.7.1 7 9.. _ r&‘_-’. 7- V “" f * ‘47", i‘- V ‘7'; - v ‘
11" - 7C. : _ -- V ‘1 v13?! ! :3 '- .. 7‘ ' ".7 -,_7. ' VV’.,‘;V ‘V .g; 7’7 7 ‘V _*"‘¢ ’ 7‘ .7VV77V
"‘2 VA ‘(d' -‘r:{" f(- _. Vé,V 7. V - r ‘ 7*" ' M V ‘ "Va" ’ ‘ ‘;~.-«; '7 J. ,V :- 5 "7 7. :Li"! 7:7: "“7 ’ 5' ”-
- _V‘ V <—, -_. Eel ' _ - V ' 7- V V V V ‘7 7 ‘ _ - ‘,_.‘.‘ ﬁ'rV ‘ JV“ 'w—Vr-L i ‘_V " :7
7 "‘ V -- -- V _ ‘" f. i-W 41m ‘ _ —- 1-» _~;§:V.V V7 -1'
""*~‘=:~¢ 316$"? 7' 7 7 --7”._;:VV—7- 7 2 ' "--7~.V-- 777775.;7 ' VVV 7
9 r 7" .. V ’ 4'r ‘ ' ’V‘ -77 V_ V ’ » - , ﬂ.- . :'--'L}rr§n_i:+ ' _. ,.'_- r- ._$- -“ ‘ .. ‘ ' ’ _ iﬁf:.ji‘u. 7 . VV_
"’ W472 V A 7 Msﬁ - _ -V "’ _/-7 "t.§ ‘ ’ ‘v’ggér" Vg‘ ' *7"? _-.3 —7 7}- 7V4_.‘ far‘ » (7,—— . vﬂ- 7 H; V ‘
'5’!" V. “‘ -:'2¢.'F:<~7 ’ 77 ' 2%»? ,zgrm .2 M47 7’ " ‘Z§"i’371;7 ‘ '~" ' 7'15“ - -
V- ‘:.- ' " 75; 517757.. 17} 7-,7_‘t _ ,—7.- . _V_ V -. ‘ ‘-.' 7:77‘ cm
WV ’7 . ; 7 . V i : 77.5.7 77 : 7-7.7..«V 7.7 - V V7 V:V:. VX:V,.VVV-_ V7
.7 .. V . 7), —,—— V—_.r-::; .7. W7 V, ' yr" ,- . - _ ‘ ; i '39-: 7 -. :f;:‘ V" > I
A V '1 'K~-. '>.Ar ﬁﬁ' ‘_ ' 7 VJ; - v V 7 W 3.; 7”." "' 7:71 -' L—"IV ' w:?.‘éw‘s bit" 45.7 '
. —V, .‘ —- ‘ - V . _ ‘ ‘ ’ ’ V4 :' n . _, 7V 7
. ’5 A! 4 A. .ﬂﬁf V, V .V {5‘ 7; 7T ‘\ 297—”-1-(1‘, V V 7 V :5: "" ;_V
.V ' $237 -‘.rV ; —7 . .V .7 v _ g“ ‘7;__‘.‘;‘__ ﬂ”, y‘n,.-t. -- .w‘.‘ _ 7‘ ~ -
. «x 7- 7 r: "' -7 ’77 7‘- " 7 k r ~ . “'- “' " gﬁ ‘ ‘ ‘2
V ‘ '7 ”’7' "'57 7“” —' $ﬁW¢7 7' "7-77 77 7'“ " 7 “ 7 V
'. V -7V‘» V 7 775,... ,2: > 1‘ 77 7 V_ 7 _ 7‘»? r_ ‘h , ????,f 5 71-7 ‘7 7‘ V - _-
-V" 7 c 3-7 V; 7.74. V . , V V ‘ - V ,— ._ ’7 V "'71.? _ ’V ’
M .., 7,-7.7 V..7u..__.a?’~ rﬁ-J 7—7-V7-w- VV-V7 - ,V V
7 .3" -;.’- ’7'7 V .4; .; ,_ :V- ':V 77" ” ’ V ,7 7 ‘ ‘ '
7 7:.vxrixcng'ir' ' ' 7"“ V , I ' ‘ . 7 ' . 5‘
r174 " ’ :‘V {'QVVN-awcw~ 77.77 V1 77 V
. 7 -7.‘£ 7 3 7 V: :‘ v > ~‘ ~ 7 ”V ' .‘ 7 V .. 7
~57 " s“ ' ’ ﬁ~h - Q ’7" " 3-; J‘b7'V1l’"/V 7 -1 7 ' ' V
. 7-3 7,V \_ ~-V_ 77VV_77 V c. F 7 .'-".V 7-7— "
_ V 7 V . Mﬁm ‘7—‘f7‘_,:: ‘gg‘ - 1:?1r‘7 :ég'g; 7-7_ . 7 .7 =3 - A- 2* V
7' ' ’ ‘ ' ' ' 7-7 .': V“ “ z i' " ""ﬁ-7 ' 7‘4 77': " 7 7 277-
. '-“‘V _ u?" ‘ ‘ 7 .. - 7 ‘rrx_V,.«‘-7LP ﬂu»;
'7 =7 { V7’ =7 - ._ - Arr?" - - 7
s V ‘ 7 - " ‘ _ “n. .— 77 ._7 W1 . ‘r’-_ Vr-v; ’
" 7 ’ VﬂV 7 . ‘V - : . _ V 7 7 V- t”
V . _ . m 1'. . — ,7 I
V(VV V . . ' ,".'.;. ’u - . "4L ' . V ‘
., 7. ». v.:.-‘ 7 “.7.“
7 V V " - u' n V, , -_- ,v :7‘ ~ch
,7» V7 _ Vim?» ~ V «2:734: -
V r ‘ V 7' . ‘ >’-.af3"" 7...)» V ‘ vf-A _
$5.7 : -_ ' 53;: 19""
I

ﬁgure 1: Map oquuamish Traditional Territory, Consultation Area, and Study Area
*3 I" 3-. ., 2‘: .(- ..‘ ° ‘- “WI"Z' 1‘ 1‘9“ 7—" -' ‘
,; 0L ' f—* .3. ’1 ..|‘ J»- '3' .-. .
oh...) I ‘ ‘ ' “L- J I.‘ . W ‘ \‘ ’ 0 1-. 01"; ‘ r 4‘ t" . I I
-‘ . o. L ‘ . (1 L g, ‘)+-IW ‘3‘;— u5 r...' J].) ‘
.' ﬁr, -z s VI? ‘ . ‘..{' 539W" . ‘-%".¢7 ‘1 '4' _ , -;
Iv ~Y4 I 1 ,. - “. ,
5 L . 31' f“ . 3 .o ‘1‘?! J‘Ef‘fé'ml‘h“ " 2' - "'7‘.- L)‘
.1 ‘5‘ V.‘ . — f". - l". )w ' / .L: ‘,-".\//‘,'-.«;'L’.° J. *, r. ..
,- 3  A a ' ,xz'. Lw- r. ar-
;‘ "l” x}: O rw n‘f h“- ;. A ’. "v'. r ' ‘I “‘ I " ‘Q. v -
‘ #371132”? ‘- =" 2: A z; j" :za 4n "-1
r7170"? '1 " ‘ ~4a“ L‘ A "J’v": ' ‘ .
,-,-L - , #3 ir- ~ w .....,. .
"“".‘~. ’3‘ . l; J” :3 ‘ mg“ ‘L " 5"” {ﬂ ‘~'1-' ‘ , ‘\ '." [1‘
"l 123": ":P-J ‘ . gdt’x ‘ ,z ("3“; 1.70"; '. ° €I'L'\'° I
.. ‘ " A-TJ '." '.‘ ‘.‘-y,‘{0. -/
v w , .. Lew”, ‘3" vi“ ' :‘(s L» .“
“6 ' 7- : " F“ n" 1' " if .I' ﬂ‘ ‘ '3‘ «- ~13"
_ i .L' L ' ~..‘,‘ /- L II \. . (tc’, "
3" r ‘ 5".“ Lazy -‘..~- "£‘?- I .. [1“
}.VI 7 ." 1?" r; ‘ L L'. I " ‘l’- ﬁ” .i‘ J‘ ‘96 I'-- "- ,‘T a _ 3’"? HI? 0 L
. ‘ - .1 g 4 gr“- (‘1- ‘? 0 Q7“; 1'! r_.»_ .. ' ‘
.t.’ " ~ 1’: 4'1, «'3’ 5 3}... .L
' _ ' ' _.~'I 'ﬂ‘ﬁxl ..; ‘sb-g .. 3' q... - ‘1' d1. ’ .
. ’ I 3" - “ . ‘1‘ '13": 71'. .‘J 1:193)- V ‘ﬂ'. 1 " ’J .‘ f q
“ ' (”L f ‘\ " “ 1" " v 1r." ‘i‘ o“? ‘ :“ .V L
3 _ 7““). . - .. R ‘r , A .' ‘I ‘-‘L|I‘-’f"-' . L 1"" 3-. qf;t’..o. , , 3.1;}:
,. .‘. ,, ‘ L ’ ~s. .L ' ' ..';
.‘ , " ‘K ' 3' ,‘ , ". x....' . .L | ‘. ‘.
. _.' ' 1;-“ .'_ _ ‘l ‘_ ‘< 11333;“: _..:'.. pf
; -. - : . > _- , " ,- H ‘: ”15:"..- __ . IL“ A ~V‘ri—L ., ,. 131,,1’:
. ~ .46 '_ ‘ f 01:,“ bef
"“7 *tsvt 3 ° LLL:;+- 5‘1"
’V‘W'LVHL‘ . ‘ :"S‘ ".'_.V. 3”...“A:
\L 37;??i ‘ f3: 32".35‘53’i11 L?" ' .~
72:37 r“..‘:;_'_io' .'I‘q .. ‘-
‘Péﬂfﬂﬁ 7‘ ¥ 1% K‘s}; ’3}- 03
“";EI},"¥$ ‘11: j ..
I. "in: l—V“ ‘~ 9 'R A - r" N 1 ,
- = - mat . - - -5MVA'°3
‘.-*‘ «'L ' mam L '-
_»‘-y . 1 Kﬁgrgga‘ \ 9 SqmishNaIimTladiﬁonalTenim
3 '3' ‘ “x '5' L .. k.
y; 31:" ‘ 3 - 6‘2... Lg] 9 Squanish NdionConsuhIion Bounday
.'I/L£1§L‘E¢ “1"; $\Eyf.) .5.
-= «La
J ‘ .r- "L
3 f . 4,;-
‘ ‘ 3% o 5 1o 20
' Nu. :—m
Squamish Daditioml Useand quxmcy Study, Final Report 4

I—
I—

I—

Squamish T radirional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 8

r ' 7L . 9 . . A l'
.- "'
Wk :-
, ,_ . ‘
J _
. p' - \ -.
‘ ' ~ .0 ~‘ '"w ‘ T‘\ “
“’3' ' v u": r’ _ , .
-Q "’ '. ' . ~ I i'” ' r; ‘-
— ‘ . ' 'u o ‘ ,
1 v. ’ . ‘D‘J‘. . ’5’
v _. ‘ ~ ‘ , ‘ I I “ ‘
- .. w“; .;‘ - w ., ~.'
~vt "V‘ qu- ‘ w I cu ‘ I
w. $54}- .g, 3;. ""5; » u ‘»
§ _ : l~ ' . . ‘ 7‘ ~
, u .; ‘\‘$ f i‘. , . IA ‘
A ;t- _ .3 .ﬁ . \f‘ | ‘ .‘ .5: b. l
.«R 1-, . 3w, 3‘. > t; . ‘ 3 ‘. v
w! ‘ > “ rc‘ ‘ ‘ - ' ‘ ' . -- ilk.
" .' - J '1 ‘ , ' t," . . - {W x' '
£7 ’. i ‘ ' V ‘ ~ ’
. ;_ -‘l .' Nf‘\ ..‘. 'I' ‘ ' ' ' »
'Tf‘l' L." 'V , . 4 . ‘ 1 ." ‘ '
3w . A .. .. ,4 - +> w;
‘ ‘ ‘ P ‘ ‘ .' - -   ,"x >.‘\. ‘ ‘
‘ - . V ‘ \L- ‘ ~-‘ ' .. '
. . ‘3 r ‘ 3" ‘ ‘ “7‘“ KIS‘K ‘ ~
’ \‘A- ' V . 'Cxu‘K‘ -x' * '
. a - . 1‘ ﬂp‘. PI Il . - - Cpl . .5 ~ Y ‘ -
" "ix ‘ ‘ ' ' ' ?}W
, " f k» 3.: 'w'f'm.“ @. ‘
u ', p? - ‘.(WW|an—fl‘ (11m ‘ H 1:5, 3‘3}... .' .. qﬁ’ﬁ‘ngw f”; ,A
. \ ‘ ‘3. ,' ‘ '3’ ‘ "(¢ :4. ‘. - 0).} ’ > I, .0. \ ¥ - “f N
, ‘ ' ‘ .—‘r . ‘ " '. "" -' 1 - .
— I _ x- .. - ‘ a o". $ 7 A ~ A ' ‘2 . ‘ . ‘O .n ._°§ A‘
_’,‘;- “o ‘« ;-- ‘ V '7 ' ‘ '0
. ‘ ‘,. .‘o“ . H? A ‘
4., 23‘. v ‘
F...“ - ,- - ~—

,V'

‘ ' “ii"; ‘ 3 i ‘ i ‘ ' ' E ' 7 i   E Z r I V 9 'E ‘ ‘I ”1,71411.1w.1.1..1.,.1 E E 3 "|~‘RI‘1'|' '3 5‘ ‘5‘ I?‘ V: ? -: ; V i V ‘
1 1 1’ . ¥ 2.. 1 1 .1“ t; ”I , “2’ ., 1111111; 11
’1 11111111 1 V - r): 1— 11.11 1~ 1 "r x '1. Agrr
. 14-91:: , E; v j - g .2
_ « n . - s w. .
‘ ‘ . .- . . 1‘ . J" ' - t“
1 . . Is? .33“ -$ 1.“. ."# 2 ,1
1 ‘ .11! z » - 1 1‘“ V '1 ' A v 1.11
V- ‘ ‘l G. , - . V 11' 4‘". ~ - ‘1 A ’ ¢‘ V' $1,142 .i. -_ (nk’w!
.1 H ~ V ,. . {?fr'f’ I :1 1 11 ‘1 x . 1" ‘ 1'1 1: 1‘1” 1 1
‘ r: 41”! .- ' ‘r' \ ‘. - 1‘ ' Q ‘
m ' , .' F . ., - 7 ‘ ' ‘ ‘ . ‘
. W «- '.' '1 "‘"’ "1 L '
l ‘ r ‘ v) lér .1 »' r 1"; 1. '1, 1 1" “ x
. 1 .3” 1 . 51
_ 1 1_ 34' 1, ‘
SKII-MISHATII 1.. 3 ' 1
- .1 " L(' I -_" i I, "" ‘ l. .‘ ‘(f
11 mm om: ./ .1; 4, _ ' , 1??
V . ’- - I . ‘ ‘
SQUAMISH INDIAN ' f’ ‘ ’. *5” I .
r'. 3,; 1‘. 'iLJ-nw 33‘
" k ‘ r r“ V "'1. E" r' 1
am PEOPLES ' "TIIIIIII VILLAGE: m MIMI!“ “
,_ V . 11‘ 11 -, 1.111, ,. '1 .‘ ’1‘ £1 ,'
1 V m "r ' .5» g , 4'.» 303mm: INLET ’ ,V
f .1 ; ; 'E - Q 4. ,1 W .; AND now: scum: ._
3-K '- \- ”ﬂy ‘ I 11 ‘ 1V - ‘\ “a
r ’1 V, ’ ’ V n ‘ “
”Ari, ‘0 ~ in... h 2 «d f; Inlet. the Whitman! Como *" l
1 1, _ 1a \ u 1 1-4. > : . w '1
" J’s “~43 7.. | I . V + f; 'I f '. u
- -.;,~ ,2». .. : mg. I 4 ‘
4": 1 .‘1 » 1 1 z ‘ ,1; .g 5 u-un'u-uma-po-u—ua
~ -‘ ~‘ .7 V ‘ 3- ~ ,r; ; : ﬂ-v-O- ww-mg 1
:_ ”(1 V. ; . 1 1x 1 V .. 1. 51 p—ﬂ- oﬁum. 1)
v ~ ,‘ . I :~ ~- -\ 1 """"""" - .1" .1 , . -
V ' ‘r‘ 1 1! 1 \ A- *5 5,3. ‘7 ..#M%.. 12-»
- A _‘ ‘. 14' ’ . f \ ‘ *1 -muww. nuns. ' . 1k-
‘ tt a‘ . n .V' 21* 71V ’1 1 _ I 1‘.1!‘ “\
i :'- 1 r ,‘ f .=' ' "" mmuw 5 ' "r. 1‘ "
V . 1 r - ~ .. , .
1 , ‘ ,1 ~ I V I. V? - . Ema?” _,.<l_ NV, 3“-
‘ ' :kA V ‘ . ‘ ' ,.\1 (‘l' m @g‘" {I 1§~.1t¢‘—‘— .‘,
‘ ‘ ~ 7 I‘ll -- ‘ r} .u..._..... -' x :- /
§- 113 1 ‘ ‘ .7 1 1,14 J: r“; 1 1 I . u *.w£ 1 V f 1 11’/
3"”. v_ Air ‘ |D‘ "1 'f w A‘, :Ul- A mt“. ‘ {z ‘ 3‘ It.
.’ A 1 l y _ 1 '\1 ',‘ J "1 1 1 - * 1,71; ‘1’“ 1} . . u
‘ - \1 _, 39%;. r -- ﬂ .»,.-»:9 =1 . .
1 ‘1‘. 13.11921.“ :3:g§-..:ffxru( g“ '1 1 «';_+ ‘ ’. e; 5‘1“ ,.»,. 1" _ E . 1 1 Jlr'v’ly’ilfk ,1".:§1.;\£91
~ .- » v i . ‘ .. .».;»;v- *4 ~ -.. ' 2-1; V ‘
1 ‘13! -12 1111.11 - _ :3 ‘. r, 1‘ 1 . 1 I. . w. 1 ’ :11» , / 1 \_* , "1" .A
‘ " . .1 .i<" .. 1 ‘4 .j ,1 'th); w _ .. _ . V; 1. -
‘LJ ‘ f' Hi. I ’03?“ ‘Q ' ' x -. 1,1111%. ‘ 3' - ' x’”], Q I ' . 1". .fé.“
1 - 1‘ .1 r 1, $ . « w n 1 »
11 v . 1 ,I: ’5‘ 17 v" 1 . .11.; i1 '1". ' 1 1/ _,.I .V 19 Z ‘ k." .1 N
. ‘ “v“7‘ .1 > .‘J V > - -‘ ' , / ‘ V ‘ 0 I > ‘ ' — ‘ l‘ ‘ “
4... . m .x 1r"; «a .n- .~ . r ‘ — ﬁx a
‘ ‘ V a ’ ‘—- .~ "" .».’ . " ' ' ‘ a ‘m
" \' 1; 3414-: _ ' 1. -V ‘ 1114K- ».' _. t; " g 3 7 ‘ 11?: 1-; 1.
.1 >1 “7. 1 _1 . u: I .1 , g 1 1
'~ 1‘ 3‘5 ‘ v» f _ "L '1‘!» . .,_,‘ “ .' .2363!”- tt'; , r.
--. ,, - —- ' _ - 1 ,3 , - , Vr~ . - ‘1 sac.»
\. V . 1—.--.~ " q. .. ; -. ~ ,1
“'~' :5 ”V - :4
. 'u 5 1 '1 ~ 1__~1‘._ J" _'n,
‘ l ' 'I ‘—|, 4" . 1 .1‘. 11 1
I’% 1- 11’ , . ~ 1 . 1;;13 1 11 1 “7“x 1 1 635
“ 'r l 'A ‘ , 1', ' r; H. 1 ~' H; I 2 7 :1;:4 2;, * ' "2", '~ .‘ - . ‘f’air f, ('5’;/‘ I l 1.. 11" I: 1
“ A ‘ r ; i ‘7 -. 3"=e~;:~c.: ' V
1 ‘ g 1 a» )7 . J: K r ‘2'..' ‘ " ?
h .. _‘ uw—sc—‘n‘ﬂ '( , A " ' . W
l .v' -- V ._ (A- .
1' ‘V‘ ") \V "1 2:“ ,
~, ‘ , . , 1 ‘ \ ‘ r
i - .. “ , 1 #3? ~ '- - ' 1'
@VhM—m- ,..~ 4 ~ “W " ' “ ‘ " “ , V f X 42-1 1.41 ‘ ‘. 4‘ .- 1.

. . . . . . 80
laughs much, 01‘ plays near 1t, 1t W111 ram” (F 1g111e 5). —
Figure 5: George Gibbs, Sketch oquuamish “stone image” at Squamish ﬁshery 0n the F raser
River, 9 March 1 85 8.
“ ' ~‘- " ‘ - -~';..;. v.” "’rt".‘-..'-" 2"”.m" "- . 5'1” ‘ '7 , ,v ‘ . .m' {:7‘ La ....;. ., 3;; -_
‘- '. » ‘ ' ‘ -;Y‘?;§g‘- enixsggzai'ﬁvﬁ‘ﬁ' "Y, m... :aﬁiﬁ’ifusﬁ‘m; f,~,-,xu:;3'.§v‘§12.~..3‘f
- ' ' -: ‘ - .. 1 t '..*.~:~"r:>‘. ’- . . .;- ' . ' ' ”gm; ‘ 3‘"? :3 Vi '- "- r .‘
. ‘ ‘ ‘ r " «a ”#95 .. w 33?? 'Kéf‘nf ~rt"-ra:':-"~.‘.‘~;'?~"3c‘3~.. a"
‘ " " ‘ ' ' ’ -‘~ - 1» - 1:..5’9-2 u
7 A . I . . " - " -'-ér‘?«~1‘.«é ?
-L,‘ ;. l' . “l";-‘A’f.1‘..."a.'t 9.‘ . . . : ' 0’ ‘.AI.: .. ">‘."; :34? ‘3’
1' "5 ‘ I ' ‘ ‘3‘! 'Of..t"|v..£ 7.! 'v‘. £311." ‘- l 1' :fti' . '13:???‘1
.‘ ' " ‘6: l' ”'7‘ :"":" f‘ '1 'f . :O-‘O. 7 _".-'." 9.. “f 3,531.51} ’3'“)?
-. ‘. . ' ‘ ‘ ~~ ’3 ' «1‘3 1 ‘ " .7- ' 2.5I'.‘f-:’r‘§;_11~.-'3‘.
. a , ,- 4 n. » ¢ .17.». .4 .;‘.,-.,,~ : ~43
. ...~. Lr.”'P.:“-‘thz. ‘ '..$r*a‘.-f.‘ 'f . . i. 3.. 1:..'( u. :f.'-.; \;$‘...}
'0 ‘7 ~ ‘5’”: . ' . .. V ‘ - ?J’JCX 1' V ‘8. . ' . h.“ . -. .. "ttiili‘. 1..."
_. 7." ‘ ‘ 4")" ’ ‘ m “at ‘2': A ~- "I": «c’~?"’.‘.~:;:i'.","":f ‘ W ' ;.-“r-.§?‘:.‘3L 3}:
. ‘ '~ -.-. .1 .. . ':-’*—- ' ‘ “ ...-“1'5.-'77“."
' Jinn. (6.0“ l r " -- ' :'-'.“.£‘A:.~':,‘.{ ‘359 z‘ #7" ‘ ‘ " 1 .:‘a -"J;‘ " 1.. " '
‘ . L. _ . , -. 1". In wt 0 o . ‘ “'fffﬁ - .‘-" . . ‘-
" 17¢ ' ' 9" / J 10-79%». 1A5; mm 4- 'Aé‘...’ mﬁwm‘w
, ' m ‘ l? ““7 Mo. ﬂaggm’ u: ‘ "a '5; '5 ' 12¢ . i“ .1
1" ' ' ~ ~' ., ',’F' "7"" M' o é‘MM
ﬂab! HI. . . - -‘ . f‘ ‘ .-’::-‘.'-";.x
' , ' . . . . ‘ 1 :~ 5. 1‘ ', ‘-’ I ‘I. ":e‘.‘:‘f:»_.',:l."1 . 3
‘. ' . _, 1. .3 ° 1 ' ' '1 Z' ' , Z 1;! 3" ‘i;"v'-?.f€‘u _2 .‘
80 Gibbs, G. (1858). Sketch: “Stone image of a S’houyahm, at the Skwawmish ﬁshery on Frazer’s River,” 9 March
1858. State Historical Society of Wisconsin. Archives Division, Gibbs Family Papers 1743-1918. US. Mss Y, Micro
1117, Photo Lots 3696, 3697. Madison.
'—
Squamish T radin’onal Use and Occupancy Smdy. F inaI Report 35

" ‘7 _ ' I:;‘ ’1'; 1' 32mm- -‘L..-r". u.“ u“ -_ "ii?”
-.--.+ ; - m1; —' >2. . W _ .
5*} 3. 1‘ “9 (43334": p. '
I ... \ ' , .v .« ' '1 1'" H3 “ .
: I ‘ I . 3 1 ¢a ‘; , \ I ' ._~
‘. ‘ ' " 3 -‘ g} ‘ ‘7; ~
.5 ‘ ﬂ ‘ '1 g ' S’I‘P . .
r I . ‘ : 1 v . " ‘ " '- r‘ 4
.‘_ 1I- o ,7 , l- b - " ‘ I [1:5 "lh'x- I
- L ., . -... n f- \ .1 3 m “3331‘ f
.‘I ‘ d . ' ‘ -I .u .1 ,~" _~ ‘3 U", f ,
z ..9 “ 3.- 2- 2, j .. v“, ‘7' ‘ -3 ‘7" ,
- 1. . -.. . - 35.»: - .. - - . o .
1 .1“ , , ., __ _—1 . .-_ q . , . . .. ’ ,§ :1‘ . . 1:1. r; . I
I.’ "'r ‘ ' ’-. 3 o. .- . f ‘m . ' ‘ 3 ‘ 1 % r _ ‘. _‘_.Cr‘ ‘ ' _ f‘, L- 1 ‘ ; ‘ .
i". f . ‘.‘ w lbw. J‘“ ’ ¢ Ep’;“' _ g a . . ‘
.“'-l." ~ ‘ . . - ' ‘ 3.. .' L1. 3." .. " . . ’ - ' "
r 3 - - - - . . ;< , ,. . -
' xx». . .
. J- .' _I\‘ _& <,‘ 77 1-4;1‘. ‘ﬁy 1—,:— " _ .. ‘7‘? 7“. :-5 I . a
‘ *' .~ x 3 .3}: . 4—7-1112. " 7.31:3”, - ¢ .1. . 3 - 9;... I:
Mr _ .. . 7‘9 ‘ 7; -. J19. . 3 ;A J «ﬁ l§
3 {a m . 3V _- . 4 . -3 1% _ I}. 1. ’5‘ . 1* . s . ff f. ‘ ff} -
r 1 "v ”317"“ 7‘ ' 3 r . E _ o q ‘ ‘ I..‘,"*~:; I T" ‘
a . ‘- .1 , 1 ’ - ‘
J II -w ' . ‘ 3 41"," ‘_ .1 , .9: -‘_ -_ '.‘ ) ;
l ' 1 i - I #415114}; ‘ i a ﬁ‘} ,‘g
.9 . 77’: . ' ‘ _ _.
t . a _ ‘ v ’ _‘ .1. _ 3 , l
i ll . l‘ 1'. .1 ﬂy 43% ”'12:? ; ‘ - 1:1; 1' ‘ i
. 'v ‘ "' -‘ .x’f'i. ' w’" 3
.‘ ‘ ‘ _ ~ 7 o ' ' ’3‘ V I
#743334, F _ :9 _ 91).“. 3 3 3 if __ I gi’z'fb
‘ 1.". ' I - ﬂ“ ’ J . . ‘ I | . - L15? ' ‘
r . v" :i‘ .‘r'- - N 1 - _ l C‘ . - ‘71".Lg . 1
-. 3 ” "x , b N*«er J - J
'~. . . . . .- c f!» “'“=*2:t ' . . ' ' I '
g. __ "‘1‘.‘ ?(?v '1 I .33: . \ a - J . h
V .~ A H h ‘3‘" l - 11:11; l ' _ _ - «I
' " . '1’ - -- 1-14” 5- ‘6..le - - ’7 *   ‘_'.'- 1-_ ‘r f :2; ﬁt”‘ri__ , ,; __, __‘__VL=’- 3h
3 - _ ‘ .. .. . .~ ~~""“L . M—J _ ﬂ.»- 1 1534

I —
Squamish T radirional Use and Occupanq! Study, F inal Report 40

In March 1863, G. Turner surveyed the Government Resewes at C oal Peninsula and 011 the
north side of First Narrows (C apilano River). —
Available records indicate that the C olonial Government created four Indian Resewes in
Bun‘ard Inlet, though there is later reference to a ﬁfth (at Seymour). In Febnlaly 1868.,

J oseph Tmtch wrote to the C 01011ial Secretaly recommending that two Resewes be

I —

' —

' —

' —
Squamish T raditional Use and Occupancy Snldv, F inal Report 41

.7' ﬂ "£7 !- . ‘
‘ﬂ - E? M
2.’.‘ ‘
‘ ' ' 6
k g
‘ r-
. ‘3‘ .
V‘ ~ . O ‘7' ‘ '
5 L9 ‘ ‘9 “ 4 ’4 w-
, 6‘" < , ' ﬁ 6&3
I 21") ‘q , "I. 3‘ ’1.‘,7 '
:pA r - I ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ I.J-.
- -$ ‘7 f" .
“x
,‘ . . a"
.»- , r. 7/4" 2.» ~77 ,
7' ‘ ’ +A*A‘A¢ “ ' -‘ ‘ - l . 1‘ 4
; 7‘.’ ‘- . " ‘. V.V -’ w
A ‘ ’ ‘ v1 . 3"", :~ §(‘f5l \ " c l! .7' ,
. V“ ‘ ‘ 3 " A "77‘; “A .' 4;
- , I 9’94 ‘- "" "j ‘,f~. ,
«~~- _ a»;- «I, ‘ gr : . w sx~¢¢ .. ;
, '..r-v. ‘,_,d " ,‘, ‘, ~ ‘ .\r ‘7 . ,.
‘ ‘.‘ ' -'¢. 9L$ h‘. ’3“ r ‘q y’QIv’,f“ , 5 , / ‘9 r’ 1"
a "- ‘ -- " " ' V ‘2‘ N w i
k 9 "'r " ' "4‘“ "( . _,‘
1': ,- . “’4’ V -' . i‘d‘-'{
. “vmﬁ-ﬁmhﬁr ‘ 4': ~.
D V \7 $27) ‘1' '.*w 7 ‘5 ’7

- , m ‘ -_ . § . ‘ J 1‘ '
- . 7 . ”I - 3..
\ M v‘f,‘ ’ ., - ,
‘ . i a _
"V I l
‘.‘,: Ji. I ‘ .
I ' - ‘ »’ . -
w s . ‘ ~
I , ‘ L ‘ ‘
. , , ‘ v .
‘ I. ’rr 5 a ‘
' '1 ‘ ‘m ‘
- y--‘ - , -- ~ - '.. I
"‘ f. ‘ ‘H. , ‘ ‘
.1 n _" '1 V .- :r
’ ‘-‘ [43-3 ' ‘ ’
x l ‘ ~
\ I - . I ‘ ‘ ‘
'1 w 1‘“ > N
T I 1 1 r“ ‘
r o ' 5‘ ‘ h I I
y'V' ‘
Q . 7 - _ _
O .
.“ . . I ' I l
‘ . ._ ‘
\ ' I p
, ‘ l ' |
‘ ' ‘ — 0 x ,
w _ y 5
‘ ‘
‘ ‘ l .. A ‘ ,__ i '
, t ».n s . -, w ‘K‘. * g ‘ ‘
9’1 ' i ’. _ ' .. . .
‘ A! . 1 2' ‘ ‘ 4.
‘ ' ° '1 l \-
, .u ‘ _ ‘n
4“ "i , , ‘_‘_A _ ._.o‘ i i h
. c -' , . "I -‘~ . '3‘
. x I 7.4 - ~ - -
' - ‘ m It 1' f
w I _ " . n. , . _ V .
1" o ‘ _ ‘1' . I , .
' .' ' l \ I‘ ." A ' .
‘ ‘3 ' 3' L -
‘ ‘.

F igure 11: A House on West 7" Avenue, the Granville Street Bridge, C.P.R. Kitsilano Trestle
Bridge, and Indian Village 0fSnauq, ca. 1890 (Photo by W Chapman; City of Vancouver
Archives, Van Sc P58)
‘ . ‘ '1‘ ‘ f ht. . -I'. 3"?" --"‘ ‘r-- A ~
4 -' C ' -‘ _ ” . ,, ,-
" . ' ?‘A'H‘ . -r‘ H ' "HI m I'M |1!‘ ‘ 'v'p1l“";v -~ v~-‘-v—. LT‘ ‘L‘n‘aq
'K‘ﬁi i. ‘ - g V _. -. .4”.r ‘n.’qﬁmm‘wq-“mmmmgﬂ' ‘ ~. '-. . m; "t ‘1 'v. . 3' tr Inmwmawor.
. , \ _ ' ﬂi ‘ ’ 3 '--
' G
- * 9 "~ t. «.49 “11,;
‘ «f: a ‘1- 3-“ 7833].;- -4 if "n .
r 7‘ ,433 B '4 ’ -—%» ‘ " ’ ﬁ'r ,.__ ' _ - 4v-- .
“ 1.7‘:::_- ,7..._.-:I. j y 4'7? ; " ,. _ “ ..,. ‘
, ._ " ' _ ' 4 ~......a"' , *' _ - , . - " V :
'—
Squamish T raditional Use and Ocatpancy Study, F inal Repon 48

A - ,. -‘H.‘ ,_, ,‘ w .z r - ~ '- '. V. ‘ ‘4
1/. J ‘.-’\/. V .' “'I‘ > \y .2 ~ ‘ I ‘1')" V I . ‘:’: ~ ‘ [’3‘ \- W V“ .’ ‘, ' ‘ ' I ‘ 'ﬂvs‘ I
.' x: ,/ .. .- , :Ezt'w—St ' ' . 1 a ., R . N , Q . .~ ‘, .1 n ; .
g ,, \YJ . ‘ (.3\ o k h ‘ . ' L ‘ ' .. ‘JU dar‘ V't ‘ ( , . ‘ "
L" ‘ 1‘ z ' 0‘35 ' . . ~ - s - eVeu l ; 1 ‘ ‘ 1 1’". / 1/ \. ‘
‘* l AC} hk'eM-f‘lR‘d-E ¢5S/* KGIM, , < . , ‘ "I \ 't ,A’ ‘ ' "‘
7 h V ' \Sl‘tlu‘ '7 . : I I ‘1'?)1 _ . ‘ ’ru' ”Ox ~' K? {uﬁn- I} If t ,/ " '. 1’ v ‘ f "r
. / , "AIW'CVQE , , . . p. ‘ “1 a , ’_‘- ‘- n 3’ MW.‘ 14“ c L} . 4”
.'/ h- 3 ." .- ”"91 :- ' drmwbt .7 ' , A ‘ .
«3'». ‘ {I ‘A N.-. f ' :“h l I J; i ‘ "A; "~ . J. A ‘ ‘- | ' 'V. y) I
J 0‘ . \' .h- é(j\- r“ Mu ii ‘. ‘ A‘" I U Dir. ,»_\t r ‘ i" a .. . ‘
A) ' _ .0 s ‘ ‘ > U x x ’ .v "iEf r“ "—J_ k - r l‘ﬂr — P ‘1
_ \gO . - l ' v _. ‘ ' ‘ O ‘ ‘ ,7‘
/ 7 «2‘2“: ' 3 '7 _ C. ‘ ‘F ”xgﬁg‘ mm- ?ey "Oh’rpk
. /.v. 7 grid (“[81 '91-‘75?" ‘ ‘ ‘ro' »," (L ~ I "W '
I‘"" ' .“JV ‘1‘ A, $ 3 r U) . - . “L La 7
— r/ ~ {£53. .. "p v] ' .—— 3 gm. ,9, ~' 1Map|ewood
- A’ ‘ , ' S ‘ . E“ L, - ‘, 1 -; . E ‘ ‘- ' ‘ a .
M _ 41h‘8}:‘£ﬂ~{ ”0‘ \A ‘ t. '.'7 — ‘ny: .- "r ; (P ~ " ‘ ‘5 ' ‘ ‘ g i . ‘
‘ | ;“°_ -,_. L, . b—rmw G':S\’-',U"St«v~U-2 ‘0) ‘ J ‘7 l V I
x - 1 ‘1." 2'2 "ar+—1~-~s «L: A . ‘ ) ~ g ' -- -
~ ’0‘ z - r ‘ _ ‘ , , , A, ’ _ p ‘
‘3’ ‘- -'r< -—~ C QﬁAh ' '- (:3! 3 "Rd p‘er,t,S : --. ‘ ‘ : i L u
> r - ,onomg ,4 4 . L4???” L, ‘ ‘ gm --. ~ + - —- ——~ ~ U
T\_ ‘: "_"x‘ , > ._ ‘ POI. \ A ?Cx {FL}; w k __‘_ ‘ K ’ inc?” ‘ "I ‘ . ‘ ; .' ‘kh‘
¥.,_‘\ ‘7 _ , _J‘ ‘v 4 ‘4 A “’ ’ ,v " ‘ ,.
~\ V. .I . . w . , z‘ = .w- 4 ,4. . .t
‘0"; _ _ - x l .7 4"- ". ~ _‘ v I ’ A v4 O‘VS‘K‘A‘. . - ﬁv ’1 . ‘
‘ . \_. . __ v,._— —_ . “—‘<~.‘\ - “\.."V-( C» " ‘I - ‘ t - 4
7 -. - ““1 m yum \‘ .~ , 4 :1 .4; '
A . ~ , w, ~. -- - . .r~. '» a v 4'» ‘ ‘~r ‘
.‘ { 7-,.‘9, ' 7.331. V \_ " ,. . '14, ‘ ,7 M a ! EVDOA'al'fsrxrfivb’ ', :3, 1 O.
. _ . 'i- .3 ‘ ,-‘ '5 j . -. v . 1 "r. ‘ I _‘ .... ; .
‘ “n - k 4?; ' 33'; "f-‘g'ﬂv‘SL u ’ '. .a" a ~~ ’ ' " L 3L" '1 ‘ ' ‘
‘ r C' ‘ . .x f: "’2‘ _ A y f - . - '\
’ - > 'm‘ ’ ' :x‘.’ Ohms ‘ '5 C - '9 / " l' V ' ‘ ' "¢Q ‘ ‘
_ _ .043 ._- , wag. 7 .1 .‘,‘ .. x, 1 .30 ' - - \
, . . m / t . f r 3 V- / ’6. . ~ J. ' u. a
. ‘ "r" x; a ‘ ‘ » ‘3-“ » ‘L ‘ . ’.',«;:J-‘" \ 7 - '-. ,*,-' .2
,«g .‘ -. gg- ., 4 1‘ - t :- x g pr“ w 4 L
-' .' .’ ‘ l" U '},‘L-|f - 1 —-v;' “ - " r 3 ‘ Q3” . R w . . - u _ A_
’7 ,r ' ' 1' "(2’ ." |#9“ rm“ 3' .mk r- 4?) 'W‘Uln " 9"?! 53° 3" ‘ "9 " ’1 : ' ‘ 4
«’5. .m." i: . ,~ ‘ r d Gown‘bla'sa - ~ “4 . . 35‘ pan - 7 w' ‘ i' ~ '-' . v
c. - ,(« 1 ~ ‘ Q ”:1: ~. Ma . ' ‘ '
“*- rv .2 4. «M. :26 9 .-. 2 a v ,» 7 W
‘._ ‘; 'J' ,1 'LL' 'Y'Z .:- jay Sta 1 SE... <A_.__J‘ ‘l v "_ r. ,’
-, u r‘ ‘ '3 ‘ -‘l ,' .‘ ﬂ, X L < : . X .
‘. »j'" &_ ‘ I L “e 1“ "ﬁ'. A. J 0, '.\ 7‘ '1‘ l) i H . 1 4" V . I
~_ _ [V1, I ‘ V. . i‘. " .. ‘ ﬁ “ ,‘ S 2" V. {a f v
’A "I ’ - ' " S A” “ ‘J .‘Q‘m a X ""1"
[I ‘ .’ - 7.? . A Q.' 5 I ‘ k l 1?, (-1) ' i .753, a , \
' ‘ . . 4, . n ;_ , Qt _. ff; Ir.
9! I- 3x... .,. 3 —, \«2. ”,2.“ . \ *‘ ~
0—“. l. . ’ "A _ 1’ i ‘ (7, ‘.I ‘ -E?“. 1. )1'? i) . _
_ - ' VV " n' - w 7 ' ' I - ; é.“ : . " II ?o!‘ ' ”"1? .1 k.‘
7 Q " .. ““4“ _'v ‘ﬂ J 14' . (”o‘- ‘- 5". 5 7» ‘.
'N=‘--“'~ d ‘f . . r ‘ g‘éa ‘ ‘ .. x14
‘ “"S'I-A “-«—';~4 w 9" . :3
‘4.“ 53 :1? ?'I31EI Gucg‘e '. (x ‘l x -- , Th
753p~ {D ' I\)()\ k Hi i:
I—gw—y Image fl 7531 5 P'Q‘." "Ct": 3f R'msh Cniumbé k
re
“.a 2000 7 Ir‘r‘xagery Date: 4‘ EHZIZIEIQ Li: L: 4915:3319? m E 546364.05 m H rate»; I] m 936 alt 3.2-1 er

River, in the general area of the Squamish Nation C onsultation Area, are also included in
the SQKM TUOS Analysis that follows. Other archaeological sites located along the
lower Fraser River (including the 150 m buffer) may also have been used by Squamish
Nation members dming travel, trade, or other activities in this region. For reference,
archaeological sites that fall into this latter categmy are identiﬁed by site n1nnbe1‘(e.g.,
Dth-4) and are listed in Appendix B; they are not portrayed on the Proj ect Maps in
Appendix A. —
—

Archaeological site infmmation for the SQKM TUOS was obtained from RAAD
(Remote Access to Archaeological Data) of the Archaeology Branch, Province of British
C olumbia, and added to the TUOS database and GIS records.

The SQKM TUOS project bibliographic records include digital copies of archaeological
site record forms obtained from the Archaeology Branch. The SQKM TUOS GIS
mapping for archaeological sites is also derived from shapeﬁles obtained ﬁ‘om the
Archaeology Branch —
—

T UOS Information Source Analysis

Table 1 presents infonnation for sites included in the SQKM TUOS Analysis, presented
according to information source. Although information about most TUOS sites was
obtained from one infmmation source categmy, some sites inc01porate infonnation from
two of the source categoﬁes.

—
W

T able 2: T UOS Database F ields

Field Name Description

SCHS# A unique catalogue number for each TUOS site.

Field ID Other identiﬁcation number(s) associated with a TUOS site, such as
an Archaeological Site designation (Dth-6), a site number from a
project interview (SQKM_04:016), or a site from a Place Names Map
(BK:2 l).

A verbal description of the geographic location of the site.
The Squamish name of the site (if available).

Site Name The English translation of the Squamish name for the site (if

Translation available).

Activity The classiﬁcation of the site at the “Activity” level, as described in
the “Site C lassiﬁcation” section (below). An individual site may be
classiﬁed as including several “Activities.”

Entity The speciﬁc resources or items f01md, harvested or used at the site, or
associated history, as described in “Site C ategory” (below). A site
may include several “Entities.”

Site C ategory Categories for Theme Map(s) for the SQKM TUOS Analysis, as
described in “Site C lassiﬁcation” section below. A site may be
included in more than one “Theme Map” category.

Information Source categories for where site information was obtained; limited to

Source one or more of: Archaeology; Interview; Written Reference; or
Map/Archival Map.

Reference Citations for sources of information about the site. Example:
Bouchard, Randv, and Dorothy Kennedv. Squamish II-Idian Land Use
and Occupancy, F inal Draft Submitted to the Squamish Indian Band
Council December I 4th, 1986. Victoria: British Columbia Indian
Language Project, I 986.

Map ID Interview maps or other mapping data where source information
about the site was recorded. Examples: SQKM_02; Dth-6 Site
Form Map; RAAD Shapeﬁle.

C ommentary about site beyond that included in other ﬁelds.
618 expression of a site as one of: Point; Line; Polygon.

Study Area Study Areas that a site intersects with or is located within.

Date on which the most recent data entry occurred for a site record.
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F inaI Report 69

Project GIS and Maps
The mapping of TUOS sites for SQKM TUOS Analysis was recorded:

0 during previous Squamish research and proj ects;

0 from SQKM TUOS proj ect intelviews;

0 from the proj ect’s literature review;

° from place names maps;

0 from archival maps; and

0 from infonnation obtained from archaeological records.
—
—
—
— The
GIS data was checked and cross—referenced for con'espondence with previously existing
database records in the Squamish TUOS Database. All TUOS site locations recorded in
the project’s GIS are linked to sites recorded in the project’s Traditional Use and
Occupancy Site Database by the “SCHS #” ﬁeld.
The Proj ect Maps presented in Appendix A were produced by — and
portray the TUOS sites in the SQKM TUOS Analysis. The Project Maps provided to
Squamish Nation as project deliverables, described in more detail later, are listed in Table
3.
T able 3: SQKAI T UOS Maps
W

SQKM TUOS Analysis Results
T UOS Site C Iassiﬁcation
The cun'ent project focuses on SQKM TUOS Analysis sites in the project Study Area and
along the lower Fraser River, as previously descn'bed. - sites in the SQKM TUOS
Analysis have been classiﬁed based on three database ﬁelds (Activity, Entity, and Site
C ategmy) for the pulposes of data management, site analysis, and presentation of
inf01mation on Project Maps. The project database can be searched and queried based on
any of its ﬁelds, but most importantly on one or more of the following classiﬁcation
ﬁelds.
Activior
“Activity” deﬁnes, at a general level, a type of occupancy or use categmy for each TUOS
site. An individual TUOS site may include more than one “Activity,” as it may satisfy
the criteria for one or more of the “Activities” listed in Table 4, below. “Activities” at a
TUOS site might include, for example: Dwelling; Preparation; Burial; Traditional
Histmy. Each of these tenns describes an “Activity” that occurs, or occun‘ed, within the
defmed geographical TUOS site b01mda1y. The “Activity” ﬁeld pennits quelying of the
database for the number of sites based on a speciﬁc resom‘ce, species or use category.
— Table
4 provides brief deﬁnitions of the various TUOS site “Activities.”
—

ﬂ ﬂ
W

Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study. Final Repon "f

ﬂ ﬂ
I:_:_
I:_I:_
Site E n 1in
The TUOS sites have also been classiﬁed at a more speciﬁc level, as each database
record also lists the various “Entities” recorded for a site. The “Entity” database ﬁeld
provides details of the resom‘ces hawested 01‘ features located at each site. For example,

a site classiﬁed in the “Activity” ﬁeld as a Fishing site might include the following
entlies in the “Entity” database ﬁeld: Sahnon; C oho Sahnon; Trout; Hening; 01' Prawns.
”4 Crabs can be associated with either Fishing or Seafood Gathering Activity. depending on context.
W

The “Entity” ﬁeld also pennits quelying of the database for the number of sites based on
a speciﬁc resource, species or use categmy.
T heme Maps
All TUOS sites have been classiﬁed, at the most general level, according to six
“Themes,” or Site C ategoﬁes, that facilitate the presentation of infmmation on the Project
Maps. Table 5 lists the project “Theme Maps” and the “Activities” associated With each
Theme Map. TUOS sites are often multi-pmpose, may be classiﬁed lmder more than one
“Activity,” and may appear on more than one “Theme Map.” The Project Theme Maps
are provided in Appendix A.
—
ﬂ %
|:I| '. |=
E A
I —
I —
—
I —
I —
I —
W

'—
Squamish T mdfn'onal Use and Occupanm' Smdy. F ma] Repon 75

Sguamz’sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Smdy. Final Repon 7C?

Sqlumn‘sh T mdfn'onal Use and Occupancy Snuir. Final Report 77

S'quamz’sh T mdfn’onal Use and Occupanqv Smdy. Final Repon "F

Board File No: OF—Fac—Oil-T260-2017-10 01
NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
IN THE MATTER OF
NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD

HEARING ORDER MH-048—201 8

TRANS MOUNTAIN PIPELINE ULC
WESTRIDGE DELIVERY LINE RELOCATION

AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD INGLIS

I, Richard Inglis, Consultant, of 2250 Central Avenue, Victoria, in the Province of British

Columbia, SWEAR (OR AFFIRM) THAT:

I . I am the sole proprietor of Inglis Consulting and have extensive experience in the ﬁeld of
First Nations anthropology and ethnography. I have completed numerous reports on First
Nations traditional use and have appeared as an expert witness on several occasions. As such
I have personal knowledge of the matters herein deposed to except where stated to be on
information and belief, and whereso stated I believe them to be true.

2. I have a Masters in Anthropology and have worked as an anthropologist for the National
Museum Of Man (now Canadian Museum of History) and the Royal BC Museum. Attached
to this afﬁdavit and marked as Exhibit “A” is a true COpy ofmy curriculum vitae.

3. I was retained by and prepared a report on behalf of the Squamish Nation entitled “Squamish
Traditional Use and Occupancy Study: Final Report” (the “‘Report”). Attached to this
afﬁdavit and marked as Exhibit “B” is a true copy of the Report with redactions.

4. The Report was prepared by me 01* under my direction and control and is accurate to the best
of my knowledge and belief.

SWURN (OR AFFIRMED) BEFORE ME, at /

El iL-‘rﬂﬂ 4., , British Columbia, on this / '

- ﬂy 0f Liguat. 2018 '
¢- . 'ICHARD IN L13
1: 1.]?! '
_ A C inmlsai-ﬂ' r {11' aking Aﬁidavits liar
Briti'at Columbia. r . E
meama— BNLLI
mower Puma
. JHJ‘I'DRU—‘x. 1-1:: UH”. 1011 I

9
(2017). ‘Wet’suwet’en First Nation Traditional Use and Occupancy Site (TUOS)
Information and Mitigation Issues for South Houston Alternate 'Route (SHAR)
Coastal GasLink Pipeline.’ Report prepared for Wet’suwet’en First Nation 17
December 2017 (co-author).
I have also presented numerous public and university lectures, and conference papers.
9

99
F igure 13: Contemporary Rock Weir F ishing 0n the xwmelchstn (Capilano Riverf 61
"'i‘i'ir'- - T ' - ~59“ - _ " ‘1: _ _“'""“.-...~ ....
. ll. ' . " r ' r '. '. _'.
1- .l" - -._' --'-.-I£ I._L_‘_1‘i F ‘ler-
.- ”,2” :1. - ' _ i " '1
ﬁilﬂ :l - - ' .I-.-:. '
.. . i4:- -
I _ __.._--"" "I ‘ - ,
11.4%? «I _ % ' 1h.-
r- (f r
f:_ . “1. 15‘ if I - t
F. rura-
“mi ' ' .

161 Nick Procaylo (2014). “Salmon Fishing on the Capilano River,” T he Province, 15 August 2014.
11.1.11}ii'e’r‘rﬁi‘ti‘lﬁ!-{:11*FEFEJJiiJEEQJWDE-ﬂﬁfh£53119?5.3.5."'5%.!.IJJ.1!-l.|_¥.*_ﬁ_5.ili.llg"£311].[€919.1'Lﬂiﬁiié.I'rT'Juﬂ.lglllﬂﬁlﬂﬂﬂﬂlﬂ (accessed 22
May 2015).

I—
I —
_—___—___—_—__
Squamz’sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 93

PAGES 94-96 OF THE REPORT HAVE
BEEN REDACTED

101
- The potlatch ban was repealed through an amendment to the Indian Act in
'7“ Williams (2014): 88, paragraph 5563-5566.
”7 SQKM_01, Interview, 2015.
. Squamish TraditionaZ Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 97

102

1951-178 —

Travel between Squamish and other Coast Salish communities was and remains

signiﬁcant to the maintenance of family ties. —

”3 Tennant (1990): 215.
I —

. '—

'—
I—

Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 98

103
F igure 14: War Canoe Racing at Ambleside, Summer 2014. Note the busy waterways,
. . 133
mcludmg cargo vessels.
h - k - _ [1%. I _ i _ . I. - ‘. I
. .r' L: . . . .":"-_',IJ-I. . _ -"".— _ . _ .
_ n. ‘ - a_l; - 1. = . :_'L_._.;__ '
. Z7 ‘-'.;. " " _aat'ff’ ﬂﬁhi '- ;
1 ' __ - _ . -._ —‘_:_.__ i ._‘L _‘I: ~.—... :1.- -. '_ﬂ: I
...- ..a. a. m :=:':' _ 1:13“?
I . -:-. - _. - .... .. ---1--- -.,-=.lilr*' 'a'ir'-' -
_ _ r...‘ r. _ . . ....- _ _1-‘1__. J. ‘1 .- :l- ‘ L, ...f'd'r '~I!.'.‘_'.' .._:_F
..'-—"'-- v- ﬂmg-rw -- -—..._, ' _'.'n-.-.-.—,- -.-'*—u---2"": ' ' _ ,'..-":.__.'
:-- 9.1".”4-54r'1I-‘f'yr _.1_*_;__'.:, rain 'f'rii'riiaﬁ"; : ﬁr.” '- '_ __ 1
+ ~12: - "' ' . - - m-‘-311_-1LE.' .- ..- #3:“ -=:;.-.
""-.1'F'r. ......z ' -- . 19.; " - "31' .H—' 1: 'Zi-J-T: ~_ .. 3-5;.”“7- -.' .1
l_.-*:::'F’j:':'.‘-"="-*' mi” '- ”ﬂ" +1}: _ -' -.'I:.-.*' -‘-' -"'-"* ﬂ' “2""; '
:.--- iﬁikm _-:_-. $31.1. J -.__ .:_1 . __ _.'_'..;.:.J .-:n-...i._._ -_ ﬁ__;__,_+__ _‘I _ ..
' mﬁwﬁﬁh «r; 1;; . " “saanaizfi. -..
._:.-a-_-'-_L- "" H Tul- ' ‘ —-—- . ' .. _ ' inn. -'.'- 3:..."
1,1 -.-¢*+r.‘ l. “1,... _ T“; t: ':"'"-"1"ﬁ':_; '___ . u -. _ _‘r' ’:::.'--:'—. 1
. 4n; . . . ‘_ __...- a "'1": .—L.... __....+ ”‘_jtﬁr -.‘l..- _._._ _ l__-.-—-' 1t- _ . _ -.-.;-|}
#ﬂi: . —q.-'-'. ___ ﬂirt? . :iI-‘h EE-E'ﬂ-i‘h': '.. 1.. ..:—..|:: uigirf . 1
_ '1, "."' -- :E. . _ ____; *_:*:r_:.;_._ -:'_'Fr¥.":'£§u- warrju-Z-r . __A: :- . ....
+.' ... F -*:_,':1'Ia . ..a .a; -" 9n??? *1—_-;- '. : z
' _ " 'WLH- f"- _.._'I ,_I. _u- "Jk'ﬁr -'_-i-_.-'+"'l"-' '.— _ I- : "'
"-"j-F'f- raw: 1.?" ,- -_"—"'- ' _ __.-
I", _-+ ‘ __-::.:i_-_-_I.‘i—I: : -.Lfiﬁ'ﬂhiﬂ rd: _:..
-- ' __ """ :ﬁhr-‘Aﬂzrﬁ‘ﬁ‘ ' 1'? —~.-- '5'! .l
.' _ z..." ,_;:L__.__ ‘ . ___ -_-_."- .'_--"'_
:r - ." "' _ __; :r. --. 1 -. - . I J
27": '. " -' '5 "-" “...: *JH .._
""'" . _ .1‘ r—-' ‘7 ﬂ"! -"'-' Jhi
P
- Fraser River
|
|
I u ' ' 3) '
83 Osler, Sanford. (2014). Sahsh Racmg Canoes on North Shore, 29 June 2014. hungﬂﬁanfﬂfﬂgﬁlgLﬂfhljgﬁﬂlﬁ-ﬂt
Ea,ELugﬂllﬁﬁﬂﬁﬂﬂhﬁjmmf (accessed 24 May 2015)-
| —
I Squamish T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 99

104
There are repeated references to the Squamish 0n the lower Fraser River in the extant
Hudson’s Bay Company (HBC) journals from Fort Langley, which date from 1827-
1830. ‘ 86 _
i
'86 Maclachlan, ed. (1998).
I —
I —
I —
I —
I —
I —
Squamz'sh T raditz'ona! Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report [00

PAGE 101 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

1 06

Report Summary
The Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council commissioned this traditional use and
occupancy study as part of their response to the proposed Kinder Morgan Trans
Mountain Expansion Project. This Report presents information relating to historical and
contemporary Squamish occupation and use of marine areas, tidal reaches, and associated
shorelines in southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower Fraser
River.
This Report draws information about Squamish traditional use and occupancy sites and
areas from contemporary proj ect interviews as well as previous studies and archival,
ethnographic, and archaeological sources. The methodology and guidelines employed for
this project are based on those established by the Province of British Columbia’s
Traditional Use Study Program.
The Study Area for this report includes the marine areas, tidal reaches, and associated
shorelines within the southern portion of Squamish Nation Territory, including southern

1 Howe Sound, Bun'ard Inlet east to Port Moody, False Creek, and Indian Arm (Figure 1).
The project’s Study Area also includes a 150 m inland buffer along all shorelines. These
are the areas that could be impacted in the event of an oil spill or cleanup operation
associated With the Trans Mountain Expansion Project.
Some Squamish TUOS sites located outside the Study Area are included in the TUOS site
analysis presented in this report (SQKM TUOS Analysis). These are TUOS sites

- identiﬁed during research as directly associated with Squamish activities or Squamish
traditional history, and are located along the lower reaches of the F raser River in the
general region of the southern part of the Squamish Consultation Boundary (Figure 1).
Squamish oral history consistently describes Squamish ties to southern Howe Sound,
Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower Fraser River. The numerous Squamish

' spiritual, settlement, resource, and travel sites and areas throughout these regions provide
evidence of Squamish occupation and use since earliest times. The documentary record
W2

1 07
identiﬁes Squamish Villages in these regions. Indian Reserves in Burrard Inlet and
southern Howe Sound were allotted to the Squamish in the late nineteenth century.
Burrard Inlet remains 21 maj 01‘ population centre for the Squamish today.
— Toayd
environmental enhancement efforts are restoring health to the marine environment in
Howe Sound. The Squamish Nation is also supporting salmon stream rehabilitation and
habitat restoration efforts underway in Burrard Inlet.

Today, Squamish people maintain strong cultural and historical ties to southern Howe
Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower F raser River. _
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 103

108
Based on “Entities” described for each site, the traditional use and occupancy sites and
areas documented in this study have been classiﬁed into relevant “Activities” and
“Categories” (Aquatic Resources; Archaeology; Culture History; Land Resources;
Settlement; and Travel). Information for all traditional use and occupancy sites and areas
has been entered into a TUOS database, and each site has been digitally mapped in a
linked GIS database. The locations of the traditional use and occupancy sites and areas
for the SQKM TUOS Analysis are illustrated on the following Project Maps in Appendix
A: All Sites; Aquatic Resources; Archaeology; Culture History; Land Resources;
Settlement Activity; and Travel Sites.
There are — traditional use and occupancy sites and areas
currently documented in the SQKM TUOS Analysis. Together, these sites illustrate the
strong aquatic orientation of the Squamish and testify to the extensive and intensive
nature of Squamish occupation and use of southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and
Indian Arm, and the lower F raser River, in the past and today.
This Report should not be considered deﬁnitive nor representing all the information on
Squamish use and occupancy, in general or relating speciﬁcally to the Study Area.
Additional research would undoubtedly add to the information and analysis presented in
this Report.
W4

10
Hearing Order 0H—001-2014
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Application for the Trans Nlountain Expansion Project
Squamish Traditional U se and Occupancy Study: F inal Report
._ W. l
1 .1' :
. i l
' I -- - ﬂ __, _ ri. I F' 1
. .. - H , __ _, . _._._.,- m“ _¢,¢_=:;-.m:-"”._. - '--" - _ 1
WV“"."""-'*'-" '.-‘t"T-*'~‘"-*'r-""'3 -- '~ - :1" ~*‘*¢ﬁ-ﬁ*—-**.."*-"=~ - .' ﬁne“:- 4 ..
r ﬁ'“"-"_ - 't'“'7.'""‘- 'h;r"2!.t£5‘ .‘:'r- . ﬂ-n ff": __"" T . {f --. .fiﬁl“ ' Pug. 'L'J
:.- T's . . “#1:“:3. J:  _'~' ' I ' "" ._ “Egg. mt
_ F' “LEE: 5 ;q="; __ -_ .:__' ":“‘. .._ __':.'____ . _'
.L T W? _
_ L .|i____,-
Khahrsahiano Magus! Jack), hi3 wife Swanann‘s (Martian), and child in dugout canoe, Kirsilano Indian Reserve, ca. 1907
(City quancouverAr-chives, CVA 1376—203)
Prepared for Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council
by This is Exhibit "B" referred to in the
_ , . _ Affidavit of Richard Inglis sworn
Tladltlons Consultlng Se1v1ces, Inc. before me at l C' E h! I 3- . BC
‘ this I day of August, 2018.
May 25, 2015 -
- . I ..
- Moﬁmﬁ BNLLIE .- AClommi Sionerfortaking
Mﬂ'mﬁ‘t’ PUB“? Affidavits within British Columbia
1913:: GM HAY 55:“: {f
'ﬂﬂTﬂmA HG 1J5] a 1113.}

109
Bibliography
Anderson, AC. (1858). Handbook and Map to the Gold Region of F razer ’s and
Thompson ’s Rivers. San Francisco: J .J . LeCount.
Anderson, A. C., A. McKinlay, et a1. (1876). “Correspondence: J 0th Indian Reserve
Commission to Lenihan, Indian Superintendent, New Westminster, 27 November
1876.” Library and Archives Canada, RG 10, Volume 3638 File 7346, MIKAN
no. 2061004, Microﬁlm reel C-10112. General Correspondence Regarding Indian
Matters in British Columbia. 1876-1877. Ottawa.
. (1877). Minutes of Decision: Skawmish Tribe, 15 June 1877. Canada.
Department of Indian Affairs. Seymour Index. Volume 3: Minutes of Decision,
Correspondence & Sketches —Joint1ndian Reserve Commission & G.M. Sproat.
British Columbia Indian Reserves. F ile 8496. [Reg. No. B—64656]. Ottawa: 140—
148.
Anderson, A.C., A. McKinlay, G.M. Sproat. ( 1877). Correspondence: A.C. Anderson, A.
McKinley, and G.M. Sproat, Minute of Decision, 26 April 1877. Federal
Collection, Minutes of Decision, Correspondence and Sketches, Vol. 3: Joint
Indian Reserve Commission & G.M. Sproat, “British Columbia Indian Reserves,”
File Nos. 7571, 8132, 8402, 8496, 9804, and 2042 No. 1, Volume No. 1, Reg. No.
B-64656. Digital copy obtained from Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs.
ILR Item #15135.
|
: _. (1877). Conespondence: Indian Reserve Commission, British Columbia, Minute
of Decisions, 26 April 1877. BC. Provincial Collection. Minutes of Decision,
Correspondence and Sketches, Binder 1: J 0th Reserve Commission & Gilbert M.
Sproat, J anuary 1876 to April 1878. Binder 1 (Box 1). [Digital copy obtained
from the Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs.] Correspondence n0. 1352/77.
Barnett, Homer (1955). The Coast Salish ofBritish Columbia. Eugene: University of
Oregon Press. Reprinted by Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1976.
Bartroli, Tomas (1997). Genesis of Vancouver City: Expiorations ofh‘s Site I 79], I 792 &
. 1808. Vancouver: Electric Print.
Basso, Keith (1996). Wisdom Sits in Places: Language and Landscape Among the
Western Apache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Blenkinsop, G. (1877). N0. 1: Census of Indian Tribes, Winter 1876 and 1877. Library
and Archives Canada. RG 88, Volume 494 Box 3, MIKAN no. 142483.
Notebooks, 1874-1900. Ottawa.
! Boas, Franz (1886). “Squamish Vocabulary (List of Squamish Septs).” Boas Collection,
S2h.1, [1886]. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society Library. Microﬁlm
A-249 in British Columbia Archives, Victoria.
. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 105

110
Bouchard, Randy (1996). “Squamish Occupancy 0f Burrard Inlet and False Creek.”
Expert Report for Mathias Litigation (T-163 6-81), Federal Court of Canada.
Bouehard, Randy and Dorothy Kennedy (1986). “Squamish Indian Land Use and
Occupancy.” Unpublished report submitted to the Squamish Indian Band Council,
14 December 1986. Victoria: British Columbia Indian Language Project.
. (2007). “Aboriginal History of the Squamish Estuary.” Report prepared for the
Squamish Nation, 28 March 2007.
Bouchard, Randy and Nancy Turner (1976). “Ethnobotany 0f the Squamish Indian
People of British Columbia.” Unpublished manuscript. Victoria: British Columbia
Indian Language Project.
Boyd, Robert (1999). The Coming offhe Spirit ofPestiZerzee: Introduced Disease and
Papufation Decline among Northwest Coast Indians, 1 7 74-1 874 . Vancouver:
UBC Press.
British Columbia (1860). Proclamation by His Excellency James Douglas, Companion of
the Most Honourable Order of the Bath, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of
Her Majesty’s Colony of British Columbia and its Dependencies, Vice-Admiral
of the same, &c., &c., [Proclamation Relating to the Acquisition of Land, 4
J anuary, 1860]. N0. 15. Appendix to the Revised Statutes ofBrz'tz'Sh CoZumbia,
! 1871, Containing certain repealed Colonial! Laws useful for reference, Imperial
' Statutes affecting British Columbia, Proclamations, &0. Victoria, Richard
Wolfenden, Government Printer: 61-64.
. (1865). N0. 23 An Ordinance for regulating the acquisition of land in British
Columbia, 11 April 1865. Appendix to the Revised Statutes ofBritish Columbia,
1871, Containing certain repealed Colonial! Laws useful for reference, Imperial
Statutes aﬂecting British Columbia, Proclamations, &c. Victoria, Richard
Wolfenden, Government Printer: 85-93.
British Columbia. Department of Lands (1860). New Westminster District Crown Land
. Pre-emption Records No. 1—127, 19 January-13 March 1860. BC Archives, GR
112, Volume 91. Victoria.
British Columbia. Ministry of Forests, Aboriginal Affairs Branch. (2001). “Traditional
Use Study Program Guidelines.”
British Columbia. Provincial Secretary (1923). Order in Council No. 507, 6 May 1924.
British Columbia Department of Lands File 044557, Federal Harbours in British
Columbia. Land Title and Survey Authority of BC, Surveyor General Division.
I Victoria.
. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 106

111

Campbell, Chief Ian (2014). Squamish Nation Oral Presentation, National Energy Board,
Hearing Order OH-001-2014, Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC, Volume 12,
Chilliwack, BC, 24 October 2014.

Canada. Privy Council Ofﬁce (1924). Order in Council No. 1924-1265, 19 July 1924.
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. First Nations Land Registry System.
Instrument No. R12073. Ottawa. Ottawa.

Crain, S. et a1. (1862). Correspondence: Silas Crain et al to Young, Colonial Secretary
(petition), 14 July 1862. BC Archives. GR 1372, Colonial Correspondence, File
1346, microﬁlm reel B-1354. Petitions - 1862. Victoria

Crease, H. P. P. [1863]. [Map of Burrard Inlet with pencil n0tati0ns.]. BC Archives, Map
Collection, CM/A 1071. Victoria.

Cruikshank, Julie (2005). D0 Glaciers Listen? Local Knowledge, Colonial Encounters,
and Social Imagination. Vancouver: UBC Press.

Douglas, J . (1859). Circular: Douglas, Governor to Gold Commissioners and Magistrates
of British C01umbia(copy), 1 October 1859. Victoria: BC Archives, Colonial
Correspondence, GR 1372, ﬁle 485/ 8f (enclosure), Microﬁlm reel B-1325.

Eliza, Francisco de (1791). ‘Carta y Comprehende.’ Museo Naval, Mapa 3-E— 01.
Madrid.

Galois, Robert (1996). “Measles, 1847-1850: The First Modern Epidemic in BC.” BC
Studies, No.109, Spring 1996: 31-43.

Geological Survey of Canada (1979). Surﬁcial Geology Vancouver British Columbia.
Geological Survey of Canada Map 1486A. In Hayes, Derek (2005). Historical
Atlas of Vancouver and the Lower F raser Valley. Vancouver: Douglas &
McIntyre: 103, Map 198.

Gibbs, G. ([1858]). Map: Lower Fraser, 9 March 1858. National Archives of the United
States. International Boundary Commission, Record Group 76, Series 68, Folder
1, Map 1. Washington, DC.

. (1858). J ournal: Expedition to Frazer’s River, 9 March 185 8. Smithsonian
Institution Archives. Record Unit 7209, Folder 1, Box 1. Journal V. Notes,
N.W.B.S., 1855-1858. George Gibbs’ Papers circa 1850-53, 1857-60.
Washington, DC.
. (1858). Sketch: “Stone image of a S’houyahm, at the Skwawmish ﬁshery 0n
Frazer’s River,” 9 March 1858. State Historical Society of Wisconsin. Archives
' Division, Gibbs Family Papers 1743-1918, US. Mss Y, Micro 1117, Photo Lots
3696, 3697. Madison.
_ Squamz'sh T radz'tional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 107

112

Good, C. (1861). Correspondence: Good, for Colonial Secretary to Moody, Chief
Commissioner of Lands and Works, 5 March 1861. In British Columbia (1875).
Papers Connected with the Indian Land Question. Victoria: Richard Wolfenden,
Government Printer: 21.

Gray, Thomas E. (1858). Daily Victoria Gazette, October 19, 1858: 1.

Harris, DR. (1905). Map of New Westminster District. Vancouver Public Library
Special Collections, 912.71 135 H3111 copy 2. In Hayes, Derek (2012). British
Columbia: A New Historical Attas. Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre: 243, Map
597.

Harris, Cole (1997). “Voices of Smallpox Around the Strait of Georgia.” In The
Resettlement ofBrz'tt'sh Cotumbia: Essays on Catanialz'sm and Geographical
Change. Vancouver: UBC Press: 3-30.

Hayes, Derek (2012). British Columbia: A New Historical Atlas. Vancouver: Douglas &
McIntyre.

Hill-Tout, Charles (1897). “Notes on the Cosmogony and History of the Squamish
Indians of British Columbia.” From T ransactions 0f the Royal Society ofCanada,
1897. Reprinted in Ralph Maud, ed. (1978) The Satish People, Volume II: The
Squamish and Lillooet. Vancouver: Talonbooks: 19-25.

Hill-Tout, Charles (1900). “Report on the Skqomic [Squamish] of British Columbia, a
Branch of the Great Salish Stock of North America.“ Frnm Report of the Brittth
Associationfor the Advancement ofScience, 70th Meeting, 1900. Reprinted in R.
Maud, ed. ( 1978). The Salish People, Volume II: The Squamish and Lillooet.
Vancouver: Talonbooks: 27—97.

Howay, P_W. (1910). The Work 0fthe Royal Engineers in British Columbia, 1858—1863.
Victoria: Richard Wolfenden.

. (1937) “Early Shipping In Burrard Inlet, 1863-1870.” BC. Historical Quarterly.
Vol. 1, No.1, January 1937: 4.

J acobs, David (2014). Squamish Nation Oral Presentation, National Energy Board,
Hearing Order OH—001-2014, Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC, Volume 12,
Chilliwack, BC, 24 October 2014.

Kendrick, J ohn (1991). The Voyage of the Sutil and Mexicana I 7 92: The Last Spanish
Explorations of the Northwest Coast ofAmerz'ca. Spokane: The Arthur H. Clark
Company.

. Squamz‘sh T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 108

113

Kennedy, Dorothy and Randy Bouchard (1976). “Knowledge and Usage of Land
Mammals, Birds, Insects, Reptiles and Amphibians by the Squamish Indian
People of British Columbia.” Unpublished Manuscript. Victoria: British
Columbia Indian Language Project.

(1976). “Utilization of F ish, Beach F oods and Marine Mammals by the Squamish
Indian People of British Columbia.” Unpublished Manuscript. Victoria: British
Columbia Indian Language Project.

Kennerly, C. B. R. (1858). Diary: “A Trip of Fraser and Harrison’s Rivers, 8 March to 5
April 185 8,” 9 March 1858. National Archives of the United States. International
Boundary Commission, RG 76, Entry 196, Kennerly Diary, 8 March-S April
1858. Washington, DC.

Kuipers, Aert (1967). The Squamz’sh Language: Grammar, T exts, Dictionary. Part1. The
Hague: Mouton.

(1969). The Squamish Language: Grammar, Texts, Dictionary. Part II. The
Hague: Mouton.

Lamb, W. Kaye, ed. (1984). A Voyage ofDiscoverjy t0 the North Paciﬁc Ocean and
Round the World, 1791-1795, 4 Vols. London: The Hakluyt Society.

. (1960). The Letters and Journals osz'mon F mser 1806-1808. Toronto: The
Macmillan Company of Canada Limited.

Land and Resources Committee, Squamish Nation (2001). “Kay Temixw Land Use Plan:
For the Forests and Wilderness 0f the Squamish Nation Traditional Territory.”
First Draft, May 2001.

Lenihan, J ames (1877). Correspondence to E.A Meredith, Deputy Superintendent of
Indian Affairs, June 10, 1877. Ottawa: Library and Archives Canada. RG 10,
Volume 3650, File 8424.

McDonald, Robert A. J . (1994). “Lumber Society on the Industrial Frontier: Burrard
Inlet, 1863-1886.” Labour/Le Travail, Vol.33, Spring 1994: 69-96.

McKenna, J .A.J . and R. McBride (1912). Memorandum of an Agreement Arrived at
Between J .A.J . McKenna and the Honourable Sir Richard McBride, 24 September
1912. In Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British
Columbia (1916). Report offhe Royal Commission on Indian Aﬂairsfor the
Province ofBrz'z‘ish Columbia. Victoria, Acme Press: 10-11.

I Squamz’sh T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 109

114

McKinlay, A. and GM. Sproat (1877). Correspondence: A. McKinlay, Commissioner,
and GM. Sproat, Joint Commissioner, to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and
Works, 11 June 1877. BC. Provincial Collection. Minutes of Decision,
Correspondence and Sketches, Binder 1: J oint Reserve Commission & Gilbert M.
Sproat, J anuary 1876 to April 1878. Binder 1 (Box 1). [Digital copy obtained
from the Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs.] Correspondence no. 1351/77.

Maclachlan, Morag ed. (1998). The F ort Langley Journals, 1827-30. With contributions
by Wayne Suttles. Vancouver: UBC Press.

Matthews, Major J .S. (1955). Conversations with Khahz‘sahtano 1932-1954. Vancouver:
Vancouver City Archives.

Miller, J .R. (2000 [1989]). Skyscrapers Hide the Heavens: A History ofIndian- White
ReZarz'onS in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Moody, C. R. C. (1862). Public Notice: [Government Reserve Point Grey], 23 December
1862. British Columbia. Government Gazette, 24 January 1863. Victoria: Queen’s
Printer.

Morton, James (1977). The Enterprising Mr. Moody, the Bumptious Captain Stamp: T he
Life and Colourful Times of Vancouver’s Lumber Pioneers. North Vancouver: J .J .

. Douglas Ltd.

1 Osler, Sanford. (2014). “Salish Racing Canoes on North Shore,” 29 June 2014.

' http://sqnfordosler.ca/bl_0g_/s_a1is_h-racing—eanoes-on—north—shEZ (accessed 24 May
2015)

Paull, A. (1922). Correspondence: Paull t0 Ditchburn, Chief Inspector of Indian
Agencies, 17 November 1922. Library and Archives Canada. RG 10, Volume
11079 Part C. Microﬁlm reel T—16104. Chief Inspector of Indian Agencies -
Vancouver Agency - Squamish Band amalgamation (Shannon Squamish ﬁle),
1922-1927
. (1922). Correspondence: Paull t0 Ditchburn, Chief Inspector of Indian Agencies,
12 December 1922. Library and Archives Canada. RG 10, Volume 11079 Part C.
Microﬁlm reel T-16104. Chief Inspector of Indian Agencies - Vancouver Agency
- Squamish Band amalgamation (Shannon Squamish ﬁle), 1922-1927
. (1922). Correspondence: Paull t0 Ditchburn, Chief Inspector of Indian Agencies,
14 December 1922. Library and Archives Canada. RG 10, Volume 11079 Part C.
Microﬁlm reel T-l6104. Chief Inspector of Indian Agencies - Vancouver Agency
— Squamish Band amalgamation (Shannon Squamish ﬁle), 1922-1927.

Squamish T raditz'onal Use and Occupancy Study, F z'nal Report 110

115

Pearse, B. W. (1871). Schedule: Schedule of A11 Indian Reserves (surveyed) in the
Province of British Columbia, 16 October 1871. In British Columbia (1875),
Papers Connected with the Indian Land Question. Victoria: Richard Wolfenden,
Government Printer: 104-1 05.

Procaylo, Nick (2014). “Salmon F ishing 0n the Capilano River,” The Province, 15
August 2014, httpﬂwﬁw,111§p§gﬂit]e_e,_ept_nhtew5!heﬂlmtnﬁSalmnn+ﬁ5hing
+Capi!_ann+Riverf[012223573tmyhtm] (accessed 22 May 2015).

Reimer/Yumks, Rudy(2011). “The Mountains and Rocks are Forever: Lithics and
Landscapes of Skwxwzj 7mesh waumz’xw.” PhD Thesis, McMaster University.

Richards, G. H. (1860). Hydrographic Chart N0. 1922: Fraser River and Burrard Inlet,
Surveyed by Captain G.H. Richards RN. and the Ofﬁcers of HMS. Plumper,
1859-60, 30 November 1860 (corrected to April 1862). Land Title and Survey
Authority of British Columbia, Map Vault, 18T2 New Westminster. Victoria.

Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia (1913).
Transcript of Hearings: New Westminster Agency. Meeting with the City Council
and Board of Trade, North Vancouver, 19 June 1913. Union of British Columbia
Indian Chiefs. McKenna-McBride Commission Transcripts. Vancouver: 8-20.

. (1913). Transcript of Hearings: New Westminster Agency. Meeting with the
Mission Band at the Mission Reserve, 17 June 1913. Union of British Columbia
I Indian Chiefs. McKenna-McBride Commission Transcripts. Vancouver: 1-7.
I
. (1913). Transcript of Hearings: New Westminster Agency. Meeting with the
Mission Band at the Mission Reserve, 20 June 1913. Union of British Columbia
Indian Chiefs. McKenna-McBride Commission Transcripts. Vancouver: 21-33.
(1916). Report 0fthe Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of
British Columbia. Victoria, Acme Press.

Seymour, A., compiler (1997). Correspondence Related to Chief Charley of Squamish, 7
January - 29 April 1905. Department of Indian Affairs, Federal Collection of
Minutes of Decision, Correspondences and Sketches, Volume 15: Minutes of
Decision, Correspondence & Sketches — P. O’Reilly, A.W. Vowel] — May 1902
to January 1906. File 29858-9, Vol. No. 10 [Reg. No. B-64650], Ottawa: 236-
237, 245, 237—248, 260, 263-264, 266-268, 270, 272, 272-274.

Sproat, G. M. (1879). Field Minutes: General Reserves near the City of New
Westminster, 30 June 1879. A. Seymour (compiler), 1997. Department of Indian
Affairs, Federal Collection of Minutes of Decision, Correspondences and
Sketches, Volume 18: Minutes of Decision & Sketches - G.M. Sproat - True
Copy, May 1878 to January 1880 Ottawa: 338-339.

Squamz'sh T raditfonal Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 111

11 6
Squamish, Chief Charley (1910). Correspondence: Chief Charley to [Indian Affairs]
Ottawa, 20 February 1910. Library and Archives Canada. RG 10, Volume 7787
F ile 27153-22, MIKAN 1102039625, Microﬁlm reel C—12066. New Westminster
Agency - Surveys of Land on the Musqueam, and Langley Reserves (Plans),
1891-1931. Ottawa.
Squamish Nation, httuzfr’wwwmumhilt...netﬂbeut—uw’nur—lﬂndf (accessed 23 May 2015)-
Suttles, Wayne (1990). “The Central Coast Salish.” Handbook ofNorrh American
Indians, Volume 7: Northwest Coast. Edited by Wayne Suttles. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution: 453-475.
( 1998). “Names in the Fort Langley Journals.” In Maclachlan, Morag ed. (1998).
The F or: Langley Journals, 1827-30. With contributions by Wayne Suttles.
Vancouver: UBC Press: Appendix E.
. (1998). “The Ethnographic Signiﬁcance of the Fort Langley Journals.” In
Maclachlan, Morag ed. (1998). The F ort Langley Journals, 182 7-30. With
contributions by Wayne Suttles. Vancouver: UBC Press: 163-210.
Tennant, Paul (1990). Aboriginal Peoples and Politics: The Indian Land Question in
British Coiumbia, 1849—1989. Vancouver: UBC Press.
Trutch, Joseph (1868). Correspondence to Colonial Secretary, 18 F ebruary 1868. In
British Columbia (1875), Papers Connected with the Indian Land Question.
Victoria: Richard Wolfenden, Government Printer: 75-76.
Turner, G. (1863). “Field Notebook: New Westminster District, Survey of Reserve at
English Bay and North of lst Narrows, 181 to 185 G. 1, Survey of Coastline
Around Coal Peninsula, February - March 1863.” BC Archives, C/AB30.1F
(original); certiﬁed copy at Land Title and Survey Authority of British Columbia,
Map Vault, Royal Engineers Field Notebooks, Notebook N0. 4, LTSA PS-
FB1790. Victoria.
Williams, Chief Richard (2014). Squamish Nation Oral Presentation, National Energy
- Board, Hearing Order OH—001-2014, Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC, Volume 12,
I Chilliwack, BC, 24 October 2014.
|
. Squamz'sh T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 112

117
Appendix A: Project TUOS Maps
, Squamish T raditz'ona! Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 113

PAGE 114 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

1 1
Executive Summary
The Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council commissioned this traditional use and
occupancy study as part of their response to the proposed Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain
Expansion Proj eet. This Report presents information relating to historical and
contemporary Squamish occupation and use of marine areas, tidal reaches, and associated
shorelines in southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower Fraser
River.
This Report draws information about Squamish traditional use and occupancy sites
(TUOS) and areas from contemporary proj eet interviews as well as previous Studies and
archival, ethnographic, and archaeological sources. The methodology and guidelines
employed for this project are based on those established by the Province of British
Columbia’s Traditional Use Study Program.
The Study Area for this Report includes the marine areas and associated shorelines within

. southern Squamish Traditional Territory, including a 150 m inland buffer. The Squamish
TUOS sites that intersect with that area are included in the TUOS Analysis for this
Report (SQKM TUOS Analysis). TUOS sites identiﬁed during research as directly
associated with Squamish activities or Squamish traditional history, and located along the
lower reaches of the Fraser River (With 150 m inland buffer) in the general region of the
southern part of the Squamish Consultation Boundary, are also included in the SQKM
TUOS Analysis.

I Squamish oral history consistently describes Squamish ties to these regions. The
numerous Squamish spiritual, settlement, resource, and travel sites and areas throughout
southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower Fraser River provide
evidence of Squamish occupation and use since earliest times. The documentary record
identiﬁes Squamish Villages in these regions. Indian Reserves in Burrard Inlet and

I southern Howe Sound were allotted to the Squamish in the late nineteenth century.
Burrard Inlet remains a major population centre for the Squamish today.

119
Appendix C: Report Author CVs
l
I
I
Squamt'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 115

PAGES 116-136 OF THE REPORT
HAVE BEEN REDACTED

1 2
Federal and provincial legislation, land alienations, and intensive urban and industrial
development have polluted and denied the Squamish access to many spiritual, resource
harvesting, and settlement sites, including Villages in what is now the Greater Vancouver
area. Despite this, Squamish people continue to travel their marine waterways and harvest
available resources. They likewise maintain strong cultural and historical ties to southern
Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower Fraser River through ancestral
stories, names, and villages, through place names and places of power such as origin and
Transformer sites, and through personal spiritual training and practice.
There are_ traditional use and occupancy sites and areas
currently documented in the SQKM TUOS Analysis. The locations of these-
sites are depicted on the following Project Maps in Appendix A: All Sites; Aquatic
Resources; Archaeology; Culture History; Land Resources; Settlement Activity; and
Travel Sites.
Together, these - sites illustrate the strong aquatic orientation of the Squamish
and testify to the extensive and intensive nature of Squamish occupation and use of
southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower Fraser River, in the
past and today.
This Report should not be considered deﬁnitive nor representing all the information on
Squamish use and occupancy, in general or relating speciﬁcally to the Study Area.
Additional research would undoubtedly add to the information and analysis presented in
this Report.
W

1 3

Acknowledgments
The TUOS team members thank the Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council for the
Opportunity to work on this proj ect. We likewise extend our sincere thanks and
acknowledgement to the Squamish members who participated in interviews for this and
prior projects; their rich knowledge and experiences provide the core of the proj ect results.
Notes to Reader
The Views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect adequately
or completely the views of the Squamish Nation.
No attempt has been made in this report to standardize the linguistic transcription of
Squamish words. Place names and other Squamish terms are transcribed in the system
used by the Squamish Nation, except where found in quotations. In this case, names and
terms are presented in the manner in which they appear in the source documents.
Squamish words are in italics except when part of a direct quote.
This Report should not be considered deﬁnitive nor as representing all the information on
Squamish use and occupancy, in general or speciﬁcally relating to the Study Area. Further
research would undoubtedly uncover more information, and further analysis would lead to
enhanced interpretations.

I Squamz'sh T raditiona! Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report iii

14

Research and Report Production
This report has been researched and produced by Traditions Consulting Services, Inc.
Traditions was founded in 1997 and has since then conducted many traditional use and
occupancy studies (TUOS) for First Nations in British Columbia. A summary of
Traditions” specialties and selected clients and reports appears in Appendix C.
Co-author Richard Inglis, an associate with Traditions, is an anthropologist with decades of
experience conducting TUOS studies and other F irst Nations-related research; he has also
served as an expert witness in several First Nations court cases. Co—author Chelsea
Horton, an associate with Traditions, has a PhD. in First Nations History and has been
conducting TUOS studies and related eommunity-based research since 2013. Co-author
Kevin Neary, President of Traditions, is an anthropologist with decades of experience
conducting TUOS studies and other First Nations-related research in British Columbia.
CVs for the report authors appear in Appendix C.
Team Members
Richard Inglis Research, Interviews, Report Writing
Chelsea Horton Research, Interviews, Report Writing
Kevin Neary Interviews, Database, Report Writing (TUOS)
Louise Williams Community Liaison, Database, Interviews,

Contributor to Report Writing (TUOS)
Chris Hebda Interviews, Database
David Vogt Research, Historical Report
Chrystal Nahanee, Squamish Nation GIS
Simon Norris, Hillcrest Geographies GIS '
Pamela Williams GIS
Robyn Ewing Interview Transcription
Alice Huang Interview Transcription
W

15
Table of Contents
Executive Summary!
Acknowledgments iii
Notes to Reader iii
Research and Report Productlonlv
Team Members iv
Table of Contentsv
List of Figures v11
List of Tables vm
Introduction 1
Purpose of Report 1,
Study Area 2
Sources of Data 2
Structure of Report 3
Ethnographic Overview 6
Squamish Socio-Political Organization, Territory, and Territoriality..............,.................. 6
Squamish Seasonal Round 19
Historic Overv1ew27
Contact Period (Late 1700s) 27
Pre-Colonial Period (1820s to 1857) 31
Colonial Period (1858 to 1870) 37
Confederation Period 42
Indian Reserves 47
Traditional Use and Occupancy Site Research58
Introductlon 58
Protocols 58
TUOS Research Methodology 58
Traditional Use and Occupancy Site Deﬁn1t10n59
' SQKM TUOS Information Sources 61
Project Interwews 61
. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Fina! Report v

16
Archaeological Site Records 65
TUOS Information Source Analysis 66
Document and Records Management 67
B1b110graphy 67
Digital Recording OfInterviews 67
Interview Notes 67
Interview Transcrlpts 67
Interview Maps and GPS Recording 68
Traditional Use and Occupancy Site Database 68
Project GIS and Maps 70
SQKM TUOS Analysis Results 71
TUOS Site Classnﬁcatlon 71
Site Entlty 73
Theme Maps 74
Results Summary, Traditional Use and Occupancy Sites and Areas 80
Settlement Activity Sltes 81
I Culture History Sites 82
Aquatic Resource and Land Resource Sltes 83
Travel Sites 84
Overview of Squamish Occupation and Use of Southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet
and Indian Arm, and the Fraser R1ver85
Southern Howe Sound 85
Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm 91
. Fraser River 99
Report Summary 102
BlbllographyIOS
Appendix A: Project TUOS Maps 113
Appendix B: List of Recorded Archaeological Sites Along the Lower Fraser River in
' the General Area of the Squamish Nation Consultation Area 114
Appendix C: Report Author CVsllS
. Squamish T raditiona! Use and Occupancy Study, F ina! Report vi

17
List of Figures
Figure 1: Map oquuamz'sh Traditional Territory, Consultation Area, and Study Area 4
Figure 2: Map 0fSkwanE7mesh Temz'xw (Squamz‘sh Terrztory)5
Figure 3: 1hflh§i7elsh (Siwash Rock), Stanley Park, ca. 1890 (City of Vancouver Archives, C VA 677-116)]6
Figure 4: Khahtsahlano (August Jack) and .1.S. Matthews, Sko-Mz'sh-Oath: The Territory of the Squamt'sh
Indian People: Indian Villages and Landmarks: Burrard Inlet and Howe Sound Before the Whitema-ns
Came, 1937 (City of VancouverArchives, Map 351) 30
F igure 5: George Gibbs, Sketch oquuamz'sh “stone image” at Squamishﬁshery 0n the F mser River, 9
March 1858. 35
F igure 6: George Gibbs, Map: Lower Fraser River, 9 March 1858, with inset illustrating location ofKeh-
katt (1_czl_cayt)36
Figure 7: British Hydrographtc Chart N0. 1922, F raser River and Burrard Inlet, surveyed in 1859/60.
Aboriginal villages are not depicted. Note, however, the extensive intertidalﬂats 0n the north Shore of
Burrard Inlet at Capitano and Second Narrows 37
Figure 8: Map ofBurrard Inlet by Walter Moberly 0f the Royal Engineers, 1860. Annotated by Henry P.
Crease in 1863. 40
F igure 9: Geological Survey ofCanada map depicting the extent ofinﬁﬂing (black cross-hatching) ortthe
south Shore ofBurrardInlet, 197944
F igure 10: Map of the north shore ofBurrard 1n1etdepictz'ng timber leases and District QfNorth
Vancouver, 1907. 45
Figure 11: A House on West 7:}: Avenue, the Granville Street Bridge, C.P.R. Kitsilano T restle Bridge, and
Indian Village 0fSnauq,ﬂca. 1890 (Photo by W. Chapman; City Qf Vancouver Archives, Van Sc P58)....... 48
F igure 12: Surrenders for rtghts-ofway and continuing reductions over the years have resulted in
Signiﬁcantfragmentation oquuamish Reserves on the north shore. Google Earth image illustrates
extensive bifurcation ofSeymour Indian Reserve, 2015 (Googie imagery dates to 2009). 53
Figure 13: Contemporary Rock Weir Fishing on the xwmelchstn (CaptZano River) 93
Figure 14: War Canoe Racing atAmbleSide, Summer 2014. Note the busy waterways, including cargo
vessels99
. m—m

18
List of Tables

Table 1: SQKM TUOSAnaZysz's Sites, by Information Source 66
Table 2: TUOSDatabase erlds69
Table 3: SQKIM TUOS Maps 70
TabZe 4:ActzvztyDeﬁmt10nS 71
Tabie 5: Theme Maps, AssoczatedActlvmeS 74
Table 6: All SQKM TUOSAnaZySiS Activities 75
Table 7: Aquatic Resource Theme Activities 76
Table 8: Culture History Theme Actzwtzev 77
Table 9: LandResource Theme Sztes 77
Table 10: SetﬂementActivily Theme Sztes 78

1

|

|

|

| Squamish T raditz'onal Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report viii

1
This is Exhibit "A" referred to in the
Affidavit of Richard Inglis sworn
before me at chﬂ Q , BC
Richard 1. Inglis this L day of August, 2018.
2250 Central Avenue
Victoria, BC. ' . _ ﬂ
V85 2R9 .-. .. r: " $1 0'“
Email: inglis@islandnet.com A emmissio/er fﬂl‘ ta + i -
Affidavits within British Columbia
- MORRIE BAILLlE
Educatlon NOTARY PUBLIC
1932 OAK BAY AVE
Honours BA, Anthropology, Trent University, 1970 V‘CFOR'A' BC VBR 109
MA, Anthropology, University of Toronto, 1972
Professional Experience
Inglis Consulting
2003 — present
Position: Sole proprietor company
Archival and community based anthropological and historical research and
presentations for First Nations, Governments and Industry; Traditional Use
Studies; Speciﬁc Claims.
Traditions Consulting Services, Inc.
5 2003 - present
Position: Associate
Archival and community based research and presentations for First Nations,
Governments and Industry; Traditional Use Studies; Speciﬁc Claims.
Treaty Negotiations Ofﬁce, Province of British Columbia
1992 - 2003
Position: Negotiator
Member of the provincial teams that negotiated the Nisga’a Agreement-in-
Principle (1996) and Nisga’a Final Agreement (I 998) and the Sliammon
Agreement-in Principle (2003).
Royal BC. Museum, Victoria
1980 — 1992
Positions: Museum Curator - Archaeology Division and Ethnology Division; Head of
Anthropology
Canadian Museum of Civilization, Ottawa
1972 - 1980
. Position: Archaeological Researcher
1

1 9
Introduction
Purpose ofReport
The Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council commissioned this traditional use and
occupancy study to support their response to the proposed Kinder Morgan Trans
Mountain Expansion Project (TMEP). Kinder Morgan Canada Inc. is proposing to
expand the capacity of the existing Trans Mountain Pipeline system. If approved, the
proposed proj ect would be undertaken in numerous phases and consist of apbroximately
980 kilometers of new pipeline, eleven new pump stations and expansion of existing
stations, additional storage capacity at existing storage terminals, and expansion of the
Westridge Marine Terminal and associated infrastructure, resulting in a dual-line
operation. The proposed development, if approved, would also result in an increase of
outgoing marine tanker trafﬁc from approximately ﬁve tankers per month to an estimated
thirty-ﬁve tankers per month, with a similar amount of return trafﬁc. The proposed Trans
Mountain Pipeline Expansion Vessel Trafﬁc Routes depart from the Westridge Marine
Terminal in Burnaby out through Burrard Inlet to the Strait of Georgia, then south to East
Point on Saturna Island, then southwest and south through Boundary Pass and Haro Strait
to Discovery Island, then south and west out Juan de F uca Strait to the Paciﬁc Ocean.
This Report presents information about historical and contemporary Squamish occupancy
and use of marine territory and associated shorelines in the southern half of Howe Sound,
Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the Fraser River. The Report does not present
information or analysis regarding the potential impacts of the Kinder Morgan TMEP.
This Report should not be considered deﬁnitive nor as representing all the information on
Squamish use and occupancy, in general or relating speciﬁcally to the Stady Area. Further
research would undoubtedly uncover more information, and further analysis would lead to
enhanced interpretations.
W

20

Study Area
The Study Area for the Squamish TUOS for the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain
Expansion Project (SKQM TUOS) includes the marine areas, tidal reaches, and associated
shorelines within the southern portion of Squamish Nation Territory, including southern
Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet east to Port Moody, False Creek, and Indian Arm (Figure 1).
The project’s Study Area also includes a 150 m inland buffer along all shorelines. These
are the areas that could be impacted in the event of an oil spill or cleanup Operation
associated with the Trans Mountain Expansion Proj ect.
Some Squamish TUOS sites located outside the Study Area are included in the TUOS site
analysis presented later in this report. These are TUOS sites identiﬁed during research as
directly associated with Squamish activities or Squamish traditional history, and are
located along the lower reaches of the Fraser River in the general region of the southern
part of the Squamish Consultation Boundary (F igure 1). Theses sites, and the sites
intersected by the Study Area, are included in the TUOS analysis (SQKM TUOS Analysis)
discussed later in this report. The Squamish TUOS Analysis sites are illustrated on the
Proj ect Maps in Appendix A.
Sources ofData
Traditional use and occupancy information presented in this report comes from several
contemporary interviews with Squamish Elders, Knowledge Holders, and Resource Users.
Traditional use and occupancy information from previous studies with Squamish members
was also consulted and incorporated into the project database, GIS, and report. A range of
published and unpublished sources, including government reports and correspondence,
newspapers, and historical, ethnographic, and archaeological studies were also reviewed
for this report. Repositories accessed for documents include the British Columbia
Archives, Vancouver City Archives, Library and Archives Canada, and Land Title and ,
Survey Authority of British Columbia, Surveyor General Branch. Information about
archaeological sites in the Study Area was obtained from the Archaeology Branch,

I Province of British Columbia.
W

21

Structure of Report
This report begins with ethnographic and historical overviews of the Squamish, presenting
necessary context for the traditional use and occupancy information that follows. The
ethnographic overview draws on anthr0pological, archaeological, and interview evidence,
While the historical overview reviews archival references to the Squamish through four
periods:

' the Contact Period (late eighteenth century);

' the pre-Colonial Period (18203 to 1857);

° the Colonial Period (1858 to 1870); and

' the Post—Confederation Period (1871 to today).
This information is followed by an overview of the project’s traditional use and occupancy
methodology and results, and a report summary. There are three report appendices:
Appendix A contains the Proj ect TUOS Maps; Appendix B is a list of recorded
archaeological sites along the lower F raser River in the general area of the Squamish
Nation Consultation Area; Appendix C contains CVs for the report authors;
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 3

22
Figure 1: Map oqurmmish Tradmonm Tyrﬁrogr, Consrmaﬁm: Area, and andyArea
Fr: -' :35; . '. '. 1. -
Ln ! -. .- a. . . .
| . .- ,- .. m. .
'_+ 1-. ?:I' _ x._ r £11.?
1' ur . .— _:.' _ 1""... '
u' r' i'bj .' ‘ﬂzé' "" I - I 1'". ‘- p' '- *3 '
I I L- - 'I' IIL-r -'-' 1“ E E;- u: . I '
. I|' ' r . _ " . ’TT: - - '1 I
i] -. I . .r l- I‘_ -:_"_' i: _" _ LI'. r
l l‘_ ._ glwfk'lij'q'. " r $H;EI fﬁ-ﬁﬁ; h\ _ “Hith- I
v- 'r - .. - ‘ .' .. w- - .1}? -...'
11;" -' ' 1" niﬁag; " _r _ .' \3~k\ '._'_| .i __ I J (I'll: jg
. h a -. - - - 1. . . ‘ ~ mi!
| I':"'I _-.,' -- "_ I :. ‘fﬁ'd 15hr L 1|
5-" i '1 . l". . - I :‘i'w. - . iablk‘td : I| .
| .' *5 ' Jim. ' ..=— Aﬁﬁ'aw - - -- I 4.1.“ '5
. m1. - .l; . , I -. .l I. _- . "I '§. .
" III... II . -‘i- ' II 1' . I ”I'll 1 .11.“ '- " 5 | I 'F" ' r
E 3333* u 1- - v. 1;... __ .
Ha, .,~='-'--. w . ' -' ' 51’ -. ”=1 “. - r "i 3.;
r.- . - ._ ' ' .“I' l I_ . - 1
' :L . _:' “I '..r- Iii J“ 4. _ I_r . :1“ t
H*_‘- .. . E "n. '2 .. II I I I 14 I
. h ha... ?ﬁi ' :F. ' :ill 1 .. :11 "I; .'
. j LJE' f . . - ~..' iii- .' k1! _ "I __ "'I'l-
# I I n' I' I 1:. ... ' r . -* . f- :- '1
l|:"~:-n_ '* '.I. -1 -— .3135 -._ __ .."'.""
‘ . J33" “I ##I LE L'T 1"; "“231 ?H:
_ .. all; ,2: _: i _, . “.5 IE. . {1;
IE”: f}: H“ " ”4"!“ f -"'.I - ?'1_”._‘ ‘ﬂ'
4%‘5‘? 5:1 “*‘I: Mll.f«.'!.' I ‘5‘
‘r *' ‘41 d' -" .11; +.r" . ' .1 r]
'-- ‘ ‘ . 1 I; _ . -.;I.'--. - a; r.
I . . . ii. .ﬂ-H'i. n- .. .m. ~‘T'
'h r ____ ﬂ._. 1‘ ”F 1. -. -._ . I
. l" W135 Hi i... r _. - 1-. 1" . .___
a _ ﬁg .. W nits... - T .. .
-- ' 24:". 1 - ”-111; ...- “.r- Aill'i?3“"§£r
hh- _ -. "'1' hi}; ‘ . ‘ i._ 1 -."'."I-' .rEE-illlll EL“! 4
*1... '. - :31 l #5 "f‘t-ﬂ'hnﬁ: 'uﬁtﬁﬁ. tm-ﬁf-t
Lie r.- 5‘5? arri‘q- *214gryaheﬁﬁg .
-*~r:m.r;_.,.s*-" ' .- ”J; i‘riﬂt— "—""1:'T‘-:-=EE_I_$:!
?*- ""‘*‘ 1" ""* 51-" t'
| m. ' j :I-I " _-' :31‘E_.la_u_1'l.i
' g. - 4i: ___ 'T ' .
I 4/ - " 1L1 '- .3ij
ul'It : . frlﬂf‘gbi: 'J:'-|+ ' i“ '- I
' ‘~_ J1?“ l IsmdyAma
_ I. : 2' T} a - I' 9 Squamish Nation TraditionalTerrimry
H-.- 2.. -:~. _ . . : _‘ -
I if; _ __~' .-' €33 Squamish Nation Cumunﬁﬁm Boundary
.- w 1,) m:
l '1. "'E _ aw}, -
J", - '-_’ IE1: i," I.
I l I}: Irr 1 "ﬂﬁii'.
. . *- n 5 10 20
' ' l - -- -:—Km
I
Squamixh ﬁ'admona! Use and Occupanqv 3111135“, Firm} WW :1

PAGE 5 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

24
Ethnographic Overview
- While this overview and the historical one that follows provide a summary
background concerning Squamish ethnography and history, these overviews should not be
considered comprehensive 0r deﬁnitive. They are intended to provide context for the
information presented later in the report concerning Squamish traditional use and
occupancy sites and areas.
Squamish Socio-Political Organization, T erritory, and T erritoriality
Anthropologists describe the Squamish as members of the Central Coast Salish. The
Squamish speak their own language, but are related through culture and kinship ties to
Coast Salish peoples stretching from the northern Strait of Georgia region to the Lower
Mainland and lower Fraser River area, across to Vancouver Island, and south to Puget
Sound in the United States. —
Social, economic, and political alliances were a key outcome of such kinship
l Suttles, Wayne (1990). “The Central Coast Salish.” Handbook ofNorth American Indians, Vo/ume 7: Northwest
I_
Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F z'nal Report 6

25

connections.3

The website of the contemporary Squamish Nation describes the geographic reach of

Squamish territory this way:
“Our traditional territory is located in the Lower Mainland region of
British Columbia. Prior to and following the arrival of the Europeans in
the late 1700’s, the lands and waters we used and occupied either
exclusively, or jointly with our F irst Nation neighbours, were as follows:
from Point Grey on the south to Roberts Creek on the west; then north
along the height of land to the Elaho River headwaters including all of the
islands in Howe Sound and the entire Squamish valley and Howe Sound
drainages; then southeast t0 the conﬂuence of the SOD and Green Rivers
north from Whistler; then south along the height of land to the Port Moody
area including the entire Mamquam River and Indian Arm drainages; then
west along the height of land to Point Grey.
This territory includes some of the present day cities of Vancouver,
Burnaby and New Westminster, all of the cities of North Vancouver and
West Vancouver, Port Moody and all of the District of Squamish and the
Municipality of Whistler. These boundaries embrace all of Howe Sound,
Burrard Inlet and English Bay as well as the rivers and creeks that ﬂow
into these bodies of water. In addition, we used and occupied the various
islands located in Howe Sound.”4

The Squamish Nation also has a consultation area, which includes regions outside the

traditional territory where the Squamish have long-term historical and cultural ties and

where they continue to exercise their rights today (see Figure l).

. 3 Bouchard, Randy, and Dorothy Kennedy (2007). “Aboriginal History of the Squamish Estuary." Report prepared for
the Squamish Nation, 28 March 2007: 14; SQKM_04, Interview, 2015.
4 http://www.squamish net/about-us/our-land/ (accessed 23 May 2015).
W

PAGE 8 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

27
l—
. I—
H Reimer/Yumks, Rudy (2011). “The Mountains and Rocks are Forever: Lithics and Landscapes of Skwxwﬁmesh
waumixw.” PhD Thesis, McMaster University: 39.
Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 9

28
Squamish oral tradition relateg that the Squamish have occupied and used their territory for
generations beyond nmneb- —
I —
. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 10

2

Expert Witness and Reports
(1988). Regina v NTC Smokehouse Ltd. et at... [1996] 2 S.C.R. 672
(2006). Expert opinion report and witness. Overview of T sz’mshz’an Indian Reserves and
F tsheries, 1830-1923. Lax Kw’alaams Indian Band v. Canada (Attorney General), 2011
SCC 56, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 535, July 2006.
(2007). Expert opinion report and witness. Nuu-chah—nulth Sociopoh'tical Organization,
Settlements and Economy: The View from Historical Documents Contact to ca.1890.
Ahousaht Indian Band and Nation v. Canada (Attorney General), 2009 BCSC 1494.
(2007). Expert opinion report and Witness. Overview ofNuu—chah-nutth F isheries 1871-
19303. Ahousaht Indian Band and Nation v. Canada (Attorney General), 2009 BCSC
1494.
(2007). Expert opinion report and witness. Response to ‘T he Ahousaht Indian Band and
Others v. The Attorney General ofCanada and Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the
Province ofBrz'tish Columbia ’ by Joan Lovisek. Ahousaht Indian Band and Nation v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2009 BCSC 1494.
(2008). Expert opinion report and witness. Response to Ahousaht — Ancient Explorer
Records by Joan Lovisek (Lovisek Second Report). Ahousaht Indian Band and Nation v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2009 BCSC 1494.
(2013). ‘Squamish Fishing on the Fraser River.” Opinion Report for Ratcliff and C0., 30
July 2013; Response Report, 11 October 2013.
2013-4. Member of the expert witness panel for BC Hydro, Site C Environmental
Assessment.
(2015). Afﬁdavits for Gitga’at First Nation, Hartley Bay, BC.
(2017). Expert Report. ‘Kitasoo/Xai’xais Additional Land Applications RCMBC.”
Expert Report prepared for Kitasoo/Xai’xais Integrated Resource Authority
Kitasoo/Xai’xais Nation, 21 August 2017. Kitasoo Xai’xais v Canada, SCT-7002-15
(2018). ‘Research Report: Aboriginal Use and Occupation of the Fairview Connector
Lands, Prince Rupert Harbour.’ Expert report prepared for the Gitxaa1a Nation and
Woodward & Company, 28 February 2018. Gitxaala Nation Prince Rupert Port
Authority Arbitration.

2

29
The many place names that populate the Squamish landscape similarly testify to long
living histories of Squamish use and occupation. —
I—
I—
I—
I—
I—
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 11

PAGE 12 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

31
described this connection as one of being “of” territory. Distinguishing this perspective
from a Western scientiﬁc worldview, Reimer explained:
I—
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 13

32
3“ SQWF_07, Interview, 2014.
35 SQKM_02, Interview, 2015.
Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ma} Report 14

PAGE 15 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

34
Figure 3: lhilhgi7elsh (Siwash Rock), Stanley Park, ca. I 890 (City of Vancouver Archives,
CVA 677-116)
'- - F'h I IL .- ¥ " '-
r‘r-ﬁ' -- J-I‘ .
I r...“- ‘1‘- Ira -.
F _ |_HL ll." ' I .
'_-_." _f'4r_1 _'* ?-H “'4'
'_" _-ﬂ':i _ '- Iii: _ l r“; .
. ..1 _ 32.1%11 1 2‘13" '4' . I
1.5;. I _- 5"." l‘I- " .- 3. 'I'_' “'15.. .
I ﬁ‘iﬂ‘ﬁ " T1 L Jr - - H . * .
. “EM" 41:;- ~'f . -. - '“' ~.-“'
,._.,il_1. . -le mi". ‘1" J. I 1-..‘1 .. 'l ‘; Thalia i- ‘-
, .. 11;. r:?j :. :I- _ 4‘... ml, :FJ £31.: ' .
. 1' '1"! r L." I; II . . ' . ‘3‘": ‘I
.'.- .. .531; “g. t - ' ' k?» ”ﬁw
_ .. 51%: n. __ :7 I {ﬁg j.4.— £4155; ,
.i -: -. 'r . -~-~r 1- ~- -',_..: ~
I. i I_. _ II...‘ . . ﬁr. .F'q 112's. Mali": :. .
‘ . Ln. - ._ ff . . "‘H' ﬁﬁi'
- I h. I. 1 Lg _.;7 :l—ll i I! ‘52:} nﬂhi'Ih-J‘II
--'-‘.‘1. . ' -. '.-' . -' ""-'":~.'.'.--" 1' .' _. .
' .' .1 "1 ' . Ii. I"; - “m; r 1‘ '- ""- .." .-
frat - ,r- «n? "(a
' _ . “I... 'v " ﬁl_ - . 1 .'..;.....
*- v- 4-— - .- 4- . --' . * ~ '43-. " 3.5 ."':.".‘r..~
24¢ -: J I ' IT ' a. . . T‘

‘ w.‘ _:__}'3-1' _;:-:-~:‘ . Iﬂi --
_ u is likely that
I—

l_

l—

.—

Squamish Traditional} Use and Occupancy Study, Fina! Report 16

35
other streams 110w obliterated by development in the Greater Vancouver area were used
for this purpose as well.
Stories associated With such sacred places and practices are still passed on Within
Squamish families and communities today. _
I—
I—
Squamish Traditional} Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 17

36
This living interconnected sense of Squamish territoriality is critical context for
understanding the traditional use and occupancy information that is presented later in this
Wp—
I—
I—
Squamish Traditionai Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 18

37
Squamish Seasonal Round
The interconnected nature of Squamish territory is apparent, also, in the Squamish
seasonal om —
I—
Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 19

PAGES 20-21 OF THE REPORT HAVE
BEEN REDACTED

3
Selected Publications and Reports
Allaire, Louis, George F. MacDonald and Richard 1. Inglis
(1979). ‘Gitlaxdzawk — Ethnohistory and Archaeology. ’ In Sheena River
Prehistory. National Museum of Man, Archaeological Survey of Canada,
Mercury Series No. 50, Ottawa.
Haggarty, J ames C. and Richard I. Inglis
(1983). ‘West Coast Sites: An Archaeological and Macroenviromental Synthesis.’
In Archaeological Place Names or: the Southern Northwest Coast, Thomas Burke
Memorial Washington State Museum Report 4, edited by Robert Greengo, 33.
Seattle: University of Washington.
(1984). ‘Coastal Site Survey: Theoretical Implications of a New Methodology.”
Paper presented at the 17th Annual Meeting of the Canadian Archaeological
Association.
(1984). ‘Preliminary Results of the Archaeological Survey of Paciﬁc Rim
National Park.” T he Midden V01. XVI, No.3 (July 5, 1984): 6.
(1985). Historical Resources Site Survey and Assessment, Pacific Rim National
Park. Environment Canada, Parks, Microﬁche Report Series. Calgary.
Hebda, Richard 1., J ames C. Haggarty and Richard I. Inglis
(1997). ‘Brooks Peninsula Refugium Proj eet.’ Chapter 1, Brooks Peninsula: An
Ice Age Refugium on Vancouver Isiahd. Occasional Paper No. 5, BC. Parks,
Victoria.
Hoover, Alan and Richard Inglis
(1990). ‘Acquiring and Exhibiting a Nuu—ehah-nulth Ceremonial Curtain.”
Curator: 4: 272-288, 1990.
Inglis, Richard I.
(1974). “Archaeological Impact Study: Prince Rupert Bulk Loading Facility
Environmental Assessment, North Coast, BC. (2 volumes), 1974.” A precis was
published in 1975 by the federal-provincial j 0th committee on Tsimpsean
Peninsula port development.
(1992). ‘The Spanish 0n the North Paciﬁc Coast: An Alternative View from
Nootka Sound.” In, Spain and the North Paciﬁc Coast, Essays in Recognition of
the Bicentennial erhe Maiaspina Expedition 1 791-] 792, edited by Robin Inglis.
Vancouver Maritime Museum, Vancouver.
(1997). ‘Ethnographic History of the Brooks Peninsula Region.” Chapter 13,
' Brooks Peninsula: An Ice Age Refugium on Vancouver Island, edited by R. J .
3

39
The rivers 0n the west side of Howe Sound, the Squamish River valley, and Burrard Inlet
supported runs of coho, chum, pink, and spring salmon, as well as cutthroat trout. -
. I—
'—
Squamish Traditionai Use and Occupancy Study, F z'nal Report 22

PAGE 23 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

41
Squamish oral history and the archaeological record document longstanding patterns of
trade, between Squamish Villages and with other Aboriginal peoples. Trading took place
via water and overland trails and, with the arrival of Europeans, expanded to include new
With the growth of the industrial economy in Vancouver in the same period, a number of
Squamish people moved to the Burrard Inlet area on a permanent basis. Here, they
participated in the wage labour economy and continued their traditional harvesting
, 4? Bouchard and Kennedy (2007): 10; Maclachlan, ed. (1998), 39, 129, 131.
l—
Squamz'sh Traditz'onai Use and Occupancy Study, FinaZ Report 24

42
— To
Squamish people, harvesting resources Within their territory is a key expression and
component of their cultural identity and their heritage. It is part of what makes one
Squamish.
I—
I —
Squamz‘sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 25

43
— The Squannsh
Nation is also supporting salmon stream enhancement and habitat restoration efforts on
several waterways in the Greater Vancouver and Howe Sound areas.
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 26

44

Historic Overview
—
—
—
— The
following section reviews available archival evidence, ampliﬁed by oral and
ethnographic accounts, for the four chronological periods delineated in the report
introduction above.
Contact Period (Late 1 7005)
There are few Contact Period records relating to Squamish territory. The earliest
descriptions date to the late eighteenth century when Spanish and British exploration
parties visited Burrard Inlet and Howe Sound and charted the coastline.“
In July 1791, the Eliza expedition under the command of J osé Maria Narvéez brieﬂy
explored the southern Gulf of Georgia region, including the entrances to Burrard Inlet
and Howe Sound. The resulting chart is difﬁcult to interpret, however.52 Historian
Tomas Bartroli has reviewed various interpretations of the chart, including a Village
marked at Point Grey (Islas de Langara). Two other villages are depicted on the chart
on the opposite shoreline, which may represent the north shore of English Bay.53
Neither the Villages nor the Aboriginal people encountered were named by the Spanish

, expedition.
5‘ For discussion 0fthe British and Spanish explorations 0fthe region see Bartroli, Tomas (1997). Genesis qf

. Vancouver City: Expzoran'ons oflrs Site 1 791. 1 792 & 1808. Vancouver: Electric Print.
52 E11221, Francisco de (1791). “Carta y Comprehende." Museo Naval, Mapa 3-E- 01. Madrid.
53 Bartroli (1997); 37-40; E1123, (1791).

. m—ﬁ

45
A British expedition under the command of Captain George Vancouver explored the
southern Gulf of Georgia area in June 1792. On 12 and 13 June, two boats from the
expedition explored Burrard’s Canal (Burrard Inlet) t0 the head of Port Moody. When
the expedition passed through First Narrows, Lieutenant Peter Puget described an
encounter with the local inhabitants:
“On its South side is a Village from which we were visited by about 30
Indians. .. and from them we procured an Excellent Supply of Smelts in
Exchange for Trinkets, etc. . 3’54
The Village was likely xwdyxway 0n the northeast shore of Stanley Park.55 On their
return, Vancouver noticed “two or three of the natives” 0n the beach on the north shore
of the Narrows, likely xwmelch ’sm (Capilano), where “most of their canoes were hauled
up into the creeks.” As no habitations were Visible, Vancouver concluded that “their
Village was within the forest.”56 There are 110 villages depicted on the expedition chart
of the region, and no names of people or Villages are recorded in the expedition
j oumals.
From 20 to 23 June 1792, a Spanish expedition under the command of Alcala Galiano
anchored off Point Grey (Punta de Langara). While there, they were Visited by a
number of canoes of Indians; one party invited them to move the ship inside the inlet.57
A Village in the vicinity of Point Grey was marked on the expedition chart. Two
launches from the expedition explored Canal de Floridablanca (Burrard Inlet), t0 the
head of Indian Arm. Sasamat was recorded as the name of the “northern branch of the
5“ Cited in Bartr01i(1997): 70.
55 Vancouver in Lamb, W. Kaye, ed. (1984). A Voyage ofDiscovery t0 the North Pacyfic Ocean and Round the World,
1791-1795, 4 vols. London: The Hakluyt Society: 581; Bartroli (1997): 70.
56 Vancouver in Lamb (1984): 583. In 1941, Khahtsahlano (August .1 ack) stated that at xwmelch 'stn, “‘the spruce and
crab apples grow on the edge of the river, both banks, and nobody could see through them and they hid the houses on
. the east bank.’” Matthews (1955): 123.
57 Ga1ian0 in Kendrick, John (1991). The Voyage 0mg sum and Mexicmm 1792..- The Last Spanish Explorations ofthe
Northwest Coast ofAmerica. Spokane: The Arthur H. Clark Company: 129, 130.
W

46
Canal that we call Floridablanca”.”58 This is Indian Arm today. In summarizing their
exploration, Galiano commented that, “there were many [Indians] in villages with their
women.”59 The Spanish traded for a number of artifacts during their exploration of the
area, including a small canoe, three paddles, three clubs, bows, arrows and one
harpoon.60
In 1934, noted Squamish historian Khahtsahlano (August Jack), who collaborated on a
series of interviews with City of Vancouver archivist J .8. Matthews between 1932 and
1954, named Squamish villages located in Burrard Inlet “before the whiteman came”:
58 Quoted in Bartroli (1997): 165.
59 Galiano in Kendrick (1991): 134.
60 Galiano in Kendrick (1991): 128, 129.
l—
' —
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 29

47
F igure 4: Khahrsahlano (August Jack) and J.S. Matthews, Sko-Mish-Oath: The Territory of
the Squamish Indian People: Indian Villages and Landmarks: Burmrd Inlet and Howe Sound
Before the Whitemans C ame, 193 7 (City of Vancouver Archives, Map 3 51)
” 115.11 I .II 1. 1' 1.1 : .:.-_-1=.: ”I:-1:-'-_--E. I._- I 111-2-111-- .3111 11:13.1;- '.-1:'=”1-.3.-'1'1 I.-';_'-'-'i".-"1-'E'Ei1T3? . . i "5-75.21. .- - £1
gI I !III .III... :-I._- . ..I. ..I.:I.IIEI_I-Ii:I_I_l II-IIII_|IIIIIIII| 1'i'.-'-'-. I_;I~.I_IIIIIIIII.I-I_II:I:.._: '15: ":‘.'1-"II"" I 'I-Ii _I.Iii:I-II 353- .: _I1I-I:-_III.IEI.III:I I_:_II:I.I:_I iIIIIII-III.II1I-I:I._:.I..I;:II:I_'1IIII'_I:_:'I'I.I:'II1I:I:_-I_:_-I_IrIEI:E1EII-III?_1III_IIIII- -I.IIIII--!:IEII'I.II-III III'II§I:II_-IIIIIIII._1I.III1III;_..-II.I-:_.II!IIIIIIII. ; IIIIIIIIII—IIIIII-IIII'II
I. _I. . I7 .' .I ___ . II ' ._ '-""Ih'II_I - ' - r11‘III
.. - . . 11”..” 3 -1 =11. . .1 -_
‘1? I . ' - 1+1}: 111'" . 4:11. ._ _ rI'I _11 I 1:1.
2‘3: - 11%;! "- '- ” 3 ”131.1":3'} ' 3.3333
I_III I_I. . I-I :11 - - . -t 3.- I II:I -I'_:_- iffy I . _ I _III
:— 3. .- ”: - . . II” I" . I IIIIIr' + . I II 'IIvIII ' ."1 -I _ ' 'Iir'I. ' "'- 1
1 _. .' .- __ .- 11, 1 .. .11 : .. - ----- -1-11””1--:11 .11 11.11.. 1.11
.' - III .‘ .f; .. . I- III . II 1 . IIIIIIunII I.III .; 1’ -_ III
I "' ' "1””. ‘1E l' 11 I .'- :1}: '1 r1” 1.- ' 43.11.113.335:
m 15111110111 or THE .~I_ _. ='-"1I-- ﬂ!” ' - - -_ 1 . . -1111. 3.311,
1111 ' 11-- 1 - I. .' I
I .. IIII_ II. I.I?IIIIIIIII . . - I _ . .IIIII.. I_I_
_ - . . .. PEOPLES. 1&1 \- 11—-—- . -- .11 ”1- 111mm VIHLABES AND LAhnMAp‘ks 1 .‘.-'..-. 1.1.3
I. . ' ' 1.1. I ” -” “:3 1. '-' .1153” BURRARD .’lNLET 1. . 3 14.3
.' H - . .- ' .- i" - 1*: -‘ _ .I-l AND HOWE soumaI I-.IIIII.III .- -1-:I
1| ‘6; ' ti.- ..11_‘.” 11-1- 31 ' ‘-.- .1’13. Before the “.7. iteman's Cam ”3. 3.3
1 - 41-”r 'I '.1..'31 Elf -- ' '11.: I '1 : 1' I‘ll'II'I- " . I I' 'I- ”'3
. I: I .I I 3"“;1-5} 1: :l'. 'I' I ..- I I . I "I'r I '. r '1" .I '1; 3 . qﬁjuH-r _ 1”qu. um, n12: aft .. I. '1 II I.I.r
1 1" . 1 ...1. - -' - - . .11 11 111%» 11.11-11- = 1 .11
3 II 1' i; -' 3":3'3'1-“13'k "151'“ I - 111-.1.J.T311;,111113E:€;"11;";3'21 J '” 5 '3"
I . . _ I.I! - II.I! 'IIII.II.1-II-..11..I' - I ‘I I —I ' I TI I III ' II. ”-II'. ‘III-' II culurrnr.:I..Mﬁara:‘rul%“unirm- E'lI 'I. I .III-I_I. I I,
I I”: 3T 11” - '”' . .-;1II11"".:—"" . .131 - ' ﬁfLEK3334..... “i" 53'
I : '1. '1 Ir - :{r-I'II- '1'f'ffc;l 1" II.I? .I.. I— ii- . I 111 tr III _ . .' .fﬁfj :I-I-‘_I_II.III'-|I‘I:3-:I.I|"II:Ilj-"'-I::"IEEr I II.I; I:II31::.1 I. 11'1-
- 1' 33131.1. 1" 3 1‘13 41%? 5 : - 33-1333. ..2 ' _... . - *W” E '3‘?“ £1.13
'.”I. I 'gh-%_ 1' -. - - II I g - - III-_- I ' 1 1 111351.1319-1'1.“ 5“” «1_11 T3111?” .' . ”. ?:‘1-111 1';'”:1
_ .5333" 113% 1 - f ' '. 1. "'1' - ”-51%? $551351: '-' 13f” TE?
.i rI -__':;-_-:-I- 1W ' I I I I'II:. ' I _ .- _II _. .-1" III. h .. ' . II-I'IIIII . IIII’III .II_IIIII.I .IIIII.I .IIIII IEIIII III II III
'3- '. ' . 11111111111111?“ """% .'. ”” _ ' 1 'I . I . ‘11: -II'” . 33" - _ .1 '
1.1- ” 1. - 111.1: :1-1 “1’” - .1 .””' 131' 1;. 1E1“ _ ' --..- r .” _..-7T 3
: . 11 ﬂ' ..r_--.. of... ' .'_ .-.' . 1'1 .. .. 1"- 1.1.1 .--1' 3:11. ” .11:| “I
1. 1 . II-1- 1 . . - . If - 1. ;-.1.11.:1:.--1.-1-1- h 1111 11.1
r I .‘ -.| "f I‘IHII .- . __ 1.;I I..I. - _ urlji' I l. 'l- __._.1.- II. 'l'r_.'.I‘-I-"_ I.II .. _III II '_'I . . - fIIﬁh$ 'I Fi'
”1 ' - " 1 - 1'1? ” ”"11?” ” ..1. .””". - . . ',' ”5. -11.: 1 . -J 1:31- ‘1 i1
i .- 1'11- :41? - ' --' " 11:!“ .111” - . ”.1 11-. 1 --.1 1 11" ”“1113 3”"-'”-'-'-
I -£ .. G _ far I I _I-IIII: I IIIIII .I I . 11 I '1‘“; f. II.II. _. II .I 4-111. ..FI A... II' "1: I.
1. _u ” ‘1]? H- 1..— ” 1.11:; ” ;-.".”.1..1j..':T-‘I1”-' 1.”- ﬁ‘... '13: :3
I ._f' 1 . 1 1.-" ". I _- - .. . . y. .1 If: I-.-I.II-I:-5I.: :11 I .3 111:: II I II' I_I I11..1I=IIII I-II_11I.J_II:1I IF. III1III-E-1I1I1IIII.I:I'.'.: 1_-I_I I. _
.'r . .W _ —. _IIIrIIIIIE1III1‘1III1IIIII‘I1I-IJIIIIIII1I --.1_IIII-I'-'I‘I'::;F__1 131.1 {I31 ; I III_IIrI'li;-I';‘1II:I.II . I _. .
.- . .I"I. ' I ' .-_:v'jI:I1I'III'_'.-'_: .-I-I'.I__:_I._III --_-I_'-_.I-._I_hidr|'|1 I IIIIII-Ir . Ill‘ﬁcfi':;":1:':11-
1..:”I1 E "F "" ” -1”‘ y - 1. 311-3515113111: ”.” '1”-?.i'”.1'. ii. .1."”"T%%ILII
3 -- - ' . -- .. a - _ 1m - 1””'--- '1 $111"; -'1-1.. ._'1-1.
'1‘; . .”.-.-1-”-'1.- -” E11191: ””1 . . ”-1 11-11
. ?..III 13.” ' ' 1: 31 5': -- ._ ”11-1.. 1313311” 1131.3:-
. - I . ' I” ” 1.: .1.‘-.11-..-..':.'. _. 31-1—1- -;_ .1111
' .9. 1:11 _... -- . 1
I ' f: . II: .' Tfi'jh I: 1-.-;" 'I.- . 3 _ I~1"-._ “II I ' ' I .._-'4. 1:333:
””- 1 ' ” ” 111.13 : J1 ”-”:”-'”-”. .. -.-11-—1- ‘1ﬁ'111 . ..11 -- ‘1
.11'”;”.”':‘””I'””=1:11-11"- 11f:1-”I--”5-”f””53'”-?:'.-.”-: 3”: :5 ..”i-I”..:-"1!-'.'f"”i::_';5'-}§”E..-1:.5}:.='E-'.”-.-:-'_.§.:'_:_.§ '3. 32' 3'73. 3 1532111221”? -.-..i”'”'_..33'3"..::.-3:”55”"1.””
_ _ 1' _ 1 I _ I _I _P
Squamz'sh Traditiona? Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 30

48
Scholars have suggested that disease ravaged the Puget Sound and lower Gulf of Georgia
regions circa the 17703 and 17805, with additional epidemics following in the nineteenth
maps —
_ There are no speciﬁc archival references to the impact of
early epidemics on the Squamish-66 —
Pre-Colonial Period (18205 to I 85 7)
After the Spanish and British exploration expeditions 0f the late 1700s, there are almost no
documents that reference the region of Squamish territory until the Colonial Period. There
are, however, repeated references to the Squamish 0n the lower Fraser River in the extant
Hudson’s Bay Company (HBC) journals from F ort Langley, Which date from 1827-1830.
First Contact with Aboriginal people on the lower Fraser River was made in late June and
early July of 1808, by an overland expedition led by Simon Fraser. A number of Villages
63 Suttles (1990): 471; Harris, Cole (1997). “Voices Omeallpox Around the Strait of Georgia.” In The Resettlement of
British Coiumbia: Essays on Coiom'ah'sm and Geographica! Change. Vancouver: UBC Press: 3-30; Boyd, Robert
(1999). The Coming thhe Spirit Qf'Pestz'lence: Introduced Disease and Population Dec/r‘ne among Northwest Coast
Indians, 1774-1874. Vancouver: UBC Press; Galois, Robert (1996). “Measles, 1847-1850: The First Modern
Epidemic in BC.” BC Studies, No.109, Spring 1996: 3 I —43.
I_
I—
r 66 The origin story that Hill-Tout recorded from Mulks, cited above, could be read to reference smallpox. Hill—Tout
(1897) in Maud (1978): 22.
I—
Squamz’sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 31

4
Hebda, J .C. Haggarty and R. Inglis. Victoria, B.C.: Ministry of Environment, B.C.
Parks, Occasional Paper No. 5, Victoria.
(2006). ‘Protecting Cultural Heritage.’ In Making Peace and Sharing Power: A
National Gathering an Aboriginal Peoples and Dispute Resoiution. Victoria.
(2008). ‘Overview History of the Aboriginal Occupation and/or Use of the
Harrison Lake Region. ’ Report prepared for Canada and British Columbia,
Treaty Negotiation Ofﬁces.
(2015) ‘Encounters: View of the Indigenous People ofNootka Sound from the
Cook Expedition Records. ’ In Arctic Ambitions: Captain Cook and the Northwest
Coast, edited by J ames K. Barnett and David L. Nicandri. Seattle: University of
Washington Press: 131-147. ‘
Inglis Consulting

(2011). ‘History of the Establishment of Kitkatla (Gitxaala) Indian Reserves.’
Research report prepared for the Lax Kw’alaams Indian Band (lead author).
(2012). ‘Historical Report: Toquaht and Uchucklesaht Reserve—Based Fishing
Rights Speciﬁc Claims. ’ Report prepared for Toquaht Nation and Uchucklesaht
Tribe, 31 J anuary 2012 (lead author).
(2013). ‘Historical Report: Kwikwetlem Indian Reserve Creation, 1858-1930.”
Speciﬁc Claim report prepared for Kwikwetlem First Nation (lead author).
(2014). ‘Supplemental Speciﬁc Claim Report: Creation of Indian Reserves for the
Uchucklesaht Tribe 1874 to 193 8.’ Report prepared for the Uchucklesaht Tribe,
15 March 2014 (lead author).
(2014). ‘Gitga’ata First Nation Traditional Use and Occupancy Study Prince
Rupert Region: Preliminary Results Report. ’ Report for the Gitga’at F irst Nation,
Hartley Bay, BC, 7 July 2014 (lead author).
(2014). ‘Kwikwetlem First Nation Historical Research Report: Dykes On and
Near Reserve N0. 1 and Reserve N0. 2. ’ Report prepared for Kwikwetlem First
Nation, 31 March 2014.
(2014). ‘Gitga’ata First Nation Traditional Use or Occupancy Study Project for
the Proposed LNG Carrier Shipping Route: Preliminary Report.’ Report for the
Gitgat First Nation, Hartley Bay, B.C, October 2014 (lead author).
(2015). “Final Report: Gitga’at First Nation Traditional Use and Occupancy Study
Prince Rupert Harbour and Lower Skeena River Regions. Part1: Traditional Use
and Occupancy Report.’ Report for the Gitga’at First Nation, Hartley Bay, BC,
27 J anuary 2015 (lead author).

4

49
were brieﬂy Visited or observed. The editor of Fraser’s journal, historian W. Kaye Lamb,
stated “. .. the description of the j oumey down the river from Lady Franklin Rock
(located above Yale) to the site of New Westminster is described in such general terms
that it is impossible to identify the various features mentioned with conﬁdence.”68 The
only names recorded by Fraser are one Village, “Misquiame,” and one people, the
“Masquiamme,” both located on the North Arm of the F raser River.69
There were several HBC expeditions in the Fraser River area in the 18203, including
McMillan in November 1824, who travelled down the river from Hatzic Slough to the
mouth, and Hanwell, in command of the William and Ann, off the mouth of the river in
late August 1825. The HBC established Fort Langley in 1827, approximately thirty miles
upriver from the mouth of the Fraser River.

The Fort Langley journals make frequent reference to the Squamish on the lower Fraser

River.” —

63 Lamb, W. Kaye, ed. (1960). The Letters and Journafs osz'mon Fraser I806-1808. Toronto: The Macmillan
Company of Canada Limited: 101, footnote 27.

69 Lamb (1960): 106, 109.

70 The name Squamish is rendered in various ways in thejournals including Homes, Choomes, Whomes, Whoomes,
Whooms, Whoomus and Whoomis. Wayne Suttles (1998). “Names in the Fort Langley Journals.” Appendix E in
Maclachlan (1998): 237.

I—

Squamish T raditz'onal Use and Occupancy Study, F ﬁnal Report 32

50

— -

—

— —

—

— —

72 In September 1829, when describing the Cowichan, McMillan stated that, “each [canoe] seldom contains more than
one man with the family.” Ifthis is a general pattern, then a canoe would have a man, his wife and children, or
approximately ﬁve per canoe. The Squamish also had larger war canoes with them (see 17 May 1830 entry). Bamston
described war canoes “as Luggage Boats. .. which contain a great Bulk of Furniture & Baggage. The Size of some of
these craft is fully 50 feet in length and 6 to 7 ft. across the middle.” Barnston, 25 August 1827, in Maclaehlan
(1998): 34. The large canoes are also described as holding thirty men in each. McMillan, 21 March 1829; 24
September 1829, in Maciachlan (1998): 102, 128. 011 22 May 1828, McMillan noted “a Couple of Large Canoes of
Whooms {with about 15 men ea}." McMillan in Maclachlan (1998): 64.

73 The journal entry for 28 September 1827, for example, records that the Squamish were returning from the salmon
ﬁshery upriver. Barnston in Maclachlan (1998): 39. On 2 August 1827, Barnston noted the location of the Indian
ﬁshery and the ﬁrst purchase of fresh salmon from that ﬁshery: “The arrival ofthis ﬁsh is hailed by the natives with
joy & festivity. At this time they are excellent. but only to be had at the Rapids above, where in the course ofthe
season great quantities of them are taken by the natives and dried for winter provisions.” Barnston in Maclaehlan
(1998): 30. In a footnote, Maclachlan states that the rapids were ﬁrst named Simpson’s Falls following the
Governor’s expedition down the Fraser in October 1828, and that Fort Yale was established there in 1847.
Maclaehlan (1998): 246, footnote 30. In 1858, former HBC chieftrader AC. Anderson described the “Falls” as a
series of rapids about 3 miles in length where, during the summer season, the rocky shores are “thronged by Indians
from the lower country, who resort thither for the salmon ﬁshery.” The foot of the “Falls” was located twelve miles
above F ort Hope which was located near the mouth of the Coquihalla River. Spuzzum was located six miles above
the “Falls.” Anderson, AC. (1858). Handbook and Map to the Gold Region QfFrazer ’s and Thompson ’5 Rivers. San

. Francisco: J.J. LeCount: 5, 6. On the eulachon ﬁshery see McDonald in Maelachlan (1998): 147, 148.

74 For examples of participation in the fur trade at the fort see Barnston in Maclachlan (1998): 39; McDonald in

Maelachlan (1998): 118, 131 . 0n the intertribai marriage see McDonald in Maclachlan (1998): 127.
W

51

— A sketch by Gibbs, dated the same day, was annotated:
“Stone image of a S’houyahm at the Skwawmish ﬁshery 0n Frazer’s River. If any one
I—
I —
I—
I—

- I—
Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ﬁnal Report 34

52
. . . . ,5 . _. 39
laughs much. 01‘ piays near at H wall mm (Figure :3). —
Figure 5: George Gibbs, Skprrh ofé’qmunisiz “stow image” m‘ Squamish ﬁshery on the Fraser
River, 9 March 1858.
—1."'—"——' —"'_ﬁ_|'._".";._ - -_ . , tT' ‘TI—H—l—-W
-. . .. .:_. .. 31-1-*~--r ,chﬁ' rain? '- *'r..-a=a.-"-'='=;'i'r*<'='
' . ' ~““":'..1,i.‘- wrﬁ‘,‘ ' ,jﬁr $$$th "- 'Ergg-z'gf."
. .- 1‘ H :gr *E'J-rﬁ. :II._ -. 1, '_ 35:: Eti'.:}£': ”I" 113.; 1: II-.. .' ' .r‘ r1:l ?{ﬂf‘h I'ki“ 1:1“ ‘
- .- r: '.-- -- .“.‘ -.' r a: ”1:55”,
. 1 . I . M r.‘-._' '. . _- -_ f. '4":- LIT. .ti:.-'..'Ii.':!'li.{q
- * .. . ..__ j“ =1" 1;”; .':.'=""j"‘-4L"w'i.:15;":‘-Ef§. ‘
- "- 3.1:.- " I " 1*“: . f“ ' " 9" f-“Jz' :rﬁﬁ'f.
:- ”'.-r"- . : IF. _l' rim?- -. I - 4' . d: ‘ '.‘.r :l'lrit?iﬂ*ifr
I-r .:u i _ . L1 n - :If-J’. ‘- 'I I:::::.l:1'l _ ." :.__.- ”1- i':‘:_:'.-II f-‘II'r-EEJF'.
'.. ....... L ’;F,ﬂu‘-Eg- "l-' J '3'- r ' ‘ *. ..,. _" l:' I 1 {I'M}. 11Iq-ll‘H-r'l;
. l' J - ' _ . .nr" * .. . "a . * ._ ‘- -_ .g-.i_*. 'z'
. ~ - 45'5- :m. -. W; J. __ *3: .- --=-**—--:-':.—*r - = ‘
. - -..--_..a.. -- 5'5““ ‘ .' 'ﬂ-j 351-49";
“' ' ' . .‘ .- _ .",-.-..-.lr,l.'.:t"-‘*;- . . '.. .1 -
" fr - ”“‘i’" .7... 6%. r4“."#1'#:.i.'mm ".2;- -,4.,' h": -,,-'1:ﬁ*g;:_=~,+.~:;
" PM” I?! A" f hwi!*ﬁ-§jfﬂlm1£ ‘11."; - 'I ,'.".:"1-' ...‘-'«.'i*:.‘.-_
n. l - __ . lj- 0‘le ll-ﬂ-i- #1,, _é¢TMM
ﬂtdigi? ril- I ; - P. -.‘._. ‘33:". ' ' _J'-!_.F‘lf31 “‘..Itllllir-
' - |- r' ' "'. . - 'n|"..'*'l‘.l'l '1‘
. _I-+.‘ ', _ .. _‘_, .I ; '+ _‘ "Jirﬁ‘iﬁ
|
|
|
m Gibbs, G. {1353). Sketch: ""S'touc image of a S‘hsuyahm, at the Skmxrawuﬁsh ﬁshery 0n Frazer‘s River.“ 9 Maw}:
1858. State Hiﬁtorical Society 01’ Wisconsin Archives Division. Gibbs Family Papers 1743-1918, US. M55 ‘rﬂ Micro
111?, Photo Lots 3696. 3697. Madison.
. '—
' Squamwh Tradin'mmi U53 and Ozz'cupmwy Smafi‘, an? Raps)? 3'5

PAGE 36 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

54
Colonial Period (1858 to I 8 70)
During the Colonial Period, the hydrographic survey branch of the British Navy and
surveyors for the Royal Engineers were charged with charting, and thus smoothing
settlement and development, of the new colony of British Columbia. In 1859/60, Captain
G.H. Richards undertook a hydrographic survey of the Fraser River, Howe Sound, and
Burrard Inlet (F igure 7).82 The resulting charts became the reference maps for subsequent
mapping during the Colonial Period.
Figure 7: British Hydrographic C hart N0. 1922, F raser River and Burrard Inlet, surveyed in
1859/60. Aboriginal villages are not depicted. Note, however, the extensive intertidalﬂats 0n
the north shore afBurrard Inlet at Capilano and Second Narrows.
?'t: '1 i . _ _. ‘5
" '.‘_—- ' _ " .— :_-.-- - -' - ' .. “ti“? -." .
" ' - - 1.'-'_,'! ' - . T __ .I.;*;,-.'-_ g.‘ - I- '
7-31 1 i'llII-‘IP 1.... 4‘. .- - ‘-' 'l‘" liq“. '3': "£3 " 'I I. f r I ' "'“1 I n. I -' t h. . :‘I
.:_,I 4"“- hh- '14.; - l ",1"..- .:-I'- . ._'I .I-. . I: ' k
f I. .I . _- {Li ' -.' J ."l‘ ' '— '.' "riff" "'1 '
'a'- . .-. ‘I‘ rivﬂ-H'III- . -*_.
4 l . -' 1H}- - '.l I r "1??" E' :' 1b. .
.- -. 9% W: “":'%“ e 5. _
. I . :4» .hﬁ'ﬂ'ﬂ w H . '2" ‘1 _.,' “nflt-ii ' rmmﬁm mum
1 El ' . . .‘ﬁL :%L 7‘5; “$1.315?“ Ir ‘ m-‘mmm 1.“.1-11
I " I w?aﬂiiw-i ._ 'a' " -1 I": ___. .___ . I
I L. I __ ' 21 ff” N 3‘}: :.-"_1.1_
ll l . '1; f r _ _-I_.. 1:. ‘ .‘F I..|- _'-;l_: . ' I
'~ ' emaﬂ-t -, -'- ' «k .
F”. “t? -- $.51; . e w
nfl; W -- _ ' _-' 'i‘l‘f'rH-F‘N‘" '
I I'. ' I '. . --"I‘:'1-l_,.r-~
I' I _ .. “T.- _H. “I LFHJ?‘ nn- Rig"
' ' " '.i"f"h-".'1'£__iﬁ" {a :9:
I ' - . L:"-- _: . ‘I-L.I____,-' .. . 1' J"?
. .' '5‘"th - ' AXE W\\. “?;?;fﬁ‘ﬂit-zazfnﬂ ‘5'},
I I I _ _'“__ ' _ __ _ . _ '~.__ g, M -,_ ._ __ -
I-.__.. _' , . -_. -=—_d:-;.=nnnr.-r—- F ‘ ' ﬁn“,
82 Richards, G. H. (1860). Hydrographic Chart N0. 1922: Fraser River and Burrard Inlet, surveyed by Captain G.H.
Richards RN. and the Ofﬁcers of HMS. Plumper, 1859-60, 30 November 1860 (corrected to April 1862). Land Title
and Survey Authority of British Columbia, Map Vault, 18T2 New Westminster. Victoria.
———_—_—_—___
Squamz’sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F z'nal Report 37

55

The Royal Engineers undertook early survey work on land. In 1910, historian F.W.
Howay summarized the contribution of the Columbia Detachment of the Royal Engineers
during their ﬁve years in British Columbia (1858-1863):

“Taking stock of the work of the Engineers up to the end of 1863, we ﬁnd

that all the important explorations in the colony were performed by them;

the whole peninsula between Burrard Inlet and Fraser River was surveyed

by them; all the surveys of towns and country lands were made by them; all

the main roads were laid out by them; some of these, including portions of

the Cariboo Road, the Hope-Similkameen Road, the Douglas-Lillooet Road,

and the North Road to Burrard Inlet, were built by them; practically all the

maps of the colony and of sections of it were made from their surveys,

prepared in their drafting ofﬁce, lithographed and published by them at their

camp; they formed the Lands and Works Department, the Government

Printing Ofﬁce, and printed the ﬁrst British Columbia Gazette; they aided in

the maintenance of law and order; and their commanding ofﬁcer was the

ﬁrst Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, as well as the ﬁrst

Lieutenant-Governor.”83
The Royal Engineers’ service in British Columbia was terminated in 1863 and the
detachment returned to England. Many members, however, stayed behind and continued
as surveyors in the ’new colony.
In 1860, Captain Richards proposed four Government Reserves in the Burrard Inlet region:
one on the shore of English Bay in the area of Jericho Beach, one across the peninsula
between F alse Creek and Burrard Inlet, and two in Port Moody, one on the north shore and
one on the south shore. The Reserves were for admiralty or naval purposes and are
depicted on the ﬁrst hydrographio chart of F raser River to Burrard Inlet (F igure 7). An

1 33 Howay, F.W. (1910). The Work thhe Royal Engineers in British Columbia, 1858-1863. Victoria: Richard
Wolfenden: 9, 10. See also Hayes, Derek (2012). British Columbia: A New HistoricalAtlas. Vancouver: Douglas &
McIntyre.
. W

56
1860 map of Burrard Inlet drawn by Walter Moberly 0f the Royal Engineers depicts the

four Government Reserves set out by Richards as well as a Military Reserve at Coal

Peninsula (Stanley Park) and a Town Reserve in the area of downtown Vancouver (Figure

8).84 A Gazette Notice for a seventh Government Reserve at Point Grey was issued on 23

December 1862. Moberly’s 1860 map also depicts the ﬁrst land pre-emptions registered in

the Burrard Inlet region in that year.85

Colonial policy in British Columbia required authorities to establish Reserves for Indians

before Crown lands could be pre—empted and held in fee simple. Governor J ames

Douglas” ﬁrst instructions on the subject, dated 1 October 1859, called for all Indian

villages, “and the land they have been accustomed to cultivate, t0 the extent of several

hundred acres around each Village,” to be set aside as Reserves.86 Subsequent Colonial
policies focused more tightly on Indian Reserves and settlements, without mention of
' 8

cultlvated lands. 7

84 Crease, H. P. P. [1863]. [Map of Burrard Inlet with pencil notations]. BC Archives, Map Collection, CM/A 1071.
Victoria. The Government and Town Reserves were set out as part of the instructions from Governor Douglas

' relating to opening up Crown lands for pre-emption. Good, C. (1861). Correspondence: Good, for Colonial Secretary
to Moody, Chief Commissioner ofLands and Works, 5 March 1861. In British Columbia (1875), Papers Connected
with the Indian Land Question. Victoria: Richard Wolfenden, Government Printer: 21.

85 Moody, C. R. C. (1862). Public Notice: [Government Reserve Point Grey], 23 December 1862. British Columbia.
Government Gazette, 24 January 1863. Victoria: Queen’s Printer; British Columbia Department of Lands (1860).
New Westminster District Crown Land Pre—emption Records No. 1-127, 19 January-13 March 1860. BC Archives,
GR 1 12, Volume 91. Victoria. The seven Government Reserves are listed in the “Return of Government Reserves,”
tabled in the Legislature by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, and dated 14 January 1873.

86 Douglas, J. (1859). Circular: Douglas, Governor to Gold Commissioners and Magistrates of British Columbia (copy),
1 October 1859. Victoria: BC Archives, Colonial Correspondence, GR 1372, ﬁle 485/8f(enclosure), Microﬁlm reel
B-1325.

87 British Columbia (1860). Proclamation by His Excellency James Douglas, Companion 0f the Most Honourable
Order of the Bath, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Her Majesty’s Colony of British Columbia and its
Dependencies, Viee-Admiral of the same, &c., &c., [Proclamation Relating to the Acquisition of Land, 4 January,
1860]. N0. 15. Appendix to the Revised Statutes QfBritiSh Columbia. [87], Containing certain repealed Colonial
Laws usefulfor reference, Imperial Statutes qﬂ’ectz’ng British Columbia, Proclamations, &c. Victoria, Richard
Wolfenden, Government Printer: 61-64; British Columbia ( 1865). N0. 23 An Ordinance for regulating the acquisition
ofland in British Columbia, 11 April 1865. Appendix to the Revised Statutes qurz'tfsh Columbia, 1871, Containing
certain repealed Colonial Laws usefulfor reference, Imperial Statutes affecting British Columbia, Proclamations,
d’cc. Victoria, Richard Wolfenden, Government Printer: 85—93.

Squamz'sh T radr'tional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 39

PAGE 40 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

58
In March 1863., G. Turner suweyed the Govemmeut Resewes at Coal Peninsula and cm the
north side of First Nan'ows (Capilano River). —
Availabie records indicate that the Colonial Govenunem created four Indian Resewes in
Bun‘ard Inlet, though there is later reference to a ﬁfih (at Seymour). 111 1391311131}? .1868.
Joseph Tultch wrote to The C‘oluniai Secretaly l‘ecounnending that two Resewes be
.—
I—
I—
'—
Sqnmnish Traditional Use and Omlpanqv Smdr. Firm? Rape)? r13

5
(2015). ‘Final Report: Gitga’at First Nation Traditional Use and Occupancy Study
Prince Rupert Harbour and Lower Skeena River Regions. Part II: Ethnographic
Research Report.’ Report for the Gitga’at First Nation, Hartley Bay, BC, 5
February 2015 (lead author).
(2015). “Final Supplementary Research Report: Coquitlam Indian Reserve N0. 1
Dyke.’ Report prepared for Kwikwetlem First Nation, 1 March 2015.
(2015). ‘Coldwater Indian Band: Preliminary Ethnographic and Historic
Overview and Traditional Use Study.” Report prepared for the Goldwater Indian
Band for Hearing Order OH—001-2014. Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Application for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project, 26 May 2015 (lead
author).
(2015). ‘Gitga’at First Nation Traditional Use or Occupancy Study Proj ect for the
Proposed LNG Carrier Shipping Route: Final Report.’ Report for the Gitga’at
First Nation, Hartley Bay, BC, 31 May 2015 (lead author).
(2016). ‘Kitselas First Nation. Lakelse-Kitimat Valley Region TUOS: Preliminary
Report.’ Report for the Lands and Resources Department, Kitselas First Nation,
Terrace, B.C, March 2016 (lead author).
(2016). ‘Gitga’at F irst Nation Traditional Use and Occupancy Study for the
Aurora LNG Proj ect, Prince Rupert Harbour Region: Preliminary Report. ’ Report
for the Gitga’at First Nation, Hartley Bay, BC, 10 August 2016 (lead author).
(2017). ‘Preliminary Historical Report Kwikwetlem F irst Nation: Pitt River Road
and Red River Dyke on LR. No. 2.’ Draft Speciﬁc Claim report prepared for
Kwikwetlem F irst Nation, 22 October 2017.
Inglis, Richard I. and James C. Haggarty

(1983). ‘Archaeologieal Investigation of the Yuquot Whaler‘s Shrine: Nootka
Island. ’ Report submitted to the Mowachaht Band, Gold River and the Nuu-chah-
nulth Tribal Council, Port Alberni.
(1986). Pacific Rim National Park E thnographic History. Environment Canada,
Parks, Microﬁche Report Series 257, Calgary.
(1987). ‘Cook to J ewitt: Three Decades of Change in Nootka Sound. ’ Paper
presented at the Fifth North American Fur Trade Conference, Montreal 1985. Re-
published in Huupukwanum Tupaat: Nuu-chah—nulth Voices, Histories, Objects
and Journeys, edited by Alan L. Hoover. Victoria, BC: Royal BC. Museum,
2000 (reprint of 1987 article).

5

59
established for the Squamish, one on False Creek Bay and the other at Mission Creek on
the north shore of Burrard Inlet.93 In November 1869, three Indian Reserves were created
by Gazette Notice: No.1 (Mission), No.2 (False Creek), and N0. 3 (Burrardview).94 -
— nmaybethat
the Colonial authorities felt that the Government Reserves sufﬁciently protected the Indian
settlements situated within their boundaries from settler pre-emption.

Confederation Period

The ﬁrst settler communities in Burrard Inlet grew up around sawmills established in the

18603 at What became Moodyville, 0n the north shore, and Hastings Mill, on the south
shore. Squamish people participated in new employment opportunities in the forestry
industry, working in the mills, 0n the docks, and as loggers. Indian Superintendent James

Lenihan commented on Squamish labour and settlement in a June 1877 report on his Visit

to the Burrard Inlet Reserves:
“Nearly all the Squamish Tribe are remarkable for their industry, -
intelligence. . . . ..

93 Trutch, Joseph (1868). Correspondence to Colonial Secretary, 18 February 1868. In British Columbia (1875), Papers
Connected with the Indian Land Question. Victoria: Richard Wolfenden, Government Printer: 75, 76.

9“ Truteh, Joseph (1869). Gazette Notice, 25 November 1869. In British Columbia (1875), Papers Connected with the
Indian Land Question. Victoria: Richard Wolfenden, Government Printer: 167. It was conﬁrmed and expanded by
the Joint Indian Reserve Commission in 1876. In the 1873 Return of Government Reserves, “north ofFirst Narrows”
is listed as a Military Reserve. Turner surveyed this Reserve in March 1863. An Indian village is located at the mouth
of the large river in his ﬁeldbook. Tumer (1863): 6.

I—

—_—_—_—_—_

Squamish T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, Fina! Report 42

60
Many of them are employed in the large saw mills at 1.00 to $1.25
per day and board.
Many others are employed in the logging camps loading the ships
and in various ways, at good wages. The proximity of the villages to the
mills afford a favourable opportunity to the young men to attend work and
reside at home.
-I
Other late-nineteenth and early-twentieth-century additions to the Squamish economy
included work in canneries at the mouth of the Fraser River and hop ﬁelds in Washington
The city of Vancouver was incorporated in 1886, and the coming of the railroad to
Vancouver in 1887 galvanized industrial and urban growth. New areas were opened up for
settlement and areas like the eastern end of False Creek were ﬁlled in to meet the growing
demand for land. The south shore of Burrard Inlet saw increased industrial activity and
growth of port facilities. A 1979 Geological Survey of Canada map depicts the extent of
96 Lenihan, James (1877). Correspondence to EA Meredith, Deputy Superintendent of Indian Affairs, June 10, 1877.
Ottawa: Library and Archives Canada. RG 10, Volume 3650, File 8424.
I —
Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F z'nal Report 43

61
inﬁlling along the shore of Burrard Inlet (Figure 9).98 —
F igure 9: Geological Survey of Canada map depicting the extent ofinﬁlling (black cross-
hatching) 0n the south shore ofBurrm-d Inlet, 1979.
|
' .__. _ 1'! ‘Idﬁlﬁir
. .21;- - _ _ _J,—.--.
| _ . i- '_ ' F
. _ .' "-._ .__?" - * 1, . .,
- ~. w... _. _, m
_. _. . I ..3 :5 a . . 4' 4"
1 .. ..{3'_ ' 1i . eh t;ﬁ*.ﬁ'
' *i ._._. --*"" a 1t'.-I'-- IE.“
' ' . naﬂﬁ
. _. «r- ' 3"": -
. _ .. _. .L'f' 'i‘n‘*,“f**‘ . 1‘, .. ‘1. H .I
I! . .1! if. . _. ’ﬁ‘t. 4|...- ” . -_ ._ _~u.- 2" _. .. .-
. _ .' ,5... __ - mm 51 3,“ gfﬁﬂcﬂ . 3“? .
- . '3. ' _ 'fOTsJ-i . H 'r' 1-: _ ;'_fT-.:"T‘ff';-1-.- "4:;
- .-".'=.‘. . _:ﬂ '1? _' _ .‘¢* *1 ' __ . pﬁ- IE _~:El--I- **n“;aH-::;:‘4: ifrﬁ‘ In. .-
I _. 1 . -*.~'.f«g*r;af-‘“‘T'l '1 pﬂti-;--il 15.3.15; :43'"__';..r thi" ”ii; “7‘? LI: :
-:.' .Ii I: :1", . £'1- I. _ F 'i" 1'14 _ ' - :'-. “1-11 II-#¢:*F+1}I
I ' 7' ‘ ##wifﬂ‘t'r -. ‘ “ﬁﬁ- gt," . $___~"1..'~'
- - .- .r- -.-.+*:.-~. . . -_ -
I. . .1. ‘l f I
. FE: J?
Industrial development on the north shore of Burrard Inlet lagged behind that of
Vancouver largely due to lack of access. Logging was the earliest industry. Numerous
timber leases were located up the valleys of Seymour River, Lynn Creek, and Capilano
98 Geological Suwey of Canada (1979). Surﬁcial Geology Vancouver British Columbia. Geological Survey of Canada
Map 1486A. In Hayes, Derek (2005). Historica/ Attas of Vancouver and the Lower Fraser Valley. Vancouver:
I Douglas & McIntyre: 103, Map 198.
I Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 44

62
River (Figure 10)?) As the north shore Opened for industrial development along the
waterfront, this shoreline was also dredged and in-ﬁlled. The river mouths 011 the north
shore were channeled. Most of the extensive intertidal ﬂats were intensively dredged in
the 1950s to increase the area for port development and the loading of freighters. The
dredged material was used to expand the foreshore, by filling in the marsh areas, and as
road ﬁll for the Upper Levels Highway.
Figure 10: Map of the north shore Qme'mrd Inlet depicting timber leases and District of
North Vancouver, 1907.
. - —___.—..I_ n ..._ r. _: . . . 1'...- J' _ " ..-- .---'
'é'IIT- _' . '3”; 'L m... Lb” -. . _ .' EH...s---*""
: + wt?" ’ 'l-' . .31.”!
L .. 5" . _ _..; ﬂ—' ._.~..:-. ;";_‘l_"
t r I._ E"; ‘ P“ i“ . TJL 1—; T“:.l:'1‘— ..._ l .—
. ' E'jﬁ. ”i! = " ’j "7 L3! """1-1211
- “tﬂ'ir...- 11:51- :wﬁ-iu‘ ‘2 - :4 «Jifft-J 1-1
;. -"'" . .1. ”a 1.1-1. 2:... .41 - .+-- 1f _ __ _
- .' -.-' -.1.;_I,‘I.al.. . . ' . _h __:__I_ "'P _ 4-.
.. . =71. 11.1;th --—W. 1.; 3-...—
":HMH{§* "W tﬁi - ~-- .11- Ff - -_
' III' . i1;- '1' HLT‘IH—IJ- Ii '1' h H --I I I ‘._ i F.?.- ‘4" -- “I _
. . 1 2'4: _9’ “El' 5...:3- '1' ‘._“ 1- ?: Jill'.‘ Eli'- m-Fvu'. .+
_ . . , .11“ ‘uI-uﬁ__ﬁ r -1 _ ?irF. .. ._".Z“ ,_ ____
- - -- - '- WW saﬂt’twrz ﬁx. ' - - 1 salt " --- .-
: . _ _. 1H =_...1 __ _ ,“ -—-—---¢ 1 ‘l'
1.11; 1:. 11...... I .. L ....... .. “1;. .. .
' -.:§‘ . r *5- " -".-'=i"w -- '----.--’E" ”H
1 .-.. i tit? ﬂ ._ .. _. - mm?
.. E. 1' r . ‘5: F f
1'1.- ﬂ "" _ B: - .
_ :r' 4"..‘3- ' .' . Ha; .'-.I .". . 9 I .
" . arm'- .11. FE .
f“: 5““?ng . .1 .
.i‘. '_ ‘._ .-_ ' 'f" _-.'-"'+
' 5-5-1.- _H ﬂ". - H '.1-
1 99 Harris, DR. (1905). Map ofNew Westminster District. Vancouver Public Library Special Collections, 912.71135
H3111 copy 2. I11 Hayes, Derek (2012). British Columbia: A New Historian! At/as. Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre:
243, Map 597.
] Squamish TraditionaI Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 45

PAGE 46 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

64

Indian Reserves

The process of Indian Reserve creation was a contentious issue between the federal and

provincial governments after Confederation. In 1876, Canada and British Columbia

attempted to resolve the issue of Indian Reserve allocation through the formation of a

J oint Indian Reserve Commission. Greater Vancouver was the ﬁrst area Visited by this

Commission. The Commissioners conﬁrmed four (Mission, False Creek, Burrardview,

and Capilano) and expanded three (False Creek, Burrardview, and Capilano) of the

Colonial Indian Reserves established for Squamish in Burrard Inlet. A ﬁfth Reserve, at

Seymour Creek, was also conﬁrmed and expanded. As in the case of Capilano, 110 record

of the creation of this Reserve by the colonial government has been identiﬁed. A sixth

Reserve, a ﬁshing station at the head of Indian Arm, was created for Squamish and

Musqueam. 10]

—

—

—

—

—

—
—
—
—
—

—
—
—

'01 Anderson, A.C., A. McKinlay, et a1. (1877). Minutes ofDecision: Skawmish Tribe, 15 June 1877. Canada.
Department of Indian Affairs. Seymour Index. Volume 3: Minutes of Decision, Correspondence & Sketches — J 0th
Indian Reserve Commission & G.M. Sproat. British Columbia Indian Reserves. File 8496. [Reg. No. B-64656].
Ottawa: 140-148.

W—w

65
Figure 11: A Ham? on W95! 97” A‘I'é’ﬁﬂé’, me Grammy Sift)?! Bridge’, CRR. Kirsﬂmm Tresrie
Bridge, and Indian Wliage ofSnanq, m 1890(133101'0 by Hi ("I:apman; (“in of Vancouver
Archive’s, Van Sc P58)
I I ' ' -.u I ' .I I .
I . . .-.;. ' nhr.,'-' .I'" r-

. aa' # I. E" "5' '1; ‘it' ' WW'v—rniﬁrﬁ‘w :‘iTIFITF- . - ... :r- ,.,"....:-.-.-r..--.-.-.un

J"; .‘ ~ "33", “4,-.‘w . Ii

' _ . 13.3.- 1 E H?“ 46" el‘i-Tnf:

. _- " ‘._ .-J-.n" _ ' . . ._ " -1
'—
—_—_.____—____——_
Squamish D'adfn'onaf Um and Occupancy 3mm: Firm? RM)? 43

66
The Joint Indian Reserve Commissioners also Visited Howe Sound and, 011 28 November
1876, allotted three Reserves 011 its western side:
I —
'—
—_—_—_—_—_—__
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ma} Report 49

67
The Joint Indian Reserve Commission did not complete its mandate due to continued
disagreements between the federal and provincial governments. Finally, in 1912, Canada
and British Columbia agreed to establish another commission, the Royal Commission on
Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia (RCIABC), to be the “ﬁnal
adjustment of all matters relating to Indian Affairs” by reconciling all differences
between the two governments respecting “Indian lands and Indian affairs generally.”108
I —
I —
I— '
'08 McKenna, J .A.J - and R. McBride (1912). Memorandum of an Agreement Arrived at Between J.A.J. McKenna and
I the Honourable Sir Richard McBride, 24 September 1912. In Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of
British Columbia (1916). Report OfIhe Roya/ Commission on Indian Aﬂaz’rsfor the Province QfBrftish Commbia.
Victoria, Acme Press: 10-11.
! Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, F z'nal Report 50

68

The RCIABC considered the right-of—way applications and, in a series of Interim
Reports, recommended approval of the PGE and Burrard Inlet Tunnel and Bridge rights-
of-way across Squamish Reserves. The Commission also recommended permission for
the federal Department of Public Works to construct a wharf on Mission Reserve N0.

1. | 12
' —
I —
'—
“2 Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia (1916). Report 0ft/qe Royal Commission

on Indian Aﬂairsfor the Province ome'tish Columbia. Victoria, Acme Press: 26, 27, 37, 70.
Squamish T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 5]

6

Inglis, Richard 1., J ames C. Haggarty and Kevin Neary
(1998). ‘Yuquot National Historic Site: Commemorative Integrity Statement.’
Gold River BC. and Victoria BC: Mowachaht/Muchalaht First Nation and
Canadian Heritage.
(2000). ‘Balancing History: An Emerging F irst Nations Authority. ’ In Nuu-chah—
nuh‘h Voices, Histories, Objects and Journeys. A.L. Hoover, ed., Royal British
Columbia Museum, Victoria.

Inglis, Richard I. and George F. MacDonald, editors
(1979). Sheena River Prehistory. National Museum of Man, Archaeological
Survey of Canada, Mercury Series No. 50, Ottawa.

Ingelﬁnger, Sarah Shurcliff, and Alice W. Shurcliff
(1993). ‘Introduction.’ Captive 0fthe Nootka Indians: The Northwest Coast
Adventure ofJohn R. Jewitt, 1802—1806. Boston: Back Bay Books: Distributed by
Northeastern University Press.

Jonaitis, Aldona
(1999). The Yuquot Whalers ’ Shrine (with research contributions by Richard I.
Inglis). Seattle & London: University of Washington Press.

J onaitis, Aldona and Richard Inglis
(1992). ‘Power, History and Authenticity: The Mowachaht Whalers Washing
House’” South Atlantic QuarterZy 91: 193-214.

MacDonald, George F. and Richard I. Inglis
(1976). The Dig: an archaeological reconstruction ofa west coast village.
National Museum of Man, Ottawa.
(1981). “An Overview of the North Coast Prehistory Project.’ B. C. Studies, 48:
37-63.

Moziﬁo, Jose Mariano, edited by Iris Wilson Engstrand.
(1991). ‘Introduction.’ Noticias De Nutka: An Account ofNoosza Sound in I 792.
lst paperback ed. Seattle Vancouver: University of Washington Press; Douglas &
McIntyre, 1991.

Traditions Consulting Services Inc.
(2005). ‘Cowichan Title and a Cultural Heritage Assessment of the Shawnigan
Lake Area.’ Report prepared for Cowichan Tribes (lead author).
(2005). ‘Mowachaht Aboriginal Title.” Report prepared for the Mowachaht/
Muchalaht First Nation (lead author).

6

69

Surrenders for rights—of—way and continuing reductions over the years have resulted in

signiﬁcant fragmentation of Squamish Reserves 0n the north shore. A contemporary

view of the Seymour Creek Reserve is illustrative (Figure 12). —

At the same time, services such as water and electricity were not delivered to homes on

Squamish Reserves until the second half of the twentieth century. _
' —
I —

Squamz'sh T radz'tz'onal Use and Occupancy Study, F ma! Report 52

70
F igure 12: Surrenders for rights-ojlway and continuing reductions over the years have
resulted in significantfragmentation 0quuamish Reserves 0n the north shore. Google Earth
image illustrates extensive bifurcation 0fSeym0ur Indian Reserve, 2015 (Google imagery dates
to 2009).
“HE. FE“... «_l" . -_- ‘3'}:1‘ ._ Frill]. l'i _EIF _. - J;;' I'. .— .A' "'37? -. . ' -'-,I __'.I r: ..J' J.|:' . ' ' 1. 1 rs. .- _-'_ l’IJ-‘-‘_ 111'
’ -' ’ . .:'..-."‘-' .. 1. -‘_ . '1n'n..l.;':, ._, 'T. ' _ Z _ ' .I _‘f “r!" _ -".|- "' __ .'- - _F-
. t-r“*‘*-* "r- iﬂ ”'”"“-““5€3§‘-1§ ﬁg ' .. .. . ""‘Fs's- .. ./ [Cr ’-. . .
h,i_.:..-":-;;_}*: “2 3;”: ﬂ; ﬁﬁ- ' _ :_...:,._1_3._;:_:1"1..'__Irﬁ'ﬁ“ ' _ 12‘” 3.x?!" ' 1 {1. '1}: £31" . .
ff} .4“ -' _.'?'E1- i 3'4". '51-"- "ijﬂmﬂt'rr'ﬂ ' : ..- I H."- 1: T‘- I-.‘.'£':I'-".I|:'|' 1E: F l! I I"! -.
r:- “r ' __ ":yf. ,-' F‘u‘ai 3,1:qu Iii! .E'IuLE-i _ H h—‘JB‘K' Izlew 4... gagi-r- . 1:.r' . _. .-
" 1:: . 41:; ' .{ﬁﬂj' liq h ”Ji'ﬁ ' ' ' f I #1! 3' .0. . \ﬁw" . - inn; I '-
' ' _q $35: -‘: . ?_.E-j E :L'i-thJ ' i 51112-1: 1n . J_r .W" . - '
- ----;‘.---. g2} r::'""'-'ir..,'.-' Lii}: . ' ' “'Lﬂ-r' ‘37'1'".I,' - . 'il, $?U-IL“: Fiﬁ r7 Mr; I‘ ' 1'1""
* Him '__ ‘ﬁﬁf- “:11 E; .- ‘ fun“. '. . ' . - ' :3. -:
1-. $1? 9;} I_--_-_:hf-. F.- __ - ." I I' I'L‘v... . _-.- .Iﬂi" I; - 1'1. - _- ._‘:';-”L-l,l-J'.';r.”‘ _ _III E 1 _" *«EI
- f. ?‘5 173:1 “?r— -.L' u. 15;" -. ' . ' .. «iﬁwaI..r..-..~.E-:i~'.' eJ‘I a ‘m
_. _ I I _ -'_-_L, “1-.“ .IJ'.--. :1 1,-_ '1. ‘r___ -' -__,:,l" - J l
”1-“; :i 31* U ?:n- {234‘ ._._ «1:: *“Wﬁ' - E.
I . -; ,iiry. fill?" 1 1F}-F1‘-ﬁ:-. R11 .'L. ..u - .- iii: #:5- ..h H._ ::"_ 1, ._ if"
ﬁﬁ‘.‘ ‘2 '2. " ' i - _-" . .- '.:-"-'.';Z=:"-':='=.g-i"',I', E -- ' ....1$E.F{'i . i_ . '1 - - ' " - u
' ‘5' F*- [g' i l Eﬁ- iii: Pei": [‘3 Eﬁ-EE- Eh.-_—. _ .. .- . , Lit? .
* - T. » ..-:,..- swirl :- "it *4 ..- amar- ' ”v?
-_ . : .-. I . .l' _ '_II II '. 'f' 1 J. ["11" i; ‘21 ’ n
:J l' . *5 WES: ET;- _ ii; :— H ﬁl- '." I "1 r . :1, ‘4 a \ .' =4“
. ht- . - Ir’f ' :‘3 "E . ﬁe" Eu ‘ ‘53“
my...“ ‘— 3‘]? ._ Ir IL, . ' ." .' .ﬂ
. - 1:? ..:.: . . L .onq‘lc m_“m
l'.'|=:I . -'.'_.l LI “Human {1| HHHbH I'ZIJIIII'IHIH: L
I " _--.-.-_. :_ Hungrnx lam: ‘iIJE‘EULlu 11LI l1 JEH-mig 9? mt ‘fﬁiJltE-d Uh m H as. LI Ill ere nil .3 M Ht'i
In June 1916, Aboriginal leaders in British Columbia formed the Allied Indian Tribes of
British Columbia to oppose the implementation of the recommendations of the Royal
Commission and to continue to pursue the “Indian land question” (Aboriginal title).
British Columbia also refused to adopt the recommendations of the Royal Commission
without further review. By 1920, the provincial and federal governments had agreed to
j settle their continuing differences. British Columbia appointed Major J .W. Clark and
Canada appointed W.E. Ditchburn, Chief Inspector of Indian Agencies for British
Columbia, to review the recommendations of the Royal Commission. As part of this
review, the Allied Indian Tribes chose representatives, including Andrew Paull 0f
Squamish, to meet with each tribe to record their responses to the Royal Commission
Report. The representatives reported their ﬁndings to Ditchburn, who then reviewed and
' edited the ﬁndings before sending the list of new land applications for Indian Reserves t0
the provincial government.
I Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 53

71

The Province accepted only minimal amendments or additions to the 1916 Royal
Commission recommendations, which were approved by reciprocal orders-in-council in
1923—24.116
I —
”6 British Columbia. Provincial Secretary (1923). Order in Council No. 507, 6 May 1924. British Columbia

Department Of Lands File 044557, Federal Harbours in British Columbia. Land Title and Survey Authority of BC,

Surveyor General Division. Victoria; Canada. Privy Council Ofﬁce ([924). Order in Council No. 1924-1265, 19 July
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 54

72
1924. Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. First Nations Land Registry System. Instrument N0. R12073. Ottawa.
Ottawa.
I —
. —
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 55

73
This interviewee explained that the Squamish Nation is taking an active role in efforts to
enhance the sustainability of the aquatic ecosystem in Burrard Inlet, partnering with
various jurisdictions and organizations. —
— Recentpmjects
and partnerships include:

° A memorandum of understanding with Vancouver Parks and the Vancouver
Aquarium to revitalize Beaver Lake, which is being choked out by invasive
species, and the creek that drains into the lake;

° Fisheries enhancement, through installation of a rearings pond, on McDonald
Creek, with the West Vancouver Streamkeepers;

' Foreshore and estuary restoration 0n Mackay Creek, with the City and District of
North Vancouver and Seaspan;

° Estuary restoration and installation of rearings pond on Mosquito Creek; and

° Stream rehabilitation in New Brighton Park area.

As discussed in more detail below, Squamish use and occupation of lands and waters in
southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the lower Fraser River
continues to this day. This activity, several interviewees noted, continues to be

"8 SQKM_03, Interview, 2015.

”9 SQKM_03, Interview, 2015.

Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 56

74
constrained by government policy and urban and industrial development. One
interviewee stated in speciﬁc relation to the proposed Trans Mountain Expansion Project:
' —
Squamz'sh Traditionai Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 57

75

Traditional Use and Occupancy Site Research
Introduction
The following report sections provide summary information about the methodology and
results for Squamish TUOS site research for the proposed Kinder Morgan Trans
Mountain Pipeline Expansion Project (SQKM TUOS).
Protocols
Protocols and methodology, established for previous TUOS projects, were reviewed and
conﬁrmed at meetings and discussions with Squamish Nation representatives at project
startup and included decisions on the following items:

° Project Study Area;

' A list of Squamish Nation members for interviews;

' Identiﬁcation of Louise Williams as the Squamish Nation Community

Coordinator and Researcher;
' Squamish Nation representatives available to provide proj ect assistance and
coordination; and

° Project methodologies for interviews and data and archives.
T UOS Research Methodology
The methodology and guidelines employed for the SQKM TUOS are based on those
described and recommended by the Province of British Columbia’s Traditional Use
Study Programm Some modiﬁcations of these guidelines were employed for the SQKM
TUOS project, particularly in the number, content and structure of ﬁelds in the project’s
TUOS site Database, outlined later in this report. This methodology is considered to be
thorough and reliable, and is used in preference to other research models that focus on the
identiﬁcation of “kill, capture and gather” sites. The TUOS methodology employed for

I '3' British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Aboriginal Affairs Branch (2001), “Traditional Use Study Program
Guidelines.”
I W

76
the SQKM TUOS proj ect identiﬁes areas and locations where Squamish Nation
members, past and present, exercise their traditional rights, and not just speciﬁc points
where Squamish Nation members have caught fish, killed game, or gathered resources.
As determined through protocols established at the project’s outset, the SQKM TUOS
was conducted in a comprehensive manner and attempted to identify not just where
TUOS sites are located, but also documented, when possible, additional details about
each site and a history of activities that occur, or have occurred there. The information
might include details such as: when the site is or has been used; where and from whom
information about the site was learned or obtained; other people who are known to have
used the site; the history of activities at the sites; the times of year when it had/has been
used; the relative abundance of resources at the site; and the signiﬁcance of the site to
Squamish Nation members.

T raditional Use and Occupancy Site Deﬁnition
The deﬁnition of a “Traditional Use and Occupancy Site” (TUOS site) is considered to be
' the same as that for a “traditional use site” presented in the Traditional Use Study
Program Guidelines, cited above:
“A Traditional use site is any geographically-deﬁned site (on land or
water) used traditionally by one or more groups of people for some type of
activity. These sites may lack the physical evidence of human-made
artifacts or structures; yet maintain cultural signiﬁcance to a living
community of people.
Information about the existence and nature of Traditional Use sites is
usually obtained through interviews with community Elders, as well as
archival and literature searches. Examples may include:
* Locations associated with traditional beliefs of an
Aboriginal group about its origins, cultural history or world
View;
Squamish T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, F ﬁnal Report 59

77
' The location of trails, sacred sites and resource gathering
sites such as berry grounds;
° A location where a community has traditionally carried out
economic, artistic or other cultural pursuits important to
maintaining its identity; or
' The traditional home of a particular cultural group.
Under certain circumstances, information pertinent to understanding some
of these resources is enhanced through archaeological investigation.”122
For the Squamish SQKM TUOS project, archaeological sites are considered a type of
TUOS site, as implied by the deﬁnition above. Archaeological sites are important to
present day Squamish Nation members, as they are considered time capsules that contain
centuries of Squamish Nation history, and important “markers” of Squamish Nation
TUOS activities past and present.123
For the purposes of the TUOS project, one can conceptualize TUOS sites as composed of
three potentially overlapping subsets from a chronological perspective:
* Archaeological sites;
' Sites as used for traditional purposes in the past; and
' Sites used for traditional purposes today.
For example, a single TUOS site may be in use today for traditional activities, it may
have been documented in the past as being used for similar or other traditional purposes,
and it may also be formally recorded as an archaeological site.
. 122 British Columbia Ministry of F orests, Aboriginal Affairs Branch (2001).
'23 Only archaeological sites associated with Aboriginal heritage are included within the deﬁnition of a TUOS site, thus
excluding archaeological sites for shipwrecks, non-Aboriginal historic buildings, etc.
. Squamish T raditional Use and Occupancy Study, F inal Report 60

78
For this report, the TUOS sites recorded in the database are sites which:

' were pointed out and described by Squamish Nation members in interviews or in
project meetings as sites customarily used or preferred for traditional activities;

' were described in interviews or documentary sources as locations where resources
are harvested on a regular basis, particularly where they are abundant, reliable, or
possess desirable qualities;

' are archaeological sites (formally recorded, or described in interviews), or

I ' qualify based on other criteria included in the deﬁnition provided above.
S QKM T UOS Information Sources
Project Interviews
Interviews with Squamish Nation Elders and Knowledge Holders are the primary source
of information for the SQKM TUOS. The following description of interview

. methodology is generalized for interviews with Squamish members from previous
projects as well as from the current proj ect.
At the start of the TUOS research, a meeting was held with Squamish Nation
representatives, and the project interview protocols and Study Area were discussed and
agreed upon. A list of Squamish Nation Elders and Knowledge Holders for interview

. was developed, with priority given to conducting interviews with Elders 0r Squamish
Nation members considered to be particularly knowledgeable. The people interviewed

7
(2008). ‘Cultural Heritage Assessment Upper Tahsis Inlet, Lower Tahsis River
Region. ’ Report prepared for the Mowaehaht/ Muchalaht First Nation, June 2008
(co-author).
(2010). ‘S/_mv_cwz,2 7mesh Occupation and Use of z'yélmexw (J erieho) and the
Southwestern Burrard Inlet Region. ’ Report prepared for Sigwngi 7mesh Nation
Chiefs and Council, September 2010 (co—author).
(2012). ‘Wet’suwet’en First Nation Traditional Land Use and Occupancy Study.’
Report prepared for Wet’suwet’en First Nation and Paciﬁc Trails Pipeline (eo-
author).
(2013). ‘Historieal Report: Dominion Government Telegraph Service Line,
Tsimpsean LR. No. 2, Speciﬁc Claim. ’ Report prepared for Lax Kw’ala-ams
Indian Band (lead author), February 17, 2017.
(2013). Summary ethnographic reports for 24 First Nations for E18 submission,
Site C Clean Energy Proj eet. Prepared for BC Hydro (lead author).
(2013). ‘Overview History of Upper Sicwngi 7mesh (Squamish) Territory.’ Report
prepared for Skwngi 7mesh Nation Chiefs and Council, 31 March 2013 (co-
author).
I (2013). ‘Wet’suwet’en First Nation Preliminary Soeio-Economic Baseline Study.
! With Silverking Consulting Ltd. ’ Report prepared for the Wet’suwet’en First
Nation and TransCanada Pipelines Ltd., J uly 2013 (eo-author).
(2013). ‘Wet’suwet’en First Nation Traditional Land Use and Occupancy Study. ’
Report prepared for Wet’suwet’en First Nation and Coastal GasLink,
TransCanada Pipelines, December 2013 (co-author).
(2014). ‘Speeiﬁc Claim Historical Research Report: Telegraph Line and Trail
across Hesqiaht Reserves.’ Speciﬁc claim report prepared for the Hesquiaht First
Nation, 25 March 2014 (co—author).
(2014). ‘Slgwygwd 7mesh Occupation and Use of Kw ’ech ’z‘enm (McNab Creek) and
the Western Howe Sound Region.’ Report prepared for Skwgcwd 7mesh Nation
Chiefs and Council, 15 April 2014. Final Report, 11 August 2015 (co-author).
(2014). ‘S/gwngi 7mesh Occupation and Use of Swiyat (Woodﬁbre/Mill Creeks)
and Northern Howe Sound and Indian River Regions. ’ Preliminary Report
prepared for Sigwngi 7mesh Nation Chiefs and Council relating to the Woodﬁbre
LNG and associated Eagle Mountain Gas Pipeline Projects, 27 July 2014 (co—
author).
7

79
are regarded within the community as those who have signiﬁcant knowledge of
traditional use and activities based on their experiences and status as Elders; because they
are recognized as having acquired considerable knowledge from Elders or other sources;
or because they are known to have frequently engaged in traditional activities in
Squamish Nation territory.

SQKM TUOS interviews were conducted with individual Squamish Nation members.
Information relevant to the SQKM TUOS was also recorded in interviews for earlier
proj ects conducted by Traditions Consulting Services, Inc. for the Squamish Nation.
—
—
—
—
—
-

a Each initial interview appointment with a Squamish Nation Elder 01‘ Knowledge Holder
started with a discussion of the purposes of the TUOS research, including an outline of
the topics to be discussed during the interview, the types of questions to be asked, and
how the resulting information would be managed. Proj ect Consent Forms were reviewed
with each interviewee, and these were signed and witnessed before each interview
started.

Once initial discussions were completed and consent forms had been signed, the
interview recording equipment was set up and the interview commenced. For most
sessions, the process of discussing the interview and setting up equipment usually
required at least half an hour before the actual interview began. Interview sessions
ranged in total length from two hours to four hours, with actual recorded interview time
ranging from ninety minutes to three hours. Most interviews were paused at one-hour
intervals in order to prevent fatigue. Some interview sessions were halted for comfort

80
breaks that often included meals, coffee, and snacks. Interviewees were provided with an
honorarium at the end of each interview.

Each initial interview session with an interviewee began with them providing background

on their personal history, with focus being directed on how they had learned about

Squamish Nation history, culture and territory; where they had lived in Squamish Nation

territory; and what types of traditional activities they had and were engaged in. After

general personal background information had been provided, interviewees were then

requested to provide their knowledge about TUOS sites for each of the “Activity”

categories listed below, and deﬁned later in this report.

The primary goal of the Squamish SQKM TUOS proj ect interviews was‘to obtain

information about TUOS sites in Squamish Nation territory, with attention to those

located in the Study Area and the Consultation Area along the lower Fraser River. An

interview guide, organized by the Activity/Topic list below, was referenced during the

course of interviews, in preference to a formal list of set questions that Were to be asked
! of all people interviewed. The people interviewed were posed open—ended questions

concerning the list of topics, and were encouraged to provide information according to

their own preferences. FollOw-up questions were also posed, seeking additional

information on signiﬁcant points and details in the course of the interview.

Activity/Topic List

Archaeological Site Berry/Plant Gathering

Burial Ceremonial/Sacred Sites

Conﬂict Dwelling

Farming Fishing

Forestry Gardening

Hunting Indian Reserve

Legendary Being Manufacture

Medical/Therapeutic Site Named Places

Seafood Gathering Preparation Site

W

81

Activity/Topic List, continued
Resource Material Traditional History
Trails/Travel Water Supply
The pe0ple interviewed have an abundance of information acquired over a lifetime of
experience engaged in hunting, ﬁshing, trapping, beITy picking, and other traditional
activities. The information obtained through the proj ect interviews is considered rich and
reliable.
Each interview session was assigned a unique alphanumeric code. The ﬁrst interview for
the SQKM TUOS was assigned the number SQKM_01; the next interview was
designated SQKM_02; and so on. Each interview session was conducted with its own set
of paper maps (described later), used for recording the locations of TUOS sites identiﬁed
in the course of each interview, and each interview set was catalogued based on its
interview code.
Information about TUOS sites was recorded to the extent possible with each interviewee.
Interview questioning focused on eliciting information about:

° each site’s geographic location

° each site’s “Activities”

° each site’s “Entities” and

* how the interviewee knew or learned about the site
Interview questions were posed based on the list of potential site Activity/Topio listed
above. Follow-up questions were focused on obtaining speciﬁc details about when sites
are used; the frequency with which they are used; the quantities or quality of resources
harvested; how the resources are consumed or used; and associated details about
traditional use and occupancy at the location.

|
| Squamz’sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 64

82

The locations of TUOS sites were plotted in pencil on the paper interview maps as points,
lines or polygons as appropriate. Interviewees were consulted about the accuracy of the
mapping of sites as they were plotted. When necessary, mapping lines were erased or
altered based on comments from respondents.
Unique sets of interview maps were provided for each interview session. The mapping of
all sites was accomplished to the precision possible, based on the interviewer’s and
interviewee’s ability to identify, describe, and depict the locations of the sites on the
interview maps. Additional maps and websites (Google Earth) were also consulted when
site locations required conﬁrmation. In a few instances, when sites could only be mapped
with approximation; they are so described in the TUOS site database in the “Comments”
ﬁeld. Each site was identiﬁed on the interview maps by sequential numbering in the
order it was recorded; starting at “01” for each interview session. The mapped location
for each site is identiﬁed in the interview Video, in interview notes and transcripts, and in
the TUOS Database, described later, by a unique alphanumeric code, as in the following
examples:

° SQKM_01:001 - being the ﬁrst site recorded during interview session SQKM_01

' SQKM_03:024/- being the twenty—fourth site recorded during interview session

SQKM_03
TUOS interviews with Squamish members provided much of the information included in
the sew Tues database. —
—
Archaeological Site Records
The deﬁnition of a TUOS site generally includes archaeological sites. Archaeological
sites form a subset of the TUOS sites within the project Study Area, and the compilation
of information about archaeological sites is a signiﬁcant part of TUOS research. In the
' context of this study, archaeological sites within the Study Area are included as TUOS

sites. Archaeological sites associated with Squamish TUOS sites along the lower Fraser
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, FinaZ Report 65

83

River. in the general area 01" the Squanﬂsh Nation Consultation Area- are 3130 included in
the SQKM TUOS Analyéais that follows. Other mchaeological sites located along the
lower Fraser River (including the 150 111 buffer) may also have been used by Squmuish
Nation members during traveL trade. 01‘ other activitieS in. this; region. For reference.
archaeological Sites: that fall into this latter categoly are identiﬁed by site number (tag...
Dth-4) and are listed in Appendix B: they are not portrayed 03:1 the iject Mapﬁ in
Appendix A. —
Archaeulogical Site information for the SQKM TUOS was obtained from RAAD
(Remote Access to Al‘chaeological Data) of the Archaeology Branch. Province of British
Collunbia? and added to the TUOS databaae and (318 records.
The SQKM TUOS project bibliographic records: include digital copies of archaeological
Site record fOI'll‘lS obtained from the Archaeology Branch. The SQKM TUOS G13
mapping for archaeological Sites is; also derived from shapefiles obtained from the
Archaeology M —
TUOS Inﬁarmaﬁon Swims: Anmjvsis
Table 1 presents i11f01‘mati011 for sites included in the SQKM TUOS Analysis, presented
accm'ding t0 infonnation source. tt‘tlthough iufmmatiﬁu about most TUOS sites was
obtained from one information source categom: 301118 Sites incmporate information from.

. two of the source categories-

I g-g

| Squamish Tradin'ona! Use and Orcupmtme‘ Stud}: Fma} R8120)? 56

84

Document and Records Management

Bibliography

The SQKM TUOS project included the review and compilation of information from a
range of archival and published documents. The bibliographic software program
EndNote was used to record information and manage the references relevant to the
project. Wherever possible, scanned PDF versions of documents, or digital copies of
photographs, have been embedded in the project bibliography. Citations for some
documents in the bibliographic database are presented at the end of this report.

Digital Recording oflnterviews

Proj ect interviews were documented by means of HD digital video (with external
microphone), digital audio, interview notes, and interview maps. Copies of interview
videos were made to be provided to the interviewee(s); with digital copies on digital
storage devices (external drive) made also for reference and archiving. Copies of all
digital video and audio recordings are archived for reference and safekeeping by

Traditions Consulting Service, Inc. in Victoria, BC.

Interview Notes

Each interview was documented by means of notes taken by members of the project
team. Interview notes were kept in case of recording equipment malfunction, and were
also used for the initial entry of information into the project’s database, prior to the
completion of interview transcripts. All interview notes were scanned and digital copies

I are included in the project’s records as part of the project bibliography.

Interview T ranscripts

All project interviews were transcribed. The spellings of Squamish names and words in
the transcripts have not all been conﬁrmed or rendered accurately in the linguistic
orthography employed by the Squamish Nation.
W

85
Interview Maps and GPS Recording
Hillcrest Geographies produced multiple copies of an intewiew base map, covering the
Study Area and the Squamish Consultation Area for use in project interviews at a scale of
1:60,000. The locations of TUOS sites identiﬁed during interviews were plotted in pencil
on interview maps. The interview maps provided coverage for the project’s area of
interest, and greatly facilitated the recording of sites during interviews.
Each map was printed with a document block for recording the following information in
writing:
1. Interviewee(s): Signature(s) 0f peeple interviewed whose TUOS sites are
recorded on the map.
2. Interviewer: Signature of the person conducting the interview.
3. Witness(es): Signature of people who witnessed the interview (interview note-
taker).
4. Date(s): Date(s) on which the interview occurred.
I 5. Catalogue Number: A unique alphanumeric code assigned each interview map
I (e.g. SQKM_01, SQKM_02, etc.).
6. Comments: Additional commentary concerning proj ect interview or interview
mapping.
Digital copies of the marked paper interview maps were made to assist in digitizing site
locations to GIS. The paper and digitized interview maps are archived with Traditions
Consulting Services,‘Ine. in Victoria, BC.
Traditional Use and Occupancy Site Database
The Squamish TUOS Database and its associated GIS database were the primary tools
for recording and managing the TUOS information recorded during the proj eet. The
Squamish TUOS Database was established and maintained using Filemaker Pro software.
Table 2 outlines the database ﬁelds that provide information for the TUOS sites recorded.
The database facilitates querying and analysis of Squamish TUOS sites, and the
management and updating of site information.
Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 68

86
Table 2: TIME Database Ffetds

Field Name Description

SCHS# A unique catalogue lumber for each TUOS she.

Field ID Other identification number(e) associated with a TUOS Site, such ass
311‘ Archaeolo gicai Siie designation (Dth-(i), a site number from a
project hltewiew (SQKM_04:O]61 01' a site from a Place Names Map
(BK:2 1‘);

A verbal description of the geographic location of the site.
The Squamieh name of the site (if available).

Site Name The English i'I'auelatiou 0f the Squamish name for the site (if

Translation available).

Activity The classification offhe site at the “Activity” level, as described in
the “Site Claseiﬁeaﬁen" section (below). All individual site may be
classiﬁed as including Several “Aeiivitiee.” \

Entity The Speciﬁc l'eemu'ces or items fmmd, hawested 01' used at the site. 01'
associated hisstOIy. as described in “Site Category” (below). A site
may‘ include several “Entities.“

Site C afegoly Categories for Theme Map(s) ft)! the SQKNI TUOS Analysis. as
described in “Site Ciessﬁicatien” Section below. A Site may be
included in 11101'e then one “Theme Map” category.

Information Source categories for where site information was obtained; limited to

Source one or mere of: Archaeoiogy: hltewiew; Written Reference: 01'
Map/Ayehival Map.

Reference Citations fer salutes ef hlfmmatiorl about the site. Exampie:
Bmschm'ﬂ, Rand}: {md Doromy Kannada Smmmish Indian Land Use
and Occupanm: Fina? Dmﬂ Submmed :0 (M Sqnamish Indian Baud
CommiiDecember 14m, 1986. Vierorm: Erin's}; Coiumbfalmz’irm
Language Prqjeer, 1986.

Map ID Intewiew maps or other mapping data where source iufmmaﬁon
3110111 the eiie was recorded. Examples: SQKM_02; Dth-ﬁ She
Farm Map: RAAD Shapefile.

Cmmneutary eheui site beyond That included in other ﬁelds.

Site Type (313 expreseien Cafe site as one of: Point; Line: Polygon,

Study Area Study Areas; that a "site hxtersee’re with 01' is located within.

Dme 011 which ﬁve 111031 recent data emu}! occurred for a site recoz'd.
. WW

87
ijecr GIS and Maps
The mapping ofTUOS sites for SQKM TUOS Analysis was recorded:
' dlu‘iug previous Squamish research and projec’ls;
‘3 from SQKM TUOS prqiecl inlenziews:
* from the project’s: litel'amre l'eview:
* from]. place 11311163 11121135:
* from archival 1113133: and
i from infommﬁdu obtained £11311; archaeological l'ecm'cls.
— The
GIS data was checked and cross—refel'enced for correspondence with previously existing
database records in ﬁle Squmuish TUOS Database. All TUOS Site locations recorded £11
the project’s GIS are linked to Sites recorded in the project’s Traditional Use and
Occupancy Site Database by the “SCHS #” ﬁeld,
The Project M3133 presented in Appendix A were produced by_ and
pmtray the TUOS sites in ille SQKM TUOS Analysis. The Project Maps provided to
Squamish Nation 23 project deliverablea described in more tietai] 1mm" are listed in Table
3. ,
Tame 3: SQKM TUGS Maps
Map Description _
Map 1 All Sites in the SQKIVI TUOS Analysis
Aquatic. Resource Map
Archaeology ’Site Map
C'nihu'e History Map
Land Resource Map
' Settlement Acﬁvii‘y Map
Map 7 Travel Sites Map
W

88
SQKNI TUOS Analysis Results
TUOS Sim Classiﬁcatim:
The 011119111 project focuses 011 SQKM TUOS Almlysis Sites in the project Study Area and
along the lower Fraser Rivet as previously described. - sites 1'11 file SQKM TUOS
Analysis have been classiﬁed based on three database fields (Activity, Entity. and Site
C‘ategmy) for the puipoges of data management site analysis, and presentation of
information 011 Project Mapg. The project database can be searched and queried based on
any ints ﬁelds. but 1110315 imponamly 011 one 01' more of ‘lhe fallowing classiﬁcation
ﬁelds.
Acriviiy
“Activity" defines‘ at a general levelq a type of occupancy 01‘ use categmy for each TUOS
site. An individual TUOS site may include more than one “Activity,” as it may satisfy
the criteria for one 01' more of the ”Aci‘ivitieg” 11'3th in Table 4‘ below- “Activitieg’” at a
TUOS siie might include. for 3x21111913: Dwelling; Prepm‘atien; Burial: Traditional
' History. Each offhese terms degcribes 22111 “Aciivity” that occurg, 01‘ eccurrecL within 1118
I defined geographical TUOS si‘le bmwdmy The “Activity“ ﬁeld penm'ts gnawing Ofthe
database for the number of sites baged on a speciﬁc resource, species 01' use categmy.
— Table
4 provides brief deﬁnitions of the various TUOS site “Activities.”
—
—7 ﬂ
W

8
(2014). ‘Intemal Consultation Report: Squamish Environmental Assessment
Process Relating to Proposed Woodﬁbre LNG and Eagle Mountain-Woodﬁbre
Gas Pipeline Projects. ’ Report prepared for Slfwng/Z 7mesh Nation Chiefs and
Council, 15 December 2014 (co—author).
(2015). ‘Data Report on Saulteau Traplines Ground-Truthing 2014. ’ Internal
report for BC Hydro, Site C First Nations Engagement Team, J anuary 2015 (lead
author).
(2015). ‘Squamish Occupation and Use of Swiyar (Woodﬁbre/Mill Creeks) and
Northern Howe Sound and Indian River Regions.’ Final Report prepared for
Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council relating to the Woodﬁbre LNG and
associated Eagle Mountain Gas Pipeline Projects, 7 April 2015 (co‘-auth01‘).
(2015). ‘Squamish Traditional Use and Occupation Study, Kinder Morgan Trans
Mountain Expansion Proj ect: Final Report.’ Prepared for Squamish Nation
Chiefs and Council, 25 May 2015 (co-author).
(2015). ‘Data Report on McLeod Lake Indian Band Ground-Truthing. ’ Internal
report for BC Hydro, Site C First Nations Engagement Team, 15 August 2015
(lead author).
(2015). “Data Report on Saulteau Traplines Ground-Truthing (Sandy Cameron)”
Internal report for BC Hydro, Site C First Nations Engagement Team, September
2015 (lead author).
(2015). ‘Squamish Nation Preliminary Assessment: Proposed BC Hydro
Infrastructure Construction and Upgrades Related to the Proposed Woodﬁbre
LNG Facility.’ Prepared for Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council, 2 August 2015
(lead author).
(2015). “Coastal GasLink Gas Pipeline Project: Wet’suwet’en F irst Nation
Mitigation Issues Report.’ Prepared for Wet’suwet’en First Nation, 27 November
2015 (lead author).

- (2017). ‘Final Report: Ground—Truthing McLeod Lake Indian Band, October 6
and November 14 and 15, 2016.” Internal report for BC Hydro, Site C First
Nations Engagement Team, 11 J anuary 2017 (lead author).

(2017). ‘Squamish Traditional Use and Occupation Study, BC Hydro Metro North
Project: Draft Report.’ Prepared for Squamish Nation Chiefs and Council, 28
June 2017 (lead author).

(2017). ‘Draft Data Report: Ground—Truthing McLeod Lake Indian Band, June 27

' and 28, 2017.’ Internal report for BC Hydro, Site C First Nations Engagement
Team.

8

PAGE 72 OF THE REPORT HAS
BEEN REDACTED

90
Sire Enriiv
The TUOS sites have also been classiﬁed at a more speciﬁc levei. as each database
record also iists the various “Entities“ recorded for a site. The “Entity” database field
provides details ofﬂle IESOUi‘CES halvesled 01' features located at each site. For example,
a site claasified in the “Aci‘ivity” field as '5: Fishing site might include the following
entries in the “Entity“ database field: SR 111101.11 C 0110 831111051: Trout Herring; 01* Prawns.
m C rabs can be associated with eiﬂlcl' Pi 511i]! 3 09' Seafood Gathering Activity. depending on context
Squamish Te'adfi‘iona! Use and Omrqpmm’ Smdjz Firm} Ray)?! 3’3

91
1118 “Entity” ﬁeld alsc) pennitg queaying 0f the database far the number of Sites based on
:a Specific resource. SpECiES 01' use category.
Theme Maps
All TUOS SiTES have heea clagsiﬁed. at the most general level‘ according to six
“Then1es.,” 01‘ Site C‘aiegorie& 111m tlacihmte the pl'ESEiHHUOIl of information on the Project
Maps. Table 5 lists The project “Theme Maps” and the “‘Lécfivifies’" associated with each
Theme Map. I HOS sites are often 111111ti—plupoae. may be classiﬁed under more than 0116
“Activity.” and may appear on more than OﬂE‘ “Theme h-iap." The Project Theme Maps
are provided in Appendix 33
I—
l—

- '—
.—
'—

Sqtmmish Tradiriolmt' Live and Occupancy Stud" 1*. Fina} Rm)? 3’4

PAGES 75-79 OF THE REPORT HAVE
BEEN REDACTED

93
Results Summary, Traditional Use and Occupancy Sites and Areas
The focus of the TUOS analysis presented above is the “where and what” of traditional
use and occupancy sites and areas. However, recording traditional use places and
activities as dots, lines, and polygons on maps runs the risk of decontextualizing the
interconnectedness of these places and activities from their lived histories. _
— Squamishpeoplesess
that urbanization and industrial development in their territory has signiﬁcantly curbed
access to culturally signiﬁcant sites and adversely impacted the health and availability of
I marine and land resources over the past one hundred and ﬁfty years.
The SQKM TUOS Study Area includes the marine areas and associated shorelines within
southern Squamish Traditional Territory, including a 150 m inland buffer. The Squamish
TUOS sites that intersect With that area are included in the SQKM TUOS Analysis.
TUOS sites identiﬁed during research as directly associated with Squamish activities or
Squamish traditional history, and located along the lower reaches of the Fraser River
(With 150 m inland buffer) in the general region of the southern part of the Squamish
Consultation Boundary, are also included in the SQKM TUOS Analysis.
Squamish Traditionai Use and Occupancy Study, F ﬁnal Report 80

94

This Report section offers a summary of the following TUOS categories analyzed in
more quantitative fashion above: Settlement; Culture History; Aquatic Resource and
Land Resource; and Travel.
Settlement Activity Sites

° —

' —
Squamz'sh Traditional Use and Occupancy Study. Final Report 81

PAGES 82-83 OF THE REPORT HAVE
BEEN REDACTED

96
° —
— Environmental
enhancement efforts are restoring health to the marine environment in Howe
Sound. Stream rehabilitation and habitat restoration efforts are also underway in
Burrard Inlet.
Travel Sites
° —
' —
' —
- ° —
- Squamz'sh T raditz'onal Use and Occupancy Study. F ma! Report 84

97
Overview of Squamish Occupation and Use of Southern Howe Sound,
Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and the Fraser River
The following Report sections set out overviews of Squamish occupation and use of the
southern Howe Sound, Burrard Inlet and Indian Arm, and Fraser River regions. Like the
preceding ethnographic and historical overviews, these discussions are not
comprehensive 0r deﬁnitive, but rather seek to convey the extensive and intensive nature
of Squamish use and occupation of this broad landscape, in the past and today.
Southern Howe Sound
I Squamish T raditz'onal Use and Occupancy Study, Final Report 85

PAGES 86-92 OF THE REPORT HAVE
BEEN REDACTED

Written Evidence of the Squamish Nation
  Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
      Hearing Order MH-048-2018
 File No. OF-Fac-Oil-T260-2017-10 01
             July 27, 2018
 Squamish Nation
1.   The Squamish Nation (“Squamish” or the “Nation”) is a Coast Salish Nation. Squamish
     is a self-identifying Aboriginal Nation and an Aboriginal people. We currently have
     approximately just over 4,000 registered members.
2.   Since a time before contact with Europeans, Squamish have used and occupied, or assert
     that we have used and occupied, lands and waters on the southwest coast of what is now
     British Columbia extending from the Lower Mainland of British Columbia, and including
     Burrard Inlet, English Bay, Howe Sound, the Squamish Valley and north to Whistler (the
     “Territory”). We have never surrendered title or rights over our Territory.
3.   The boundaries of Squamish Territory encompass all of Burrard Inlet, English Bay and
     Howe Sound, as well as the rivers and creeks that flow into these bodies of water. A map
     of the Squamish Territory is attached as Appendix “A” to this evidence.
4.   Squamish has occupied, governed and sustained ourselves physically, culturally and
     spiritually since time immemorial from the areas of our Territory that would be impacted
     by the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation. Squamish asserts Aboriginal rights, including
     title and self-governance rights, within these areas pursuant to section 35(1) of the
     Constitution Act, 1982.
5.   Squamish continue to occupy, and be stewards of, our Territory, and harvest resources
     throughout our Territory, including from the Capilano River at the entrance of Burrard
     Inlet, for food, social and ceremonial purposes. Squamish are protectors of the Salish Sea
     and rely heavily on the marine and freshwater resources within our Territory to practice
     our Aboriginal rights.
Squamish Nation Reserves and Village Sites
6.   Squamish has 24 reserves located throughout our Territory that are extensively used and
     occupied by our members.
                                                1
 7.   Squamish has three reserves located in and at the entrance to Burrard Inlet: Seymour
     Creek Reserve No. 2 (ch’ích’elxwi7kw) on the north shore close to the Westridge Marine
     Terminal, Mission Reserve No. 1 (eslhá7an), and Capilano Reserve No. 5 (xwmelchstn).
     These reserves could be directly impacted by any accidents or malfunctions associated
     with the Westridge Delivery Line Project.
8.   However, not all Squamish villages in the Westridge Delivery Line Project area were
     designated as reserves. For example, Squamish village sites in what is now Stanley Park
     were never granted reserve status. Further, Squamish people were removed from certain
     sites as the City of Vancouver expanded. In 1913, the Squamish inhabitants of our
     reserve at senákw (Kitsilano IR No. 6) were removed from the site and relocated to the
     villages of xwmelchstn (Capilano) and eslha7an (Mission) on the north shore of Burrard
     Inlet. In 1946 our ancestors were compelled to surrender most of that 80-acre IR No. 6
     but we have maintained a 10-acre portion of it. A map of Squamish reserves and village
     sites in proximity to the Westridge Delivery Line Project is attached as Appendix B to
     this evidence.
9.   There are former Squamish villages adjacent to the location of the Westridge Delivery
     Line Project, including Temtemixwtn (Belcarra) and Titemtsen (Port Moody).
Squamish Seasonal Round
10.  Squamish has extensive traditional use and occupancy sites in Burrard Inlet and Indian
     Arm. These sites illustrate the extensive and intensive nature of Squamish use and
     occupation of these areas, and the dependency of Squamish culture and identity on the
     marine and aquatic environment.
11.  The geographic location of Squamish village sites and harvesting areas reflects the
     Squamish seasonal round, which was used to efficiently access the resources in Squamish
     Territory throughout the year. While most villages remained at least partly occupied
     throughout the year, and there are numerous permanent village sites, many people moved
     between winter villages on the Squamish and Cheakamus Rivers to summer village sites
                                               2
      on Burrard Inlet, Howe Sound, and the Fraser River to continue harvesting local
     resources through the spring, summer, and fall.
12.  Squamish members continue to practice a seasonal round today travelling throughout our
     Territory to access a wide variety of resources, and engage in cultural and spiritual
     activities. Squamish people continue to use our Territory for fishing, hunting, and
     gathering traditional foods for sustenance, social and ceremonial purposes. However, it is
     becoming more difficult for our people to access resources as the quality, purity and
     abundance of resources has been adversely impacted by industrial development.
Squamish Nation Aboriginal rights and interests
13.  Squamish’s distinct system of governance, traditional and cultural practices, spirituality,
     and harvesting activities are inextricably linked to the lands, waters and resources of our
     Territory. Squamish continue to use and rely on the resources available in our Territory,
     in a respectful and sustainable manner.
14.  Stewardship and respect for these resources is essential for the survival of Squamish and
     our distinctive culture. Squamish has a wide set of title, rights and interests that are
     potentially impacted by the Westridge Delivery Line Project. Squamish take our role and
     responsibility as stewards of our Territory seriously, and wish to protect our lands and
     waters for future generations.
15.  Chief Ian Campbell, Xwelxwelacha Siyam (Chief Richard Williams) and Paitsmauk
     (David Jacobs) provided oral evidence to the Board in Chilliwack B.C. for the hearing for
     the Trans Mountain Expansion Project describing the importance of our lands, water and
     resources to Squamish culture and identity. The oral evidence of Paitsmauk (David
     Jacobs) included the following [at paras. 5439- 5440 of the oral evidence transcript -
     NEB Filing No. A4F2C8]:
              All we see outside from our windows looking down the beach are freighters,
              ships, in and out. That’s why I’m afraid today what the damage that if anything
              happened, it would destroy our home because that harbour, that bay there that’s
              the home of the Squamish people. It’s always been a home, our home.
                                               3
               We look at the maps. We show the territories of the Squamish. I don’t like to use
              the word “territory”. I say, “That is our home. That is our home”. That land will
              never go away. Our Squamish people will never go away, so we got to be careful
              what we do today.
      The transcript of the oral evidence of Squamish members for the Trans Mountain
      Expansion Project is attached as Appendix C to this evidence (with tracked changes
      submitted by the Squamish Nation).
Squamish self-government rights
16.   An important aspect of Squamish rights and title to our Territory is our ability to govern
      and act as stewards of the lands, waters and resources within our Territory. Squamish
      have governed, protected and defended our Territory since time immemorial.
17.   Squamish was traditionally governed by our hereditary Chiefs. Chieftainships were
      associated with discrete areas within the larger Territory. Pre-contact, a complex set of
      rules and practices, called chiyax and snewayelh, applied within the Chieftainship areas –
      these rules and practices are inseparable from the lands and waters, and inform Squamish
      governance of our Territory today.
18.   Since 1981, Squamish has governed itself by way of a custom election system. Currently,
      sixteen Councilors are elected by eligible members 18 years and older and serve four year
      terms. Each of these 16 Councillor positions is directly related to the 16 hereditary Chiefs
      that amalgamated on July 23, 1923 to form Squamish’s traditional government.
19.   Squamish continues to exercise governance over our Territory in a variety of ways,
      including by: managing development in our Territory to ensure an abundance of safe
      traditional resources and foods; undertaking rehabilitation of areas within our Territory
      that have been contaminated by development; partnering with neighbouring First Nations
      and the Coast Salish community to jointly share and manage resources; and transmitting
      the principles of stewardship and resource conservation to the next generation.
20.   Squamish has further partnered with government, and proponents, to ensure responsible
      development within our Territory. An example of this is the 2007 Land Use Agreement –
                                                 4
     a government to government agreement between Squamish and the Province of British
    Columbia that incorporates portions of Squamish’s Xay Temixw Land Use Plan into the
    provincial Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP). Under the LRMP, Squamish
    and the Province have agreed to implement protective measures to safeguard over 50,000
    hectares of Squamish’s Territory and processes to make collaborative land use decisions.
21. Squamish has been an active member in the Coast Salish Gathering. This gathering is a
    trans-boundary collective of approximately 60 First Nations/tribes engaged in revitalizing
    the health and long-term sustainability of the Salish Sea by using marine use planning
    based on scientific and traditional ecological knowledge. The protection of the Salish Sea
    extends to the protection of the marine fish and marine mammals within the Salish Sea.
22. Squamish is taking an active role in efforts to reinvigorate and enhance the sustainability
    of the aquatic ecosystem, including in Burrard Inlet, to combat the effects of
    industrialization, partnering with various jurisdictions and organizations to implement
    initiatives that protect our Territory. Recent examples include:
    (a)      Fisheries enhancement, through installation of a rearings pond, on McDonald
             Creek (ch’tlaam), with the West Vancouver Streamkeepers;
    (b)      Foreshore and estuary restoration on Mackay Creek (tl’alhema7elks), with the
             City and District of North Vancouver and Seaspan;
    (c)      Estuary restoration and installation of a rearing pond on Mosquito Creek
             (Eslha7an);
    (d)      Stream rehabilitation in New Brighton Park (Kanamut) area on the south shore of
             Burrard Inlet, just west of the Westridge Marine Terminal; and
    (e)      Removal of fish barriers on Seymour Creek, with the Seymour Creek Salmonid
             Society.
23. Squamish has established a fisheries department, and enacted a fishing by-law to ensure
    sustainable fishery resources in our Territory for generations to come. The by-law
    regulates fishing through Fisheries Guardians who oversee the use of the fishing
    resources in particular areas within the Territory and educate Squamish youth with regard
    to fishing practices. Squamish has also engaged in hatchery projects to aid in the
    rehabilitation of fish stocks. These efforts are a small part of the active role Squamish
                                                5
       plays as a steward of our waters and fisheries resources.
Squamish harvesting rights in and around Burnaby Mountain
24.   Squamish continues to depend on the resources within our Territory that would
      potentially be impacted by the Westridge Delivery Line Project to exercise our aboriginal
      rights and maintain our way of life. Squamish people enjoy a variety of benefits from our
      Territory, including economic benefits, and manage our Territory to ensure the continued
      availability of these benefits.
25.   Squamish members continue to use our Territory to fish, hunt and gather resources for
      sustenance, and to fulfill our social and ceremonial needs. This harvesting is an essential
      part of Squamish identity and heritage, and is fundamentally dependent on strong
      governance and stewardship of our Territory. Conservation is a foundation of Squamish
      culture that has ensured access to resources in our Territory up until today. It is
      Squamish’s intention to ensure that this continues to be the case.
26.   The area of Burnaby Mountain is known in the Squamish community as
      Lheḵw’lhứkw’aytn, which when translated refers to the peeling bark of the local arbutus
      trees. Lheḵw’lhứkw’aytn is an area of cultural importance to the Squamish people and an
      area that has been important source of resources for the practice of Squamish rights.
27.   Lheḵw’lhứkw’aytn (Burnaby Mountain) was known for bear, deer, elk, migrating ducks
      that inhabited our coves and inlets, particularly rich and abundant in sea urchins that
      covered its foreshore, and orcas that used the surrounding waters as a calving ground.
      The availability of many of these resources has been impacted by the surrounding
      development. However, the area continues to have significance to Squamish and is one of
      the remaining areas within the Territory that remains protected and has not been directly
      disturbed by industrial development.
28.   Squamish continue to rely on our Territory to exercise our aboriginal harvesting rights to
      fish, hunt and gather marine, aquatic and terrestrial resources. For example, we exercise
      our rights in and around our Territory to harvest:
                                                 6
     (a)     fish including, salmon, herring, herring roe, smelt, trout, cod, flounder, and
            rockfish;
    (b)     shellfish including, sea urchins, crab, clams and prawns;
    (c)     birds including, ducks, pheasant, grouse, geese, and seagull eggs;
    (d)     mammals including, deer, elk, seals, sea lions, black bears and mountain goat; and
    (e)     cultural and medicinal plants, seaweed, clay, berries, broadleaf maple, cedar and
            douglas fir and other timber for canoes and longhouses.
    However, the availability, health, and abundance of many of these resources has been
    impacted by the industrial development within our Territory, particularly in Burrard Inlet.
29. The rivers and streams entering into Burrard Inlet have served as important harvesting,
    transport, and cultural locations for Squamish. These waterways have provided a number
    of resources, including:
    (a)     trout and pink and chum salmon in Lynn Creek;
    (b)     dungeness crab, flounder, cod, trout and salmon in and at the mouth of Mosquito
            Creek;
    (c)     all species of salmon (except sockeye) in the Capilano River;
    (d)     steelhead, coho, pink, chum and chinook salmon in Seymour Creek; and
    (e)     tidal traps at Stitsma (Maplewood flats) and at a7enmitsut in False Creek.
    The availability, purity and abundance of many of these resources have been impacted by
    the development in and around Burrard Inlet. Squamish is taking an active role in
    restoration efforts as described above.
30. The marine and aquatic resources in Squamish Territory also play an important economic
    role for Squamish. Squamish traditionally harvested marine and aquatic resources for
    sustenance and ceremonial purposes, but also for trading purposes.
31. Salmon are integral to Squamish culture both for food and ceremonial purposes.
    Squamish continue to harvest salmon throughout our Territory, but salmon stocks have
    been on the decline, and Squamish worry about maintaining continued access to this
                                               7
       valuable resource.
Squamish’s right to navigate our Territory
32.   In addition to supporting harvesting activities, Squamish communities have traditionally
      relied, and continue to rely, on the water ways in and around Burrard Inlet, Southern
      Howe Sound, and the lower Fraser River as important transportation corridors. This
      movement is seasonal and important for maintaining familial ties, participating in
      community activities, accessing sacred sites and transmitting information about cultural
      practices from one generation to the next.
33.    Lheḵw’lhứkw’aytn (Burnaby Mountain) is along a water route used by Squamish people
      to travel between Capilano and Indian Arm.
34.   Transportation routes were and are specific with respect to location, directionality, and
      timing, reflecting the essential aquatic orientation of Squamish people. Examples include:
      (a)      the use of specific marine waypoints, visible only from the water, as navigation
               and safety aids;
      (b)      ancestral villages in Howe Sound, like ch’kw’elhp and k’ik’elxn, along with a
               burial ground on Keats Island are stopover sites at which location-specific stories
               are told;
      (c)      water-based vantages are important sites from which to teach cultural norms, as
               well as water safety and respect, to youth; and
      (d)      canoe races that cement and maintain intra-tribal and inter-tribal relations
               continue to take place in Burrard Inlet, as well as annual tribal journeys
               throughout the Salish Sea and Pacific west coast.
Squamish cultural and spiritual practices
35.   Burrard Inlet, and the surrounding areas, have been the home of the Squamish since time
      immemorial. Squamish’s cultural and spiritual practices are inseparable from the lands
      and waters on and in which they are exercised.
36.   Numerous Squamish archaeological, cultural and/or otherwise sacred sites exist in and
      around Burrard Inlet, including shell middens, culturally modified trees (bark stripping,
                                                 8
     indigenous logging, canoe manufacture), cemeteries, burials, fish traps or fish weirs,
    canoe runs, and rock art.
37. The rivers and creeks within Squamish Territory have been, and continue to be, important
    sites from a cultural and spiritual perspective. Maintaining access and the purity and
    privacy of these sites is critically important to our people – especially in view of existing
    urban and industrial disturbance. Some creeks entering Burrard Inlet, are important to
    Squamish for spiritual training and locations for spiritual bathing.
38. The longhouse is the hub of Squamish culture, religion, beliefs, and practices. There are
    currently two longhouses located on Squamish Territory – one at xwmelch’stn (Capilano
    Reserve) and one at ch’ich’elxwi7kw (Seymour Reserve), but there was historically a
    number throughout our Territory.
39. The resources needed to support the longhouse tradition are drawn from the waters and
    lands in and around Burrard Inlet, including from Lheḵw’lhứkw’aytn (Burnaby
    Mountain): the masks are made from local cedar; feathers harvested from local waterfowl
    are used to welcome the new xekselkwelh dancers (the longhouse dancers) upon their first
    entry into the longhouse; and the food used for ceremonial and sustenance purposes is
    harvested from the broader Territory. Continued access to these resources is integral to
    the longhouse tradition enduring. The longhouse tradition is the thread connecting
    thousands of years of Squamish practice and culture.
40. The connection between Territory and culture is an essential component of Squamish
    identity. Harvesting in the same places as Squamish ancestors and relatives harvested
    allows for the transmission of site-specific Squamish teachings and history. Being on and
    learning from Squamish Territory expresses and reinvigorates Squamish identity.
41. Squamish remains critically concerned that the Westridge Delivery Line Project will
    interrupt our cultural practices, impede access to our Territory and impact sites of cultural
    importance.
42. The waters in and around Burrard Inlet are used as points to realize Squamish’s spiritual
    connection to our Territory. Sloughs and marshes are portals that connect to the aqueous
                                               9
      spiritual realms. These portals are found in several locations throughout the area that
     would be impacted by the Westridge Delivery Line Project. These stories are central to
     Squamish beliefs and mythology, and cement the importance of the water in Squamish
     culture. For example:
     (a)      Xwech’tál, a prominent figure in Squamish oral history, was transported through
              one of these underwater portals after being abducted by the seal people. Xwech’tál
              brought back the connection of these realms to the living world and the
              sacredness of that connection when he returned four years later. This location is
              near the Burnaby Mountain tunnel (along with the Burnaby Terminal and
              Westridge Marine Terminal), located north of the site near Temtemixwtn –
              Belcarra Park.
     (b)      One of the Wild People, known as the smàýlilh, trained Squamish warriors in the
              Capilano River. The Squamish were instructed to carry heavy stones underwater
              through the pools on the river, and in so doing, were transcended into the spirit
              world.
43.  Many of the people in the Squamish community have learned of the different spiritual
     sites in our Territory from our parents and our grandparents, as knowledge of these sites
     is passed down from one generation to the next by visiting the sites.
The Westridge Delivery Line Project’s Potential Adverse Impacts on Squamish
44.  As described above, the areas in and around Burrard Inlet and the Salish Sea are central
     to Squamish identity and culture. They are also key to the modern economic success of
     our Nation.
45.  The Westridge Delivery Line Project is situated in the heart of Squamish Territory. In
     addition to this being our home, we rely on our territorial and reserve lands, and the
     lands, waters and resources adjacent to them, to support our people, culture and way of
     life, and to practice our Aboriginal rights, including harvesting, cultural, social,
     ceremonial and governance rights. These areas are culturally and ecologically significant,
     are vital to Squamish’s livelihood and economy, and are critical to the survival of
     Squamish people and culture.
46.  The Westridge Delivery Line Project area contains a concentration of Squamish cultural
     and spiritual values. Due to the density and significance of the cultural and spiritual
                                               10
       values in the Project area, the lands and waters in this area are very sensitive to further
      industrial development. The loss of access to, or availability of, the land, waters and
      resources within this part of Squamish Territory would be devastating to Squamish
      identity and culture.
47.   Given the level of urban and industrial development in certain parts of Squamish
      Territory, and the subsequent effects on Squamish’s access to and use of resources, the
      maintenance of the remaining intact areas in the Territory is increasingly important.
      Lheḵw’lhứkw’aytn (Burnaby Mountain) remains a protected area that has not been
      significantly impacted by industrial development. The maintenance of the environmental
      integrity of, and access to, this area for generations to come is of critical importance to
      the Squamish Nation.
48.   Squamish would bear the burden of a significant portion of the potential risks and
      impacts of the Westridge Delivery Line Project. The construction and operation of the
      Westridge Delivery Line Project would result in physical impacts from the relocation of
      the pipeline and a substantial increase in the risks of spills or other accidents associated
      with the tunnel through Lheḵw’lhứkw’aytn (Burnaby Mountain). The Project further has
      the potential to increase the amount of diluted bitumen transporting through the Territory.
49.   Squamish takes our stewardship role within our Territory seriously. As noted above,
      Squamish has actively engaged in rehabilitating the marine and terrestrial environments
      in the Westridge Delivery Line Project area in an attempt to counteract the effects of
      industrialization. The Westridge Delivery Line Project threatens to undermine those
      efforts. It is of critical importance to the Squamish and to the continued maintenance of
      our Territory that if the Westridge Delivery Line Project is approved that it is subject to
      the condition that the existing pipeline is permanently decommissioned and the area
      remediated.
Consultation
50.   Despite the serious nature of our concerns with the Westridge Delivery Line Project, the
      federal and provincial Crowns have not engaged, substantively or otherwise, with our
                                                  11
       concerns with the Project. Squamish has not met with either Crown with respect to the
      Westridge Delivery Line Project or been informed about how the Crowns plan to
      discharge their respective duties to consult and accommodate Squamish with respect to
      the Westridge Delivery Line Project.
Limitations of this Evidence
51.   This evidence was prepared within the constrained timeline set by the National Energy
      Board for the review of the Westridge Delivery Line Project. Squamish has not had the
      time to commission studies evaluating Westridge Delivery Line Project. Nor has
      Squamish been able, in the time allowed, to canvas the views of all its members about the
      potential impacts of the Westridge Delivery Line Project on our rights, title and interests.
                                               12
 APPENDIX A Squamish Nation Consultation Area APPENDIX B amish Nation Village Sites APPENDIX C          NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD                      Field Code Changed
    OFFICE NATIONAL DE L’ÉNERGIE
            Hearing Order OH-001-2014
       Ordonnance d’audience OH-001-2014
            Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
          Trans Mountain Expansion Project
            Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Projet d’agrandissement du réseau de Trans Mountain
                      VOLUME 12
                      Hearing held at
                     L’audience tenue à
                  Coast Chilliwack Hotel
                    45920 First Avenue
               Chilliwack, British Columbia
                      October 24, 2014
                     Le 24 octobre 2014
                International Reporting Inc.
                      Ottawa, Ontario
                       (613) 748-6043
 © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2014         © Sa Majesté du Chef du Canada 2014
as represented by the National Energy Board             représentée par l’Office national de l’énergie
This publication is the recorded verbatim transcript    Cette publication est un compte rendu textuel des
and, as such, is taped and transcribed in either of the délibérations et, en tant que tel, est enregistrée et
official languages, depending on the languages          transcrite dans l’une ou l’autre des deux langues
spoken by the participant at the public hearing.        officielles, compte tenu de la langue utilisée par le
                                                        participant à l’audience publique.
Printed in Canada                                       Imprimé au Canada
                       HEARING ORDER/ORDONNANCE D’AUDIENCE
                                           OH-001-2014
                      IN THE MATTER OF Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
                      Application for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project
                         HEARING LOCATION/LIEU DE L'AUDIENCE
               Hearing held in Chilliwack (British Columbia), Friday, October 24, 2014
           Audience tenue à Chilliwack (Colombie-Britannique), vendredi, le 24 octobre 2014
BOARD PANEL/COMITÉ D'AUDIENCE DE L'OFFICE
D. Hamilton            Chairman/Président
P. Davies              Member/Membre
A. Scott               Member/Membre
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                 ORAL PRESENTATIONS/REPRÉSENTATIONS ORALES
Hwlitsum First Nation
Councillor Janice Wilson
Dr. Bruce Miller
Ms. Glenna Borsuk
Mr. Paul Reid
Mr. Jeffrey Rath (counsel)
Squamish Nation
Chief Ian Campbell
Chief Richard Williams
Mr. David Jacobs
Mr. Aaron Bruce (counsel)
Ms. Michelle Bradley (counsel)
Transcript                                          Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                        ERRATA
                                                                                      (i)
Wednesday, October 22, 2014 - Volume 10
                                            Should read:
ORAL PRESENTATIONS/REPRÉSENTATIONS ORALES
Suquamish Tribe
Ms. Jan Hasselman (Representative)          Mr. Jan Hasselman (Representative)
Thursday, October 23, 2014 - Volume 11
                                            Should read:
ORAL PRESENTATIONS/REPRÉSENTATIONS ORALES
Tulalip Tribes
Ms. Jan Hasselman (Representative)          Mr. Jan Hasselman (Representative)
Lummi Nation
Ms. Jan Hasselman (Representative)          Mr. Jan Hasselman (Representative)
Transcript                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                  TABLE OF CONTENTS/TABLE DES MATIÈRES
                                                                                 (i)
Description                                     Paragraph No./No. de paragraphe
Opening remarks by the Chairman                                     4924
Hwlitsum First Nation
Councillor Janice Wilson
Dr. Bruce Miller
- Introduction by Mr. Rath                                          4942
- Oral presentation by Councillor Janice Wilson                     4962
- Oral presentation by Dr. Bruce Miller                             4968
Opening remarks by the Chairman                                     5228
Squamish Nation
Chief Ian Campbell
Chief Richard Williams
Mr. David Jacobs
- Introduction by Mr. Bruce                                         5245
- Oral presentation by Chief Ian Campbell                           5262
- Oral presentation by Mr. David Jacobs                             5414
- Oral presentation by Chief Richard Williams                       5509
Transcript                                                Hearing Order OH-001-2014
             LIST OF EXHIBITS/LISTE DES PIÈCES
                                                                     (i)
No.        Description              Paragraph No./No. de paragraphe
Transcript                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
               UNDERTAKINGS/ENGAGEMENTS
No.        Description          Paragraph No./No. de paragraphe
Transcript                                Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                                              Opening remarks
                                                                                     Chairman
--- Upon commencing at 9:02 a.m./L’audience débute à 9h02
4924.                THE CHAIRMAN: Good morning, everyone, and first of all, I’d
         knowledge that we are on the territory of the Stó:lō people.
4925.                I'd like to welcome you to the oral traditional evidence phase of the
         National Energy Board's hearing regarding the Trans Mountain Expansion
         Project.
4926.                My name is David Hamilton, and I am the Chair of the Panel. And
         with me on my left is Alison Scott; and on my right, Phil Davies. We want to
         welcome who is here today, both in the hearing room and listening on our
         webcast.
4927.                I think it's important before we get going to -- in case there's a need for
         an evacuation. The emergency exits are behind you from where you entered.
         Then there's two exits, left and right, to take you out safely to the parking lot.
4928.                In addition to the Panel, we have a number of staff in the room who
         would be able to answer any process-related questions, and you can recognize
         them by their metal badges they are wearing.
4929.                With respect to the schedule, we will sit from 9:00 until noon today
         and take breaks as appropriate for the -- to assist us to get through this morning.
4930.                Before we get under way, I just would like to remind the parties of the
         Panel's guidance in the Hearing Order and Procedural Direction No. 1 in regards
         to oral traditional evidence.
4931.                The Board understands that the Hwlitsum First Nation have an oral
         tradition for sharing knowledge from generation to generation, and this
         information cannot always be adequately shared in writing. The Board
         recommends that those providing oral traditional evidence focus on their
         community's interests and rights.
4932.                These hearings are not to hear evidence that will be filed subsequently
         in writing, including technical and scientific information, opinions or views,
         advice to the Board on whether to recommend approval of the project or the terms
         and conditions that should be imposed, or questions to the Board or other
         participants.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                                             Opening remarks
                                                                                     Chairman
4933.                Sharing your traditional knowledge and stories about the use of your
         traditional territory is of value to us. If you wish to share any concerns about the
         impacts the proposed project may have on you and your community and how any
         impacts could be eliminated or reduced, that would be also helpful to us.
4934.                This is the type of information we're here to listen to, and we will use
         this information we gather today, along with all other available information, in
         considering the possible effects of the proposed project.
4935.                We appreciate that you have chosen to be here today. Before
         providing oral traditional evidence, presenters will be asked to swear or affirm
         that the information you are presenting is accurate and truthful, and to the best of
         your knowledge and belief.
4936.                With that, I believe we are ready to get under way. And perhaps
         before you present your oral traditional evidence, perhaps I would like the
         representatives of the Proponent, Trans Mountain, for the record, to introduce
         themselves.
4937.                MS. OLENIUK: Good morning to the Board and good morning to
         the witness panel.
4938.                My name is Terri-Lee Oleniuk, and I represent Trans Mountain along
         with my colleague to my right, Heather Weberg; to my left is Annie Korver, and
         she's a member of Trans Mountain's Aboriginal Engagement Team.
4939.                THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Ms. Oleniuk.
4940.                And before we ask for your witness to be affirmed or sworn that if you
         maybe could state at the beginning of your presentation whether you will be
         responding to questions orally, in writing, or both.
4941.                So with that, I would pass it over to Mr. Rath, I understand. Thank
         you.
4942.                MR. RATH: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Panel.
4943.                We'd also like to extend our thanks to Kinder Morgan and the Trans
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Introduction by Mr. Rath
         Mountain Pipeline people for the work that they've done so far in terms of their
         engagement with Hwlitsum First Nation.
4944.                My name is Jeffrey Rath. I am the general counsel to the Hwlitsum
         First Nation. I am here today to introduce our panel for the oral history phase of
         these proceedings.
4945.                To my immediate right is Councillor Jan Wilson of the Hwlitsum First
         Nation. Next to her is Dr. Bruce Miller, who will be presenting the bulk of the
         oral history evidence on behalf of Hwlitsum First Nation today, and I'll be
         speaking to that after the introductions.
4946.                Next to Dr. Miller is Glenna Borsuk, a senior adviser to the Hwlitsum
         First Nation. And next to Ms. Borsuk is Mr. Paul Reid of the Nisga'a First
         Nation, barrister and solicitor and member of Rath and Company, who is also
         here as counsel to the Hwlitsum First Nation.
4947.                With regard to the evidence that will be presented today, it's going to
         be presented in the form of a PowerPoint presentation provided by Dr. Miller,
         whose curriculum vitae and CV would be available to the Board and to the Panel
         upon request.
4948.                Dr. Miller is one of the leading experts in the ethno history of Coast
         Salish people in British Columbia and, for the purposes of this hearing, has been
         officially designated in accordance with Hwlitsum First Nation history and
         tradition and culture as the official repository of the oral histories that he is going
         to be sharing today on behalf of the Elders of Hwlitsum First Nation who are
         unable to attend today because of health reasons.
4949.                All of the evidence that is going to be presented by Dr. Miller was
         gathered in accordance with the culture and traditions of the Hwlitsum First
         Nation; is the proper oral history of the Hwlitsum First Nation presided through
         the person of Dr. Miller, who is the official repository of this information
         currently on behalf of Hwlitsum First Nation and the Elders who could not be
         here today.
4950.                Chief Wilson himself had intended to be here today to advise you of
         this. He, himself, had an unfortunate incident this week with his health and had to
         return to the hospital for further monitoring following some fairly extensive
         surgery that he's undergone recently.
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                    Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                     Introduction by Mr. Rath
4951.                So now, on behalf of Hwlitsum First Nation, to confirm what I've just
         advised the Panel, I will now turn things over to -- it would be my honour to turn
         things over to Councillor Jan Wilson of the Hwlitsum First Nation for some brief
         remarks that she would like to make prior to Dr. Miller's presentation.
4952.                Thank you.
4953.                THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Mr. Rath. Perhaps we could have
         the witnesses sworn or affirmed first before we proceed.
4954.                Thank you.
4955.                MR. RATH: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
JANICE CASEY PATRICIA WILSON: Affirmed
BRUCE GRANVILLE MILLER: Affirmed
4956.                MR. RATH: And Mr. Chairman, one final point of order prior to the
         commencement of testimony on behalf of our panel, we have elected to answer all
         questions that would be presented today, in writing.
4957.                Thank you.
4958.                THE CHAIRMAN: And I also maybe failed to mention that because
         of the time allotted, if you feel that -- at the end of the session that there may be
         additional information, you certainly can make a request to file oral traditional
         evidence by electronic means, such as a video or some other method if that's
         necessary. I just thought we'd leave that open for...
4959.                MR. RATH: Thank you, sir.
4960.                There may, in fact, be some additional evidence that we will be
         tendering in this regard. Unsurprisingly, like many First Nations in the coast and
         in the region, you know, Hwlitsum is involved in quite a bit of ongoing litigation
         with Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada and there's some very exciting
         Affidavit evidence that will be filed in the Federal Court surely in a fishing case
         that we may wish to tender to the Board's -- for the Board's consideration in the
         form of sworn Affidavits in the next several weeks, so thank you very much for
         that, sir.
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                 Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                         Presentation by Councillor Wilson
4961.                THE CHAIRMAN: All right. And with that, thank you, Councillor
         Wilson.
--- ORAL REPRESENTATION BY/REPRÉSENTATION ORALE PAR
COUNCILLOR JANICE WILSON:
4962.                COUNCILLOR WILSON: Panel Members, my name is Janice
         Wilson, and I'm a member of the Hwlitsum First Nation. I'm also a member of
         Council of the Hwlitsum First Nation. I speak here today on behalf of all
         Hwlitsum First Nation members, Elders and the Chief in Council.
4963.                Dr. Bruce Miller has been asked by Hwlitsum First Nation members,
         Elders and Chief in Council to present some important aspects of our oral history
         and to provide an overview of our connections to our ancestral territory. The
         evidence that will be presented today on behalf of Hwlitsum First Nation by
         Dr. Miller is a collection of some of the oral histories of Hwlitsum First Nation as
         passed down from generation to generation from time immemorial.
4964.                Thank you.
4965.                THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Councillor Wilson
4966.                And Dr. Miller.
4967.                DR. MILLER: We haven't worked out -- can I say to you when I
         want to change the slide just like that? Okay, thank you.
--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRÉSENTATION ORALE PAR DR. BRUCE
MILLER:
4968.                DR. MILLER: Okay. Thank you very much.
4969.                This is a presentation regarding Hwlitsum First Nation oral histories.
4970.                I want to start by showing you one of the major locations we're talking
         about so you can envision it. Here is Hwlitsum.
4971.                Hwlitsum is the Hwlitsum name for the location. It's called, in
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
         English, Canoe Pass. I may move back and forth between both names, but
         anyhow, it's the people and it's the location.
4972.                  And here is a navigational map just to show you -- give you another
         little bit of orientation. You can see the ferry terminal there and you can see the
         pass, and you can see Westham Island.
4973.                  Thank you.
4974.                  Later on, I'll show you a collection of maps that my colleague, Bill
         Angelbeck, and I have prepared from the oral history evidence with Hwlitsum.
         This is just to give you a start in thinking about that.
4975.                  You can see Canoe Pass here, and you can see this represents the
         locations for sockeye harvest. Thank you.
4976.                  The ancestors of the Hwlitsum were also in what is now Stanley Park
         in a location here, but probably using resources all through the region.
4977.                  And I want to say -- can you move that little cursor hand away, just for
         elegance. Thank you.
4978.                  This report represents information about the Hwlitsum First Nation's
         traditional use and occupation of the area now known as British Columbia. The
         Hwlitsum First Nation represents over 300 Hul'qumi'num people on the lower
         mainland of British Columbia, the Gulf Islands and Eastern Vancouver Island.
         But I want to say that information's not definitive and represents what is known
         now. I do not represent that it's complete. There is no doubt more information
         yet to be acquired.
4979.                  Since 2009, there's been an oral history project under way with the
         Hwlitsum people. Community members have recounted their own experiences
         hunting, gathering and fishing, and that of their ancestors. And much of this
         project has been undertaken while traveling -- while I've been travelling and my
         colleague, Bill Angelbeck, with Hwlitsum people through their waterways and
         with them fishing, hunting and gathering. And the results of this work over the
         last five years is presented here.
4980.                  And we gathered visual evidence of cultural, spiritual and harvesting
         practices and obtained detailed accounts of traditional uses of the environment.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                    Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
4981.                 The trip, the several trips, also allowed us to witness the ongoing
         relationship that Hwlitsum enjoy with the natural environment, both in obtaining a
         livelihood and in maintaining spiritual, cultural and social cohesion, all topics that
         I'll talk about in more detail. And it enabled myself and my colleague to
         understand the way the territory, the waterways, the islands and the other features
         of the land and seascape was and is understood by the Hwlitsum.
4982.                 Finally, the trip also enabled us to witness the damage mainstream
         society’s business development and management practices have inflicted on
         Hwlitsum’s society, culture and fisheries.
4983.                 Now, you've heard this already, but today's Elders are not here. One
         who was intended to be on the panel has passed away, another suffers from
         dementia. One is recovering from surgery. And the one gentleman in their
         nineties is too old to bear the weight of testimony alone. And so, as you've heard,
         they've asked me to provide this information today.
4984.                 So I'm Dr. Bruce Granville Miller from the Department of
         Anthropology at UBC. That's the picture of the Museum of Anthropology.
4985.                 The Hwlitsum, like their ancestors, the Lamalchi, are members of the
         Hul'qumi'num Mustimaxw. Prior to contact, the Mustimaxw employed a seasonal
         cycle that saw them winter December to February on the Gulf Islands and
         southern part of Vancouver Island and summer March to November on the lower
         mainland of British Columbia.
4986.                 Prior to 1863, the Lamalchi had a winter village at Lamalchi Bay on
         what is now known as Kuper Island, although I think it's sometimes being called
         Peneleka Island. The site was ideally situated because it was a safe harbouring
         place and there were abundant resources nearby to harvest.
4987.                 There's a picture of Lamalchi Bay and some of the Hwlitsum Band
         members at an event there two years ago. And I just included this picture of a
         midden on the bay to indicate that this is a place of long occupation, and so shell
         middens are refuse collecting over many generations, and the beach there is a
         midden site.
4988.                 Now the background to all this. In 1863, the British Navy bombed and
         then burned the Lamalchi village, and colonial authorities subsequently executed
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
         three of their most prominent warriors. The next year, Governor James Douglas
         allowed the Lamalchi land to be pre-empted. Since the Lamalchi had no access to
         their ancestral village site, they were forced to winter elsewhere.
4989.                 Around 1892, many of the Lamalchi chose to live year round at
         Hwlitsum. In accordance with the Hul’qumi’num custom of identifying oneself
         with one's village, winter village, the people now identify themselves as
         Hwlitsum. So to be clear, the people who were once called Lamalchi are now
         called Hwlitsum.
4990.                 The Lamalchi seasonal cycles. From before contact to 1849, they
         employed a seasonal cycle -- I've already said this, but to remind you -- four
         months, November to March, at Lamalchi, the bay -- the picture you saw a minute
         ago. After harvesting the late-running chum salmon, the last run of anadromous
         fish each year, the Lamalchi focused on harvesting local resources. The Lamalchi
         village was ideally situated for a variety of resources listed there. I won't read all
         that to you.
4991.                 They also supplemented their winter diet by hunting and trapping deer,
         elk and so forth and gathering salal, ferns, cedar bark and other things for
         medicines, foods and food processing purposes.
4992.                 In April, the Lamalchi’s seasonal cycle took them to their ancestral
         village at Hwlitsum, otherwise known as Canoe Pass, where they would spend
         eight months harvesting resources in the lower mainland of B.C. Hwlitsum -- I
         showed you the picture of it -- was well situated, and still is, because it's not only
         located in a prime harvesting location for the runs of fish, particularly eulachon
         and salmon, it was also right in the middle of an important stopover for birds on
         the Pacific Flyway.
4993.                 The Lamalchi also travelled each year to the Coquitlam River and the
         Pitt River where they harvested plants for medicinal and food purposes, the
         various runs of salmon and sturgeon. They visited relatives there. They hunted
         and trapped in the watershed areas. They harvested each anadromous fish run as
         it arrived, beginning with the eulachon, then, in order, the spring salmon, coho,
         sockeye, steelhead, and so forth.
4994.                 In addition, they harvested other species such as clams, crab, shrimp,
         sturgeon, and they supplemented their diet by hunting and trapping various
         species and gathering a number of plants.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
4995.                 After 1891 -- now, this is a discussion of their seasonal cycle to the
         present. The rich history of harvesting within Hwlitsum traditional territory
         becomes evidence when one considers that, of the 17 people who gave oral
         histories, 13 of them are or had been commercial fishers. All 17 remained
         involved in some portions of fishing, processing of fish, beach food, land and sea
         mammals, plants and other species. And together, it reveals a community deeply
         invested in protecting their traditional harvesting activities.
4996.                 These activities provide a source of food and revenue and feature in
         the construction of personal and group identity and figure prominently in their
         spiritual life. The resource activities aren’t just for food, but they create
         community solidarity through proximity, through sharing of important activities,
         and through the regular practice of reciprocity.
4997.                 All the Hwlitsum report regular participation of both giving and
         receiving gifts of food and exchanging valuable information about subsistence
         activities. This reciprocity is important in binding a community to itself and is
         characteristic of historic Coast Salish.
4998.                 I just want to also add again, I’ve heard all these people give this in
         testimony to me, but I’ve also witnessed all of these things that I’m talking about
         today. Thank you.
4999.                 That’s just a picture to give an idea, give a face to the activities I’m
         mentioning.
5000.                 This is Chief Wilson, who’s ill, can’t be here today, and this is the late
         Mary Wilson. There were two of the people that we had hoped would have a
         chance to come and speak before you.
5001.                 Inherited knowledge. The oral histories show that the Hwlitsum have
         persisted in harvesting in the areas used by their ancestors. They maintain and
         use specific knowledge of the movement of the tides, the location of resources,
         and behaviours of particular species. It’s been fun and interesting watching that
         process of knowledge exchange among Elders and junior people in the
         community.
5002.                 As an example, Jerris Wilson noted the flounder are blown by a
         southeast wind off the “flats” of the river to deeper river water. Consequently, at
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
         Canoe Pass, which is shallow, their nets go to the bottom to get the flounder under
         these weather conditions. But as I’ve mentioned, there’s an important spiritual
         component to all this.
5003.                 The Hwlitsum continue to practice historical spiritual observances.
         These include the practice of recognizing a relationship with salmon through
         setting aside the first salmon of the season, cooking it while still on board, sharing
         it with all those aboard, and carefully preserving the bones for disposal into the
         sea. One Elder noted that this is done so the fish return the next season.
5004.                 A variant on this was to carefully set aside the first salmon of the
         season to cut and distribute to family members once ashore. And another variant
         was to bring the first fish back to the Chief for him to eat and distribute. All of
         these are a part of what Coast Salish people refer to as first salmon ceremonies.
5005.                 Many of the present-day Hwlitsum people remember details of the
         fishing of an earlier period so they’re able to talk about what their ancestors did
         before restrictions on fishing activities and before the serious decline in the
         number of particular species. Because the practice is to learn fishing and other
         activities by observation of their Elders, all the Hwlitsum can recall vividly their
         early activities with these now-deceased family members. Many can recall what
         the Elders of their youth told them about generations even further back, and these
         narratives reach back to the common ancestor, Si’nuscustan, born in the late
         1700s.
5006.                 Canoe Pass to the Gulf Islands. So one of the important things I want
         to try to communicate to you is that the village where many of them live now is at
         Canoe Pass or Hwlitsum, but they have regular interchange through their territory
         in the Gulf Islands.
5007.                 One of the Elder fishermen, Lindsey Wilson, gave a useful account of
         the pattern of economic activities. He observed that the historic village of
         Hwlitsum, at Canoe Pass, is situated at the mouth of the Fraser River. There, his
         generation and those before him had access to the primary location for salmon
         harvesting -- it’s a really wonderful place to harvest salmon -- and to the birds
         migrating through the area. This location also gave access to other fish, including
         sturgeon and eulachon. Canoe Pass allowed for direct travel upriver for species
         best harvested there. So they’ve got a grand location.
5008.                 From Canoe Pass, Hwlitsum people use the tides to reach Galiano
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
         Island in two and a half hours, where there are two major passes, Porlier Pass,
         formerly Cowichan Gap, in the north and Active Pass in the south. The location
         of these passes can be seen from Canoe Pass -- something I’ll talk about more
         later -- and there are ancestral villages located at each. Movement through the
         passes allows the taking of many species.
5009.                And so Lindsey Wilson described the outside, the east of Galiano
         Island, as the “catcher’s mitt” -- that’s his imagery -- which boats in Canoe Pass
         can easily access with the tides. Tides flowing out enabled a return to Canoe Pass.
         And Lindsay Wilson suggested that he has preferred to follow a roughly
         triangular route through the northern pass, Porlier, through the many islands to
         harvest a variety of species, and then go back out Active Pass and back to his
         home at Canoe Pass.
5010.                Wilson also described the suitability of this complex for harvesting, in
         the same day, land mammals, shellfish and a variety of fish. So that’s a depiction
         of it.
5011.                So here is where they’re starting and they can follow the tides out
         through this pass, access down here and can return back out this way.
5012.                MR. RATH: Can you show them the bay on Kuper Island?
5013.                DR. MILLER: Yeah, if my eyes were better. This is actually kind of
         small.
5014.                Yeah. Well, I’ll just go on because it’s too small for me. Carry on.
5015.                Okay. Now, this is depicted visually also by community spiritual
         leaders. Jody Wilson is one such.
5016.                He’s made silk screens that depict the travel from Canoe Pass to the
         Gulf Islands and through the passes described as the Catcher’s Mitt. And so I
         found this, to my surprise, when I went to talk to Jody, that he, on his -- he’s a
         noted artist. And on his walls, much of what he was depicting showed this
         relationship between Canoe Pass and the Islands, the Gulf Islands.
5017.                The oral narratives of the Hwlitsum people reveal the use of many
         locations and intense resource activities concentrated in locations including Canoe
         Pass, Galiano Island, Reid Island, Coquitlam, Porlier and Active Passes. The
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
         area around Coquitlam, including Munday Lake and Lost Lake, Alouette Lake,
         Pitt Lake and other areas along the Fraser for fishing, hunting, trapping, gathering.
5018.                 And I want to say that a lot of this is collective activity, and they report
         engaging in a number of group-based resource activities. And as I say, I’ve seen
         this, including harvesting, processing, and distributing.
5019.                 Janice Wilson, sitting next to me, described the gatherings during
         canning season in which hundreds of cans and mason jars of salmon were
         produced in earlier years before refrigerators were available, and Hwlitsum
         people relied on this salmon during the winter. They still do rely on this salmon
         during the winter.
5020.                 Zoe Wilson noted that Hwlitsum men fished together in groups and the
         Hwlitsum women, including those living at Gulf Islands and those at Canoe Pass,
         gathered for a week at Canoe Pass, gathered from the islands, gathered together
         for a week at Canoe Pass to can the fish.
5021.                 Zoe recalled her sisters, aunts, grandparents and spouses participating,
         as did male relatives. Boats were tied up and fish were unloaded at a wharf in
         front of Stan Harris’ waterfront home at Hwlitsum. Later, I’ll tell you more about
         Stan Harris.
5022.                 Distribution. Many Hwlitsum men report distributing fish, game and
         shellfish to their extended family members. In some instances, people were
         permitted to come to the family wharf to take what they wanted and, in other
         cases, fishermen took -- themselves took the fish to relatives.
5023.                 So there are relatives at Canoe Creek and the Gulf Islands, and these
         Elders report that many of these species have been and are taken all over in any
         location within their territory with suitable conditions. Their harvesting and
         processing patterns were aided by the presence of a set of houses, two wharves
         and two net sheds on and near the ancestral village of Hwlitsum. They were also
         able to harvest with Hwlitsum relatives who lived nearby at ancestral harvesting
         sites, Salt Spring Island, Reid Island, and other locations across the Strait of
         Georgia and in the Gulf Islands themselves.
5024.                 As I’ve told you, near the mouth of the south fork of the Fraser River
         lies the ancestral village of Hwlitsum. Elders report that this area has often been
         so rich in a great number of species that, for some species, there was no need to
Transcript                                                                       Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
         go elsewhere.
5025.                 At Canoe Pass, all species of salmon are harvested along with
         flounder, steelhead, sturgeon, eulachon and so forth, and nearby sloughs offered
         opportunities for steelhead salmon. Regularly changing sand bars provided
         opportunities for harvest. Roberts Bank, just outside the mouth of the Fraser,
         yields crab and sockeye. Steveston, eulachon, Point Grey, sockeye and
         Tsawwassen Beach yields clams.
5026.                 One of the areas people talk about is known as the Drop-Off and the
         Straits of Georgia. It’s an area where the water depth increases rapidly. It’s a
         good place for harvesting a number of species including oyster, crabs, salmon,
         flounder, dogfish.
5027.                 Now back to these passes. The “inside”. Porlier Pass was described
         as a location of abundance. Elders reported taking ling cod, rock cod and all
         species of salmon, snapper, octopus and so forth.
5028.                 After travelling across the Straits and passing through Porlier,
         Hwlitsum report extensive use of these locations on the inside, that is, inside
         Galinao Island, a long island running roughly north to southeast, including
         Trincomali Channel, Montague Harbour, the location for oysters, clams, cockle,
         salmon. Whaler’s Bay was sought for oysters, crabs, winter and spring salmon.
5029.                 Now I want to change what I’m doing here a little bit from this general
         background to talk about specific Hwlitsum people and how they describe their
         traditional, cultural, spiritual and resource activities.
5030.                 And I want to start with Chief Rocky Wilson, who was unable to be
         here today, who's ill. I’m sorry to hear he's in hospital. He’s a Hwlitsum Elder
         who served as Chief of the Hwlitsum since 1999 and is an active commercial
         fisher.
5031.                 He has lived in Hwlitsum, Canoe Pass, his entire life. He’s also an
         oral historian of the community, having learned the Hwlitsum way of life and
         history from his father, mother, grandmother, uncles, aunts and cousins.
5032.                 The narratives Chief Wilson learned go back to the time of
         Si’nuscustan, who was born in the late 18th century, and link continuously to the
         present. So he’s an informed and accurate source of information about Hwlitsum
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
         fisheries and has harvested species in a great variety of locations, including those
         used by his ancestors. He has orally footnoted those ancestral practices in a
         continuous chain back to the 19th century.
5033.                 By orally footnoting, I’m -- it’s a term that means referencing
         particular Elders and who they were and the grounds of their authority.
5034.                 His father, Andrew John Wilson, was born on the Coquitlam reserve in
         1899, and his mother was on Galiano Island.
5035.                 MS. OLENIUK: Mr. Chair, I’m terribly sorry to interrupt, but Mr.
         Rath just passed the witness a note. He spoke twice to the witness asking him
         earlier to indicate something on the record, and I think that’s inappropriate.
5036.                 If there’s something Mr. Rath has to offer the Panel, perhaps he could
         be sworn and affirmed or provide his evidence that way.
5037.                 THE CHAIRMAN: Mr. Rath.
5038.                 MR. RATH: Mr. Chairman, as far as things go, I see nothing
         inappropriate here. And if the Panel or my friend would like to see the note that I
         passed to Dr. Miller, I’m happy to share it.
5039.                 It’s -- in my experience in dealing with Panels both in this Board and
         the National Energy Board, the rules or procedure are somewhat more loose than
         they are -- would be in a Court of law. But if there’s some issue in that regard,
         I’m happy to take the Court’s -- the Board’s direction on it.
5040.                 I certainly see no issue, and if my friend from Osler is -- seems to have
         a problem with it, I’m happy to hear what the Board has to say about it. I
         certainly see nothing inappropriate.
5041.                 MS. OLENIUK: Sir, it’s inappropriate. It’s contrary to the rules and
         it’s contrary to our own Law Society rules as well to -- for a lawyer to interact
         with the witness when they’re giving sworn testimony. So I leave it in your
         hands, sir.
5042.                 THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Give me a moment.
--- (Short pause/Courte pause)
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                 Presentation by Dr. Miller
5043.                THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I think it is -- there is -- our format, our
         process for all traditional evidence is less formal. I would -- the Panel agrees with
         that and we do allow counsel to sit with the witnesses. But certainly we’re here to
         hear the oral traditional evidence from those who have witnesses on behalf of the
         First Nation and the fact that Dr. Miller, he’s been asked to speak on behalf of
         them, so it would be appropriate that we keep that to those witnesses only. And
         any interaction between counsel and the witnesses should be at a minimum, if not
         none, at this time.
5044.                Thank you.
5045.                MR. RATH: That's fine, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for that
         guidance.
5046.                THE CHAIRMAN: Dr. Miller, please continue.
5047.                DR. MILLER: There we go.
5048.                Anyhow, I was commenting on Chief Wilson’s background and why it
         is that he became a noted oral historian of his community.
5049.                His father suffered from severe arthritis when Rocky Wilson was a
         teenager and, as the youngest of eight children, he was the one who spent time
         assisting his dad fishing and hunting. And his father chose him, as is common in
         Coast Salish society, to learn the Hwlitsum way of life and history, and he did that
         with his father. And he also learned about the Hwlitsum resources and way of life
         from all these other relatives that I’ve mentioned. His great-great-grandmother
         was a resident of Stanley Park, by the way.
5050.                There is Rocky Wilson, and we hope he looks like that very soon.
5051.                On August 16th, 2014, I travelled from Vancouver to Canoe Pass,
         where I met with Chief Wilson at the Wilson Wharf, which is approximately one
         and a half kilometres from the Robert Super Port at the mouth of Hwlitsum,
         Canoe Pass.
5052.                Rocky lives there in a house his great-grandfather built in 1907. The
         house is located within a few hundred metres of the Wilson Wharf, which I’ll
         show you, where his boat is tied up.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                 Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                 Presentation by Dr. Miller
5053.                We travelled on that occasion to the mouth of the river. Well, we just
         were at the mouth of the river where Rocky gill-netted and made three sets and
         harvested sockeye.
5054.                That gives you a -- that’s Canoe Pass and you can see the Super Port.
         I just want to give you a sense of the proximity of the [ass and the port.
5055.                Maybe I should point -- if you could go back to that. This is -- these
         are the big cranes and, of course, this is the Hwlitsum waters.
5056.                Now, this concerns the issue of traditional knowledge.
5057.                I’ve done this many times, actually, with Rocky and his brother and
         his other relatives. But on this occasion, for example, I watched closely as he
         fished, selecting prime fishing locations and then position the net so it would
         harvest more effectively. In this case, he selected a hole near Westham Island and
         across from Brunswick Point as a good spot to set his nets.
5058.                He also exhibited a keen knowledge of the winds and the tides, once
         noting that a wind was shifting the location of the salmon and creating a fishing
         opportunity. In my opinion, he has a deep knowledge of Hwlitsum’s waters and
         fisheries, knowing where the salmon are running and which route they’ve taken
         into Hwlitsum, which is a key issue which I’ll talk about more in a moment.
5059.                Over the three days of fishing, he caught 659 sockeye which were
         either given to his immediate family or distributed to Hwlitsum Band members,
         some of whom don’t have the capacity to fish themselves.
5060.                Now, a second person I want to talk about is Lindsey Wilson. Lindsey
         is a Councillor since 2002. He's now 58. He’s an active commercial fisherman
         and hunter. I’ve mentioned to him previously in the catcher’s mitt analogy.
5061.                Community members regard him as an excellent fisherman, and he’s a
         reliable source of information about resource activities and the resource locations
         of his predecessors and ancestors.
5062.                He has orally footnoted these ancestral practices in a continuous chain
         back to the 19th century. He was raised by his grandmother and grandfather and
         learned much of the oral traditions from those people. He also learned fishing
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
         from his -- observing his grandparents in this activity.
5063.                As a child, he wished to emulate his grandfather, Andrew Wilson, a
         noted fisher and athlete. And he said -- yeah, I can’t reproduce this well enough,
         the emphasis he put into this:
                              “I always wanted to catch fish since I was born. It’s the most
                              fun I have. It’s very spiritual out there. Everything, the whole
                              big picture.”
5064.                He engages in fishing and hunting in locations his ancestors had used
         and he fishes and hunts throughout the year and states that he would engage in
         more activities if it were now financially viable and species were abundant and
         not restricted by licensure. He harvests a wide variety of sea and land species.
5065.                Early in his life, in his twenties, his annual routine worked in the
         following manner. In January, February and even into March, he took steelhead
         in the Fraser River between Canoe Pass and New Westminster. To do this, he
         used a net that he’d made to honour his ancestors. He also took the winter springs
         at Galiano Island on the east on the outside and on the west coast, the inside, and
         Mayne Island.
5066.                In hard times, with no salmon available, he moved across from Canoe
         Pass, or Hwlitsum to the Gulf Islands in the winter, to bring back food to family
         and friends or, as he would say, they’d do whatever is necessary. This included
         winter springs prawns, clams, oysters and deer. In summers, he fished the Fraser
         River. He also fished Galiano Island for winter springs on both the inside and the
         outside in and around Mayne Island.
5067.                A third person to tell you about is Dan Wilson. He is a Hwlitsum
         Councillor. He is 60. He is an experienced commercial fisherman, trapper, hunter
         and net builder. His family occupies the wharf and net shed closest to the mouth
         of the Fraser River. I’ll show you a picture of that.
5068.                His father, Terry Wilson, is also a commercial fisher and is recognized
         as one of the most knowledgeable people about eulachon. His father, Terry
         Wilson, is also a tremendous storyteller. I spent a couple of days in his fishing
         shed -- net shed listening to -- recently listening to his fun accounts.
5069.                Dan’s harvesting activities have taken him throughout the Hwlitsum
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
         traditional territory.
5070.                 Not such a good picture, but here's Dan Wilson. Here's the Wilson
         Wharf. And all through this area, the Wilson people have lived historically for
         more than a century and then, of course, seasonally for many centuries such that
         this whole area has sometimes been called Wilsonville. And Rocky Wilson’s
         house was just across the street and over here and the houses of other Hwlitsum
         people along in the region.
5071.                 Fred Wilson is the older brother of Chief Rocky Wilson. He’s 77 now,
         a commercial fisher and hunter. He grew up at the family home located at
         Hwlitsum.
5072.                 Fred started commercial fishing, gillnetting in front of the family home
         at age eight. One of the interesting things in talking with these folks and being
         with them over a number of years is how early they started in their resource
         activities.
5073.                 He obtained -- Fred Wilson obtained his first shotgun at 14, shooting
         pheasants, and hunted with his brother, Lloyd, and other family members, but he’s
         more of a fisherman than a hunter. He hunted with -- fished and hunted with the
         Elders of his own youth. Fred Wilson is a very knowledgeable informant, and
         states his information without break to the generation of his great-grandfather,
         John Andrew Wilson, born in the early 19th century. He harvests in the areas used
         by his ancestors.
5074.                 Now, next, I want to talk about Stan Harris, and he has particularly
         important information.
5075.                 Mr. Harris was born in 1923 on Salt Spring Island. He noted that he
         “grew up everywhere,” throughout the region travelling with his logger-fisherman
         dad. Many Coast Salish men were loggers in that period.
5076.                 Mr. Harris lived in Ladner since 1938, permanently since 1947. In
         1938, he came to Canoe Pass with his uncle and cousins, fished seasonally, and
         returned home to Salt Spring Island. He married Chief Wilson’s sister, Pauline, in
         1947. And he moved in with his wife next to the Wilson Wharf, which I just
         showed you, on Canoe Pass across the street from Chief Wilson’s house and near
         the houses of the other members of the Wilson family, including Rosalie Wilson.
         So he’s deeply connected with the Hwlitsum network of families. There’s Mr.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                 Presentation by Dr. Miller
         Harris.
5077.                 In 1948, Mr. Harris noted, “you could fish pretty well all year if the
         fish were there.”
5078.                 When the salmon runs were over, he would go to the Gulf Islands to
         jig cod, dig clams and pick oysters. He would return to Canoe Pass with these
         species “by the boatload.” These foods were made available to all of the
         Hwlitsum people who wished to take some. Some of the food was sold in
         Chinatown at a dollar a sack, which he said was “good money in those days.”
5079.                 Steelheads were fished at Canoe Pass with nets “down to Brunswick
         Cannery from the bridge.” Chief Wilson observed that steelhead were often
         Christmas dinner, and Mr. Harris noted that there might not be anything else if
         money was low.
5080.                 Good -- good job at moving the slides. I appreciate it.
5081.                 The Hwlitsum community living at Canoe Pass participated in many
         activities together, and this included the First Salmon ceremony which I’ve told
         you about. When the first salmon was caught, Mr. Harris said:
                             “It was always divided up to all the families, whoever caught
                             it. Everybody came to the house to get a piece. It was always
                             good news, the season started. I never got the first fish.”
5082.                 A lament over time.
5083.                 Fishing locations. Mr. Harris observed that he fished at the ferry
         landing, Sturdies Bay, in Galiano Island at Whaler’s Bay, Montague Harbor,
         Ganges, and other locations. He fished the channel between Kuper or Penelekut
         Island and Thetis Island. He put nets across the channel.
5084.                 Ivan Wilson, the grandfather of Jerris Wilson, who I’ve mentioned, did
         a lot of fishing there. Mr. Harris said:
                             “That’s where I got my start, the other end of Galiano Island.”
5085.                 He said that he fished and hunted at “Cowichan Gap”, the old person’s
         term for Porlier Pass.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
5086.                Most of the Wilsons, he said, came to Mr. Harris’ place in Canoe Pass
         to gut their fish during salmon canning season. Everyone did their own cleaning.
         Brothers gave fish to their sisters for the women’s families. And he said:
                             “The ones who didn’t fish were given as much as they wanted -
                             they had big families.”
5087.                Mr. Harris fished eulachon every year, either by himself or with
         someone else. He used a net. These eulachon were shared with everyone. People
         were free to pick the eulachon out of the net “like grapes”. This was about
         February or March, in early spring, and Mr. Harris said he would go from time to
         time for eulachon. Many other family members came, and he said he “never got
         more than we could use.”
5088.                Mr. Harris also took oysters where the Super Port is now located on
         Tsawwassen Reserve. There were oysters on the beach where the Ferry Landing
         is now. He took them “anywhere along Point Roberts” in the sand on the beach
         or glued onto rocks. I’m pausing because -- for emphasis here.
5089.                Mr. Harris described fishing “right along the shore to the border” in
         the area where the ferry is now. The fish went around the point, following the
         shoreline, then in the channel with the tide and into Canoe Pass. So I’m saying
         this is how it was once.
5090.                Sturgeon Channel at Tsawwassen was a location for harvesting
         sturgeon. There were, Mr. Harris noted, “thousands of small sturgeon in the river
         after spawning.” He got sturgeon in Canoe Pass of up to seven or eight hundred
         pounds, and they were difficult to bring in. He put large ones crosswise on his
         boat.
5091.                In the 1950s, before the Coal Port and the ferry, Ivan Wilson, with the
         help of three or four local Japanese fishermen, winched a massive sturgeon with a
         drum onto the boat. Large sturgeon sold for $100. Now, he says, there are no
         sturgeon, and Sturgeon Channel itself is lost.
5092.                As an aside, there’s a large sturgeon down the hall hanging from the
         ceiling in this hotel. It’s not a real one, but it can give you an idea of the size of
         sturgeon.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
5093.                Before the ferry terminal changed the waterscape, the tide ran along
         the beach. I think what I’m saying now is probably the most important thing I
         have to tell you today.
5094.                Fishermen went to drift out to block the channel with a net and get the
         fish coming out. As the tide went out past Brunswick Point, it pushed the water
         south all along the sand bars. Mr. Harris said:
5095.                “It was a different game when the Ferry came in. Everything sheered
         off. The pattern [of fish migration] was different and fishing was different
         altogether."
5096.                The fish, he said, hit barriers and go on out, not back in again with the
         tide. More fish went through the main channel of the Fraser River instead of
         Canoe Pass. With the Super Port, “our Canoe Pass runs were gone. Now we get
         what’s left over from other runs. Dribbles.”
5097.                Concerning the loss of depth on the Canoe Pass channel, Stan Harris
         said:
                             “There’s always a good channel [formerly, to the Gulf
                             Islands]. There’s no channel there now. Now, mainly [water
                             comes on] the Main Channel.”
5098.                This change in water depth and pattern generally increases the
         expenses associated with fishing
5099.                Regarding the proposed one and a half mile addition to the Delta Port,
         Mr. Harris observed:
                             “Coal Port almost blocks all spring salmon. Next, [the
                             addition] would wipe out Canoe Pass altogether. No tide
                             here.”
5100.                The absence of tide would be associated with a loss of salmon runs
         into the Pass. He observed the connection between fish habitat and the run of
         water, noting that the runoff:
                             “...pushes water on us, keeps it clean. Stop that and sand piles
                             up and there is no fishing.”
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
5101.                 Mr. Harris is the last surviving Hwlitsum member who fished and
         hunted Canoe Pass, the Gulf Islands and the region before the ferry and port were
         created. That's why his oral history is so important.
5102.                 He is able to recount the fishing, clamming and oyster picking
         conditions during this period and before the loss of water into Canoe Pass and
         before the fish migration routes were disrupted. He recalled the sloughs and
         passages where sturgeon, eulachon and other species were once taken. In this
         earlier life, he was able to fish and hunt for eight months on Canoe Pass and
         vicinity and then four months on the Gulf Islands taking other species. This was a
         period before it was illegal to clam hunt, oyster and -- take oysters so on.
5103.                 Mr. Harris' account of his own life clearly outlines the strong links
         between the various Hwlitsum families, both on Canoe Pass and the Islands.
         These links were reinforced by mutual fishing, hunting and other resource
         activities, but the families were also linked ceremonially in the First Salmon
         ceremony, in their locations of residence, in their practices of mutual assistance,
         and in their recreation. And perhaps most importantly, Mr. Harris shows the
         connection to the land and water in the territory of the “Wild Wilsons”.
5104.                 Sorry, Janice.
5105.                 Now I want to talk a little bit more about Jody Wilson. Jody Wilson is
         a Hwlitsum member who was born in 1958, and he is an artist and cultural leader.
5106.                 Mr. Wilson’s house in Ladner right near Hwlitsum is his workshop
         and showcase for his impressive Coast Salish artwork in carved wood, in large
         totem poles, in two-dimensional silk screens, and in gold and silver jewellery. He
         said that he has been drawn -- he has drawn since he was five years old. He
         depicts animals associated with his own Coast Salish and Hwlitsum territory in
         their natural background which, he says, gives meaning to his work.
5107.                 He grew up across the street from Chief Wilson in what was known as
         “Wilsonville” on Canoe Pass. He says living on the river on Wilson traditional
         land he felt at home flying around in boats on the river.
5108.                 He described going to his Uncle Joe’s place on Reid Island, a small
         island in the Gulf Islands, and he did that as a really young lad dropped off there.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                    Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
5109.                 By five, he was on the deck of fishing boats and, as a boy, spent time
         with his grandfather Ivan, who, he said “made me work for it” on the water. His
         closeness to the Canoe Pass is evident.
5110.                 He described playing on boats as a child and carving gillnetters out of
         driftwood at Brunswick Point. In particular, he liked to play and hunt in the
         slough between his house and the road.
5111.                 Now, this is -- just as the notion of a catcher's mitt that Lindsay Wilson
         had is important, this is another important conceptual point.
5112.                 Of particular significance to showing Jody’s connection to the whole
         of Hwlitsum territory is his artwork. I've shown you already one piece. One large
         painting on the wall of his home is “Black Fish”, otherwise known as orca. In this
         painting, one can see from Canoe Pass to Porlier Pass.
5113.                 Jody noted that the painting show the closeness of the islands to the
         Pass, 12 miles, saying, quote:
                             “It’s like a step across.”
5114.                 This theme is repeated in much of his work. Eagle’s Moon, for
         example, shows an eagle departing Canoe Pass towards Reid Island and
         Cowichan Gap. And when I went to talk to him about all this in his home, I was
         just struck by the fact that his artwork was already showing these connections.
         It's really fundamentally what he has depicted in several decades as an artist.
         Jody noted that:
                             “Most of my art is related to Canoe Pass and Reid Island
                             unless it’s commissioned.”
5115.                 Jody Wilson, as did all of the other Wilsons of his generation and the
         one before, had a connection to Granny Cook on Salt Spring Island near Reid
         Island. Granny Cook "always had a big pot of seafood.”
5116.                 Jody observed that, as a young man, he went to Reid Island, which he
         called Fantasy Island, meaning he enjoyed it so much despite the weather, even,
         he said, a Nor'wester.
5117.                 Another piece of art, “Legends”, depicts animals including bear and
Transcript                                                                       Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
         eagle, with the salmon in the middle because salmon is central to the ecosystem
         and to the Hwlitsum way of life and survival as a people, he says.
5118.                This piece, and others, reflects Jody Wilson’s view that one must be
         strong spiritually and physically to hold their place in fishing. Chief Wilson
         mentioned that the:
                             “...old guys said that when the sockeye die off, we die off.”
5119.                The "Legends" picture captures this idea directly, and there it is.
5120.                This is at the centre of all the species. And they are people of the
         salmon and it's core to the ecosystem, he was saying, and he had depicted this in
         this very lovely piece of art.
5121.                Just as another side note, the Wilsons and the Hwlitsum people are a
         very vigorous -- physically vigorous group. They are well known for fishing in
         the area.
5122.                And when I interviewed Jody Wilson for the first time a number of
         years ago and he stood up, I looked at him. He was so massively strong, and he's
         a -- but a profound artist. And I said, "My God, what is our background?"
5123.                And he said he was runner-up in the National Power Lifting
         Championship.
5124.                Many of the Wilsons are boxers, wrestlers and athletes, and I think it's
         run down over the centuries because they're vigorous people maintaining a hold
         on their way of life.
5125.                Jody Wilson reveals the close relationship between Hwlitsum art, their
         culture and their territory. It's depicted. And he is bound, too, in a tight social
         network of community members, and he commemorates and passes on these ideas
         via art so other Hwlitsum members visually get the idea, you know, that he's
         portraying for them visually.
5126.                His art vividly depicts the geographic and conceptual closeness of
         Canoe Pass and Gulf Island, which are simply -- now here's the phrase -- a step
         across.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                     Presentation by Dr. Miller
5127.                 Jody Wilson captures visually what he and other Hwlitsum people
         have said in interviews about their attachment to territory, to salmon, and to each
         other. It's all closely bound up.
5128.                 An analysis of the data produced from the study indicates that current
         oil tanker traffic is adversely affecting the harvest of at least 11 species named
         there. Of course, should there be expansion, there would be additional adverse
         impact due to increased tanker traffic.
5129.                 I just wanted to show you the site of Tl'uqtinus village, one of the
         Hwlitsum areas, and you can see what's happened to it now, just to give a sense of
         the impact on their traditional lands and waterways from commercial and other
         activities.
5130.                 The Hwlitsum people also fear that there will inevitably be an oil spill
         and that current oil spill response system will not be able to protect their
         harvesting, cultural and spiritual locations.
5131.                 I want to amplify that the problem here is that if there is an oil spill
         and it goes into the Gulf Islands, it will disrupt -- this is one of my key points
         here. It will disrupt their ability to harvest the shellfish and anadromous fish and
         other species which they use in their spiritual life. It has to be part of ceremonies,
         burnings, cultural burnings, which connect them to their ancestors, which bid their
         ancestors come. They also fear that neither B.C. or Canada or Kinder Morgan has
         a plan in place for remediation of sensitive habitat.
5132.                 There's Mary Wilson, the late Mary Wilson -- can we go back to her
         for a moment -- with one of the young folks. This was at a Hwlitsum tribal
         gathering on Galiano Island and a large picnic, and the interesting thing was what
         they ate. I guess I'll -- my slides aren't in the order that I'd hoped.
5133.                 I mentioned about ritual life. This was an event that I participated in
         on behalf of the Museum of Vancouver, where I am a member of the Board of
         Directors and Chair of the Collections Committee. And we repatriated a ancestor
         back to the Hwlitsum and to their relatives, Penelekut. And this is the ritual that
         took place then.
5134.                 Now, the pictures I show you can't depict the main event, but the
         major thing was the ritual burning in which ancestral spirits attend to their
         occasion. And they are, as I was mentioning before, come because the burning is
Transcript                                                                       Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
         the burning of foods, of the shellfish and other of their traditional foods that are
         essential to this ceremony. I'm sorry I can't depict the rest of it for you, but their
         protocol doesn't allow it.
5135.                 Harvesting activities in the youth of the current Elders took place in
         the context of a depression, or the Depression, from our viewpoint. Even those in
         their fifties report growing up in a household with little available money. For this
         reason, fishing, hunting and gathering of a great variety of species was essential to
         survival.
5136.                 Yet another reason for the cultural attachment to these extraction
         activities is the great cultural significance, their connection with a way of life and
         to the spiritual importance of these animals to Hwlitsum understandings of life.
5137.                 All 17 who gave oral histories learned how to carry out fishing,
         hunting and gathering by direct observation of the activities of their Elders. They
         embraced these activities, with many reporting that they began fishing and
         hunting before teenage years, even as young as seven, often with other young
         people.
5138.                 Two middle-aged Hwlitsum men recall being taken to Reid Island as
         teenagers to hunt and trap, remaining for two weeks until their uncle returned
         from Canoe Pass to bring them home.
5139.                 Jim Hornbrook noted that, in his youth and young adult life, trips from
         Canoe Pass to Reid Island in the Gulf Island chain were frequent, sometimes
         weekly. He noted that he and the others always took their guns on these trips so
         that they could fish, hunt, gather and trap.
5140.                 The region around Canoe Pass, the homeland of the Hwlitsum, is key
         to these resource activities. Community members have continually occupied
         several permanent homes in the region since the turn of the 20th century, and
         much, much longer seasonally, as I've pointed out.
5141.                 Many of the present generation and their ancestors of the last several
         generations were born, raised and lived their lives at Canoe Pass. The Hwlitsum
         report they occupied the location solely on their own without the presence of
         other Aboriginal people as permanent residents. They report other non-Hwlitsum
         Coast Salish people visiting, however.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
5142.                From these homes, they harvested in the rich waters of Canoe Pass and
         also hunted and gathered. Canoe Pass was then, and continues to be, the location
         for community-wide activities, including processing, distribution of fish and other
         species to community members. The evidence shows their Lamalchi ancestors
         used Canoe Pass for the summer fisheries, but also year round for resource
         harvesting.
5143.                Commercial activities have declined -- there's that horrible hand there
         again. Thank you. Hands have special meaning in the Coast Salish world. We
         have to be a little cautious.
5144.                Commercial activities have declined in recent years as the stocks have
         declined and fishing openings limited. All of the Hwlitsum lament this
         development and feel that it has deprived them of their ability to live as their
         ancestors have.
5145.                Several adult Hwlitsum express concern that the current generation of
         children is not able to fish and, as a consequence, is deprived of the ability to
         learn practices and locations central to the development of a group and of a
         personal identity as Hwlitsum. They will be deprived of a livelihood and an
         ancestral way of life. Part of this is a massive decline of the marshlands around
         Canoe Pass.
5146.                Hwlitsum remains a key area for them. It is a primary residence, their
         favoured fish location, a work site and the site for important links which -- events
         which link them together and to their past and to their ancestors and, in turn, to
         the waters and marine life of Hwlitsum.
5147.                They retain a sense of identification with the fish, crabs, birds and
         waters.
5148.                THE CHAIRMAN: If you're -- I don't know how -- your
         presentation, Dr. Miller. If you would like a brief break, we're happy to
         accommodate that now if that would be helpful to you.
5149.                DR. MILLER: No, I've got some more water.
5150.                THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, continue.
5151.                DR. MILLER: Thank you.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                    Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
5152.                When they fish, the Hwlitsum are near their ancestral burial site and
         the village sites of their ancestors. Each fisher relies on the wisdom of his
         ancestors to harvest. Simply put, the Hwlitsum are the people of Canoe Pass.
5153.                The reliance on local food procured within their historic territories was
         evident. The food at a Hwlitsum gathering on Galiano Island, which I mentioned
         before, at the home of Richard Wilson, for example, was harvested by community
         members and included crab, fish and clam. The reliance was itself built on a
         thorough knowledge of the region and of techniques of gathering, hunting and
         fishing.
5154.                Here's a picture from the -- Richard Wilson -- the gathering at Richard
         Wilson's house on Galiano Island. These are locally harvested species.
5155.                Here's another picture. There's Richard and other Hwlitsum Band
         members eating chowder and fish and so forth.
5156.                The Hwlitsum‘s food, social and ceremonial fishery is vital to the
         maintenance and well-being of their society. The harvesting of salmon is spiritual
         and cultural. The sharing of salmon is consistent with Coast Salish traditional
         values and provides a vital resource to elderly and low-income Hwlitsum
         households.
5157.                They've made it clear that if their traditional foods, fished and
         gathered, became unavailable following a spill, they would be unable to carry out
         the spiritual activities which define them as a group and bind them together the
         Coast Salish people. The inter-generational sharing of knowledge would be
         disrupted, and it would be hard to raise their children as Hwlitsum.
5158.                Now, I've got several maps here. Did you wish a break from all this,
         or shall I continue?
5159.                THE CHAIRMAN: I think we will take a break because we have
         seen the number of maps that you've filed as well.
5160.                So I think we'll just -- I think it probably a good time to take a break.
         So we'll take 15 minutes and come back at about 10:25. Thank you.
--- Upon recessing at 10:11 a.m./L'audience est suspendue à 10h11
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
--- Upon resuming at 10:29 a.m./L'audience est reprise à10h29
JANICE CASEY PATRICIA WILSON: Resumed
BRUCE GRANVILLE MILLER: Resumed
5161.                 THE CHAIRMAN: I am here and ready.
5162.                 MR. RATH: And just as we reconvene, I'd like to advise the panel
         that we shouldn't have any difficulty at all being done prior to 12 o'clock today for
         purposes.
5163.                 THE CHAIRMAN: I appreciate that, Mr. Rath. Thank you.
5164.                 Dr. Miller.
--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRÉSENTATION PAR DR. BRUCE
MILLER: (Continued/Suite)
5165.                 DR. MILLER: Thank you.
5166.                 I have several maps here that we've produced from the oral histories
         and from the site visits that my colleague, Professor Bill Angelbeck, and I have
         prepared and I actually don't have the entirety of them. We had a little difficulty
         loading them. But I've got a number of them here, and I'm not going to dwell on
         these. But I just want to allow them to do two things. One is show the range of
         species that are historically harvested and also the extent of the region.
5167.                 And I realize these are really hard to read. The resolution, it's just kind
         of a little bit of pale here.
5168.                 This is a map of sockeye harvest. You can see the region here. So it's
         shaded like that. Here is the original homeland village. Here is the winter village
         and homeland. So here is Hwlitsum and here is Lamalchi.
5169.                 Can you go -- that's the sockeye one I just showed. Can you go down
         again? Here's coho. You can see the extent here and here. Pink. And then it also
         shows these other locations. The chum. Spring. This was an important species in
         the sense that people could move from here to here.
5170.                 An interesting historic fact was that in 1891 or '92, government policy
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
         didn't permit the so-called Cowichan peoples to go and fish in the Fraser. But the
         Hwlitsum, who were living over here, could fish the Fraser and come back to their
         traditional homelands in this area. Thank you.
5171.                 The next -- here's herring. You can see in dark its locations all through
         the islands. Dogfish, eulachon is right in the Canoe Pass.
5172.                 Just to make this more obvious, there used to be a great many sloughs
         through the region by Canoe Pass, many of which are gone now. There are still
         several, but many have disappeared.
5173.                 So here is -- what is -- halibut, and what is the other? I can't even read
         my own thing here. Hang on one second.
--- (A short pause/Courte pause)
5174.                 DR. MILLER: Here's halibut and sturgeon, and you can see these
         locations on the river by the village. And here red snapper, crab. You can see all
         the harvesting right out of Canoe Pass on Roberts Bank and so forth. Prawn and
         shrimp, large areas.
5175.                 This is clams, cockles. It's hard to map that because they were taken
         in so many locations. But here -- these are just some of them that people
         mentioned to us. There would be many others if we could get an exhaustive
         listing of them.
5176.                 Urchin. Squid and octopus.
5177.                 Now, this is a traditional use area map that's showing in more detail
         Canoe Pass. Here's Westham Island. Here's the pass. All through here have been
         the sloughs we're talking about. And here is, again, the catcher's mitt notion
         going here, following the tides in and the tides out and harvesting all through the
         islands, hunting, harvesting and gathering.
5178.                 Gathering areas are also difficult to depict visually because they're so
         extensive. You can see. And also gathering includes things like cedar. Cedar is a
         form of gathering. Here is gathering areas. Did we just have that? Okay.
5179.                 And finally, these are places of spiritual significance that emerged in
         the oral histories. And I won't go through all of these, but -- and they are hard to
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                    Presentation by Dr. Miller
         see. But you can see there's a number of spiritual sites in the Gulf Islands on the
         river itself. One, for example, is a rock that was heaved by a spirit being into a
         location that's associated with particular stories and so forth.
5180.                 And is that the last one?
5181.                 And here are some of the non-archaeology sites in the region. So the
         point here is that all these locations have a great time depth of use. And also, we
         have to point out that archaeology has done only really a minimal amount of
         work, really, considering the massive use of this region over thousands of years.
         They haven't had a chance to do all that might be done.
5182.                 MR. RATH: In this regard, Mr. Chairman, this is a question I had for
         the witness earlier today, you'll note -- and I had asked the witness to indicate it
         earlier -- in behind -- can I have the laser pointer for a second, please? In behind
         this area, that is actually Kuper Island. The little indentation on the back of it is,
         in fact, Lamalchi and Lamalchi Bay.
5183.                 And with regard to the additional evidence that I'd spoken to this
         morning that we'll tender attached as sworn affidavits, recent archaeological
         evidence that was not available when this work was done will be tendered to the
         Panel at a later time indicating the extremely significant archaeological sites of
         both Lamalchi Bay, Montague Harbour, Galiano Island, et cetera as a result of
         new work and archaeological surveys that were done last summer by Dr. Chris
         Arnett.
5184.                 Anyway, just wanted to pass that on.
5185.                 THE CHAIRMAN: But not giving oral traditional evidence, are you,
         Mr. Rath?
5186.                 MR. RATH: I'm not at all. I'm just advising the Board, from a
         procedural perspective, of additional evidence that we'll be tendering on the basis
         of this evidence being time dated to a period prior to additional new evidence
         being available that we'll be tendering at a later point in time.
5187.                 THE CHAIRMAN: Dr. Miller.
5188.                 DR. MILLER: There we go. Is that the last one?
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
5189.                So all these maps, as I mentioned, were simply to show the extent over
         time and over space of the Hwlitsum activities. And you can also see the
         closeness of the region.
5190.                If this map enabled me, we could look down the coast just a little bit.
         Well, actually, it's in outline down past Boundary Bay down into Lummi territory.
5191.                Here, these were the Lummi people who I think have appeared before
         you, are closely related to the Hwlitsum and also are immediately in the line of
         movement. Just add that additional fact that many of the Hwlitsum talked about
         their connections across the border to the -- or before the border was in existence
         with the Lummi tribe.
5192.                Thank you. I'm done.
5193.                THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Dr. Miller.
5194.                Are there any other comments from Councillor Wilson, or...?
5195.                Okay.
5196.                MR. RATH: Mr. Chairman, just as a quick point of order. I'm just
         asking from a procedural perspective whether it would be permissible for me to
         ask a few direct questions of Dr. Miller that he could answer under oath to
         emphasize or highlight some aspects of his testimony that I would like to have
         highlighted to the Panel.
--- (A short pause/Courte pause)
5197.                THE CHAIRMAN: We’re cautious of that, but it would -- I suppose
         I would need to be guided by the questions. We’ve had some experience of that
         from other First Nations who have appeared where their counsel has assisted them
         with asking them to comment but not actually to pose a question to them to
         comment on, so I might -- the Panel may have a bit of a difficulty, but perhaps
         maybe we’ll wait and see.
5198.                And perhaps -- maybe it would be appropriate for the Panel to note
         that Dr. Miller has been giving evidence on behalf of the Hwlitsum to the extent
         he is relaying that oral traditional evidence. The Panel accepts that the Hwlitsum
         are best placed to determine who speaks for them, especially in this case where
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                  Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                  Presentation by Dr. Miller
         some Elders are unavailable.
5199.                However, the Panel is not here to hear expert evidence. While Dr.
         Miller may have expert knowledge, he may submit his part of the written
         evidence of the Hwlitsum Nation. So any opinion evidence given today will be
         given no weight by the Panel.
5200.                With that, we will allow you to pose your questions and we’ll see how
         far we can go.
5201.                Thank you, Mr. Rath.
5202.                MR. RATH: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the Panel. I appreciate
         that. In the spirit of the questions I’m going to ask, I’m going to simply try as
         much as possible to ask the questions broadly and generally, and then I’ll just let
         Dr. Miller fill in as best he can from his understanding and knowledge of the oral
         history of the Hwlitsum people.
5203.                MR. RATH: And I guess, in that regard, the question I would pose to
         Dr. Miller is, in speaking earlier, you were referencing Hwlitsum First Nation
         traditional occupation of lands in Stanley Park.
5204.                Could you please, for the record, from your knowledge passed on to
         you by members of Hwlitsum, expand on that evidence for the Panel including the
         lands in and around English Bay, Stanley Park, Burrard Inlet, Coal Harbour, et
         cetera?
5205.                Thank you.
5206.                DR. MILLER: Well, Chief Wilson, Lindsey Wilson and other
         members of the community I’ve mentioned, Pauline, great-great-great-great-
         grandmother of Rocky Wilson, who, in the middle of the 19th century, lived in
         what is now Stanley Park at what is sometimes called Xwayxway, and her
         descendants also lived there and used whatever resources -- resource stations
         available in that location.
5207.                And -- what’s the other part of your question for me?
5208.                MR. RATH: And in that regard, could you advise the Panel of your
         understanding of what would have been some of the Coast Salish uses of lands
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
         and waters in and around that area?
5209.                DR. MILLER: So this meant that people were going up around
         Pointe Grey into the waters around Stanley Park, into -- Stanley Park is a bit
         transformed and the whole region is a bit transformed since the 19th century. And
         so the region around where the boat club is now was once a rich resource area that
         was used by the Hwlitsum ancestors.
5210.                And there is a number of other processing and access sites in and
         around there that Lindsey Wilson has had a chance to point out to me. And also, I
         think I was mentioning before there was interaction down to Lummi, into that
         region, and one of the Wilson ancestors lived at Lummi.
5211.                Historically, when the Lamalchi people were bombed in 1863, they
         went to visit -- they went to get out of harm’s way with their relatives at Lummi
         for a while and then returned a few years later to their locations.
5212.                So they used the resources through the areas I’ve shown you and then
         through English Bay and into the area around Xwayxway Village, which I think I
         pointed out to you with the -- it’s the location that’s now known as Lumberman’s
         Arch, is the location of the Salish Village where this ancestress lived and where
         her children lived. And they were married also into other local First Nations in
         that region.
5213.                MR. RATH: And again, just for the sake of the record, the village
         site that we’re speaking of and the areas that we’re speaking of were directly in
         Burrard Inlet. Is that correct?
5214.                DR. MILLER: Yeah.
5215.                MR. RATH: Those are all my questions, Mr. Chairman and the
         Panel. Thank you very much for your time.
5216.                We’ll look forward to answering any questions that my friends may
         have for us in writing. I just take it from the presentation today there won’t be
         any questions about how much fish our clients eat, so thank you.
5217.                THE CHAIRMAN: I’ll offer any questions for -- to Ms. Oleniuk on
         behalf of Trans Mountain.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                   Hwlitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Presentation by Dr. Miller
5218.                 MS. OLENIUK: Thank you, sir. And thank you to Hwlitsum First
         Nation for your presentation today.
5219.                 As my friend indicated, I understand that there is the possibility to
         provide questions in writing and that, in fact, is their preference. So I wouldn’t
         pre-determine that we don’t have any questions. We may, in fact, have some, but
         not at this moment in time.
5220.                 Thank you.
5221.                 THE CHAIRMAN: Mr. Rath?
5222.                 MR. RATH: That would conclude our submission for now, subject
         to what I’d indicated may be additional affidavit evidence and material that we’ll
         be tendering for the Board to consider both of historical and oral history nature
         that I think you’ll find quite interesting and illuminating.
5223.                 And with that, thank you again, everyone, for their kind attention
         today. It was an honour and a privilege to be here today. Thank you.
5224.                 THE CHAIRMAN: On behalf of the Panel, I would hope you would
         pass on the Board’s good wishes and good recovery to Chief Wilson and our
         regret that he couldn’t be here in person to share his knowledge. But we wish him
         well in his recovery.
5225.                 And I acknowledge your attendance today and appreciate that you
         have been here today to present this to us. And as I travel back to Vancouver
         Island tonight at the end of this hearing, I’ll have a different sense of the catcher’s
         mitt that I never had before. So as I’m sailing through it -- it will be dark,
         unfortunately, so I won’t get to see the beauty of that as I normally do.
5226.                 So with that, the Panel, we will reconvene at 1:30 this afternoon.
--- Upon recessing at 10:47 a.m./L’audience est suspendue à 10h47
--- Upon resuming at 1:37 p.m./L'audience est reprise à 13h37
5227.                 (Opening native song)
5228.                 THE CHAIRMAN: Good afternoon, and I would like to welcome
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                                                 Opening remarks
                                                                                        Chairman
         you and thank you for your prayer and song, and also I'd like to acknowledge that
         we are on the traditional territory of the Stó:lō.
5229.                 Again, I'd like to welcome you to the oral traditional evidence phase of
         the National Energy Board's hearing regarding the Trans Mountain Expansion
         Project.
5230.                 My name is David Hamilton, and I'm the Chair of the Panel; and with
         me on my left is Alison Scott, and on my right, Phil Davies.
5231.                 We welcome everyone who is here today, both in the hearing room
         and who is listening to us through our webcast.
5232.                 Just before -- I think it's important before we get started in case there's
         a need to evacuate the room, the emergency exits are behind you, and exits out
         into the parking lots are left and right as you go out the door.
5233.                 In addition to the Panel, there are a number -- we have a number of
         staff that are here today and they are pleased to answer any process-related
         questions you may have, and they're recognized by their brass nameplates.
5234.                 We'll sit until 4:30 today, but if you feel that if that is not enough time
         and at the end of the session, please feel free to make a request to file additional
         oral traditional evidence by electronic means, such as a video or some other
         method of your choosing.
5235.                 Before we get underway, I would just like to remind the Panel of the
         Panel's guidance in the Hearing Order and Procedural Direction No. 1 in regards
         to oral traditional evidence. The Board understands that the Squamish Nation
         have an oral tradition for sharing knowledge from generation to generation, and
         this information cannot be -- always adequately shared in writing.
5236.                 The Board recommends those providing oral traditional evidence focus
         on the community's interests and rights. These hearings are not to hear evidence
         that will be filed subsequently in writing, including technical and scientific
         information, opinions or views, advice to the Board on whether to recommend
         approval of the project or the terms and conditions that should be imposed, or
         questions to the Board or other participants.
5237.                 Sharing your traditional knowledge and stories about the use of your
Transcript                                                                        Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                                             Opening remarks
                                                                                    Chairman
         traditional territory is of value to us. If you wish to share any concerns about the
         impacts the proposed tariff project may have on you and your community and
         how any impact could be eliminated or reduced, that would be also helpful to us.
5238.                This is the type of information we’re here to listen to and we will use
         the information we gather today, along with all the other available information in
         considering the possible effects of the proposed project.
5239.                We appreciate that you have chosen to be here today, and before
         providing your oral traditional evidence, presenters will be asked to swear or
         affirm that the information they are presenting is accurate and truthful to the best
         of your knowledge and belief.
5240.                Before we begin the oral traditional evidence from the Squamish
         Nation I’d like to ask the representatives of the Proponent TransMountain, to
         introduce themselves for the record, please.
5241.                Ms. Oleniuk, please?
5242.                MS. OLENIUK: Good afternoon to the Board and good afternoon to
         the representatives of Squamish Nation. My name is Terri-Lee Oleniuk and I
         represent TransMountain along with my colleague to my right, Heather Weberg;
         to my left is Annie Korver, and she’s a member of TransMountain’s Aboriginal
         Engagement Team.
5243.                THE CHAIRMAN: And perhaps in the beginning you could indicate
         if you will be prepared to respond to any questions orally, in writing, or both
         throughout this afternoon, and so on with that.
5244.                With that perhaps I think, Mr. Bruce, if you would introduce the panel
         and we can have them affirmed or if you can proceed. Thank you.
5245.                MR. BRUCE: (Speaking in native language.)
5246.                Good afternoon to you, Chairman and the Panel, also to the
         representatives of TransMountain. I’d also like to acknowledge all the Squamish
         members and councillors and Chiefs that have shown up today for this very
         important event, making the long journey up to Stó:lō territory.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                   Introduction by Mr. Bruce
5247.                 I’d also like to acknowledge the Stó:lō people for hosting this event,
         and allowing this event to happen on their territory.
5248.                 The Squamish Nation has three witnesses that will be giving evidence
         today and it will be in the following order: Xálek’/Sekyú Siyám, Chief Ian
         Campbell; beside him is Paitsmauk, David Jacobs; and beside him is
         Xwelxwelacha Siyám, Chief Dick Williams.
5249.                 I shared my Squamish language and Squamish name to start this for
         two reasons. One, I’m very proud to be a Squamish member, and also honoured
         to represent my nation in this hearing. The second reason is to respect my dear
         family here that will be giving evidence today, who will be using their ancestral
         names and making the connections between those names in the territory and with
         our families.
5250.                 In terms of process today, we will be in the form of kind of a relaxed
         direct examination. I’ll be asking a number of questions to help guide our
         witnesses through their presentations. But for the most part I think they will be
         giving you the information in a conversational type way. The witnesses will
         answer questions to clarify the evidence that they are giving, but we would prefer
         that all substantive questions will be in writing through the information request
         process.
5251.                 Squamish Nation intervenes in this process as they have serious
         concerns about the impacts of the projects on their rights, interests, and way of
         life. Squamish welcomes the opportunity to give evidence today, but before we
         begin Squamish has asked me to make the following comments about the process.
5252.                 The first point is that the Crown has indicated to the extent that it can,
         it will attempt to discharge the duty to consult through this process, yet the Crown
         has not consulted with Squamish about the process, or engaged with Squamish
         whatsoever. Squamish is very disappointed about the lack of Crown engagement
         in the process to date.
5253.                 Squamish feels that it is inappropriate to rely on this process to
         discharge that duty, given that it is a quasi-judicial process with strict timelines of
         three hours to share its interest and impacts. More than three hours is definitely
         needed for Squamish to share its interests and impacts of the project. Squamish
         does not accept the Crown can discharge the duty to consult in such a process.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                                 Introduction by Mr. Bruce
5254.                 Second, Squamish has yet to receive a funding decision from the
         National Energy Board Participant Funding Program. As a result Squamish has
         not had the resources to properly review the lengthy and complex application,
         which is about 15,000 pages long, and to properly prepare for their evidence
         today.
5255.                 Meaningful participation in this quasi-judicial process requires a
         substantial amount of funding for legal counsel and for technical experts and
         advisors. Squamish feels that it’s inappropriate that the NEB process is
         continuing without ensuring that all First Nations have the resources to
         participate.
5256.                 Lastly, Squamish is concerned about the timing of oral evidence. The
         oral evidence is proceeding without TransMountain having files all of its evidence
         and without intervenors having an opportunity to file evidence. The Squamish
         needs this information to be able to fully articulate how the project will impact on
         Squamish’s interests and rights. Having the evidence heard at this time is
         prejudicial to Squamish in that respect.
5257.                 However, having made these points, Squamish is here today to give
         evidence that they are able to within these constraints. So on that I would like to
         introduce our first presenter, Chief Ian Campbell, Xálek’/Sekyú Siyám.
5258.                 CHIEF CAMPBELL: Do I need to swear or something?
5259.                 MR. BRUCE: Oh Yeah. Also all three witnesses will be affirming
         today as well.
5260.                 THE CHAIRMAN: Then we’ll proceed with that now then. Thank
         you.
IAN CAMPBELL: Affirmed
DAVID JACOBS: Affirmed
RICHARD WAYNE WILLIAMS: Affirmed
5261.                 THE CHAIRMAN: By all means, Chief Campbell.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                       Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
--- ORAL REPRESENTATION BY/REPRÉSENTATION ORALE PAR CHIEF
IAN CAMPBELL:
5262.                CHIEF CAMPBELL: (Speaking in native language). Thank you
         very much for the opportunity to present here today.
5263.                (Speaking in native language). My first ancestral name is Xálek’ and
         Xálek’ was the third son of Xatslanexw, also known in English as Kitsilano, in the
         Vancouver area. (Speaking in native language). My Chief name is Sekyú and
         I’m a Hereditary Chief from the village of Ḵ’íḵ’elx̱en, which is known as Port
         Mellon in the west side of Howe Sound, in At’kats’hm (ph).Atl’Kítsem.
5264.                I’m serving my third term as an elected councillor for the Squamish;
         they are four year terms. And I’m also appointed by Council as one of two
         political spokespersons to represent the political positions of the Squamish
         Nation. I’m employed by the Intergovernmental Relations Department of the
         Squamish, as one of our lead negotiators in Aboriginal rights and title, along -- as
         well as being the cultural ambassador for the Intergovernmental Relations
         Department. So these many roles certainly keep me busy and a lot of fun with
         modern developments.
5265.                My family tree is put up on the screen before you and this is part of my
         mother’s side of the family. My Mom’s name is P’elákwiya, in English, Susie
         CampbellBaker; and my late grandfather is Chief Lawrence Baker, Xálek’-
         t/Sekyú-t. And these are the ancestral names that I inherited directly from my
         grandfather, and I’ll be speaking to that in more detail.
5266.                But if I look at my grandfather’s lineage, his mother was P’elákwiya
         and came from the village of ChichelxwikwChíchelxwikw, known as Seymour,                       Formatted: Underline
         down in North Vancouver. And my grandfather’s father, my great grandfather, is
         Ketxímtn, Willy Baker a signatory to the Amalgamation. And we come from, as I
         mentioned the line from Xatslanexw Xatslánexw is one of our patriarchs that goes
         back, and Anglicized that’s known ast Kitsilano.
5267.                So as I mentioned, Xálek’ was the third son of Xatslanexw; he had two
         older brothers, Kiyuls Kiyúls and XitelkXítelk, and Xálek’s son, Tenás Jim, was                Formatted: Underline
         the father of my stra’mok (ph)schá7mek, of my grandmother P’elákwiya. And                      Formatted: Underline
         then on Willy Baker’s side our matriarch is Tsiyáliya. She’s one of the main
         matriarchs, where many of our family lineages; many of the family we see here
         from the Squamish Nation descend from Tsiyáliya and John Baker, that marriage.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                         Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         And you go beyond Tsiyáliya, her parents were Xáyaxilx and Xwetkámten, and
         their -- on the mother’s side their parents were Kawchawlut Káwchawlut and
         XwelpaltxwXwelpáltxw.                                                                            Formatted: Underline
                                                                                                          Formatted: Underline
5268.                 So I won’t quiz you later but, trust me, this is part of our in-depth
         family lineage, and certainly there’s a lot more details that can go along with this
         but just to illustrate a bit of our family lineage connected to the Squamish
         territories.
5269.                 So I’ve been very fortunate to be raised by my grandparents. And my
         late grandfather, Chief Lawrence Baker, raised me from a young age, immersed
         me in a lot of the teachings of our connection and our relationship to our
         territories through our languages which you’ve heard earlier, little pieces of our
         Sḵwx̱wú7mesh Sníchim, our Squamish language.
5270.                 And my grandfather was an orator in our longhouses. He would often
         travel with him throughout Coast Salish Territory to the various longhouses,
         including through the Fraser Valley here, in Washington State, Vancouver Island,
         to attend functions and gatherings of our Coast Salish people where we witnessed
         a lot of the rights and the rituals and the protocols of our people and ceremony.
         And that’s where we heard a lot of the echo and the resonance of our teachings
         passed down from generation to generation in those longhouses. As the orators
         would get up, they would share the teachings and the stories and the connections
         that we have are family ties.
5271.                 Further to that, we spent a lot of time going out on the land in the --
         throughout Squamish territory. And from a young age I would often go up to the
         Squamish valleys, up to the Elahoe, where it’s just a beautiful part of the coast
         here with vast hachmain (ph)Xáxmin, vast ice fields and glaciations up there with                Formatted: Underline
         some beautiful animals, the sk7lalam (ph),stl’lhálem, the grizzly bears; the                     Formatted: Underline
         tl’elhnáyemxwexwsélkn, the mountain goats. We’ve re-introduced ki’ath                            Formatted: Underline
         (ph),Kayí7ch and I’ll talk to that later, the elk, deer hunting and fishing and berry            Formatted: Underline
                                                                                                          Formatted: Underline
         picking, cedar stripping; many activities that we did as children, fishing on the
         river, catching trout and whatnot.
5272.                 And during those times on the land we would often be taught the old
         place names of where the villages were, who some of the connections, such as
         these trees, who some of the ancestral names are that connect to those places, as
         well as the mythology for everywhere you go in our territory is laden with
         mythology. Every mountain and point of land and bay has a vast wealth of stories
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                         Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         associated with our language and place names.
5273.                 So these were things that I grew up learning, and me and my sister and
         my cousins were very fortunate to have that continuity of tradition considering
         that our grandfather had attended residential schools in Sechelt, where it was
         strictly forbidden for him to speak his language. And the forced assimilative
         tactics of the Canadian government to assimilate First Nations people, he was a
         survivor of that through tenacity and resilience.
5274.                 He managed to retain our distinct identity through our languages and
         our teachings. And he learned his teachings directly from his grandmother,
         Tsiyáliya, who you’ll see on the right branch there. And Tsiyáliya was a
         Skwta’a7tsKwtsi7ts, a ritualist who knew the ceremonial language which is a
         slight higher level rather than common speech. You have to be very formal when
         you speak our language to use those types of terminology. So those teachings that
         were passed down from my Akw’auk (ph),Ékwiyekw, from my great-great-
         grandmother came down to us directly through my grandfather as that conduit.
5275.                 And as I grew up I assumed that everyone was being taught this, that
         this was common knowledge. And I realized, you know, as we travelled around
         we were able to connect with other Coast Salish people, other young people that
         were being immersed in these teachings, this knok’no’wheath (ph)nexwnéweyelh,                   Formatted: Underline
         these words of advice from our elders.
5276.                 So I felt very fortunate as I went to school. Our languages are taught
         in the public schools where they’re taught about, you know, a few hours a week,
         which isn’t going to teach fluency or proficiency, but it was an opportunity to
         learn to read and write the language.
5277.                 So my late grandfather, Lawrence, was one of those teachers in the
         high school at Carson Graham Secondary, and that’s really what kept me in
         school, was having the influence of my grandfather there; otherwise, I wasn’t too
         interested in the continuity of assimilation, as I’d seen it, in what they were
         teaching us in the public school system. And the curriculum didn’t reflect any of
         our history or the richness of our contributions to Canada and the mythology and
         who and what we are as a diverse First Nations people.
5278.                 So I managed to graduate from high school and I would’ve went into
         trades. I got offered, you know, the opportunity to get into heavy-duty mechanics
         and whatnot but I also was invited to Chile to go on a youth exchange. So I
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                       Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         thought I could go back to school or I can go on an all-expense trip to South
         America and I decided to spend a couple months in Chile with the Mapuches, and
         this was in ’92 shortly after the Pinochet dictatorship where it was still very much
         militarized and it was a real profound eye-opener for me as a young indigenous
         man to travel down there in my regalia with my drum and interfacing with the
         Mapuches people, we seen that oppression takes many forms of colonization.
5279.                I then travelled to numerous -- dozens of other countries to interface
         with other indigenous people such as the Aymaras Maori’s where delegations of
         our leadership signed MOU’s, indigenous to indigenous, with the Aymaras Maori
         people. With the Tibetans, we’ve journeyed up to Tibet and we’re seeing a lot of
         similarities in this post-colonial era as we move forward and have recognition of
         our Aboriginal rights and title and the continuity of our traditions in a modern
         context. It was the early foundations that my grandfather instilled in us that really
         enabled me to then go out and seek other mentors.
5280.                So my grandfather comes from a generation that we had many -- he
         had many first cousins, who in our language is our brothers and sisters. It’s the
         same term. Kolpates (ph)Kwupits could be an older sibling or an older first
         cousin.
5281.                So, many of his relatives are grannies who have since passed on,
         became our teachers and I certainly want to recognize our Auntie Lena; Lena
         Jacobs was one of my teachers and Chief Gibby Jacob, that’s his late mother, and
         other Elders such as Sxenenálh-t, you know, Auntie Yvonne was there to
         encourage us, Yvonne Joseph, in our languages, in our teachings, Auntie Doris.
         You know, many of these grannies continued to teach us our languages and
         immerse us and encourage us as young people to become fluent and to practice
         our language and use it and be out on the land to exercise our traditions. And they
         really encouraged us to keep these songs alive as the song we sang to begin with,
         is one of our Chief’s welcome songs; it’s an old song that comes from a
         matriarch, we then use it as a chief’s welcome song. And it’s those types of
         handing down of knowledge through the oral traditions that I was very fortunate
         to be immersed in.
5282.                To become a hereditary Chief, I guess, you know there’s a lot of
         thought processes that we can engage in here, but we have many of our hereditary
         Chiefs with us, Xwélxwelacha here is one of our respected hereditary Chiefs,
         Chief Dick Williams. We have elàlsemkinTelálsemKin/Siyám, Chief Bill
         Williams is a hereditary chief; KáKeltn siyám, Chief Gibby Jacob. We have
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                          Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         many of our chiefs, our Siyám Ts’élkwílem, our Siyám Paitsmauk; these are all
         respected Siyáms, as well as our matriarchs Sláwiya and others that also could
         easily get up here and share, you know, many of these teachings.
5283.                 But to give you a little bit of an idea of the responsibilities that are
         bestowed on us, it’s important to look at the context of our family ties and our
         lineages and how that relates to management of our resources throughout our
         territories.
5284.                 So before I get into that, I think it’s important to note that the
         Squamish are one group of Coast Salish; who you probably heard throughout the
         last number of days, these intricate connections of Coast Salish. And Coast Salish
         territories expand, basically, through the Fraser Valley here down into
         Washington State, all of Puget Sound out to the coast of Washington State up into
         Vancouver Island around Sooke, what is now Victoria, all the way up to around
         Comox back to the mainland of Bute Inlet and all of the Inuit -- inlets that flow
         into the Salish Sea back down here to the lower mainland.
5285.                 This geographic region is considered the Coast Salish language family,
         and we've been dissected in half by the Canada/U.S. border by this imposition of
         these two countries that have claimed our lands and territories. Without our
         consent or without any compensation, they've assumed jurisdiction.
5286.                 And the Coast Salish have always been a strong unit who have very
         intricate family ties that span many thousands of years of trade and commerce and
         of coalitions, of very strong social and ceremonial practices that are still very,
         very much alive and well today, as well as a lot of the trade that continues from
         systems such as this Stó:lō, the beautiful Fraser River, where we would gather
         along these rivers in multitudes of Coast Salish people. During the summer
         months, we would all gather along here and take advantage of the bounty of the
         salmon, at that time, used to be plentiful before the commercial fisheries wreaked
         havoc.
5287.                 And the Coast Salish would have many potlatches where there'd be
         intermarriages amongst the tribes, and a lot of gambling would go on and
         exchanging of wealth and goods, namings and memorials.
5288.                 Many of the potlatches that you hear of took place during these times
         of gathering and then, in the winter months, we would gather for our winter
         ceremonies where we would again continue to connect with each other and
Transcript                                                                       Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                          Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         reaffirm our ties.
5289.                In the Squamish territory, we are one dialect,. Tthe Sḵwxwú7mesh is
         one dialect amongst the Coast Salish language family. So the Squamish territory
         within this geographic region, basically, is a large part of the lower mainland out
         to Elk sn, which is Point Gray where the UBC is situated today, along the Haida
         height of land through Vancouver, out to Burnaby, including all of the lakes, out
         towards TitemtsenTítemtsen, which is known as Port Moody today, up into Indian
         Arm, Tsleil-Waututh, which our family is here, some of our Tsleil-Waututh
         family.
5290.                Here we go.
5291.                This is a map of the Squamish territory. So I'm at the bottom right
         corner right now, where -- I'll see if this -- just down in this area is -- around
         where Kinder Morgan is an area known as LheklhukwaytnLheklhúkwaytn. And
         I'll ask my Kinder Morgan family, friends here to take that into your heart and
         mind as the real place names of these areas because we've been invisible in our
         own land for a very long time. And in this day and age, it's important for you to
         know where you're at in our territory.
5292.                So we have TitemtsenTítemtsen, which is this village right over here
         in what is now Port Moody. We have Temtemixwtn Temtemíxwtn is a very large
         village that was once inhabited in Belcarra all the way up Indian Arm. We go
         along the Haida height of land, everything that flows into Burrard Inlet and Howe
         Sound is considered Squamish territory, including the Whistler area.
5293.                And the Haida height of land up through the Squamish valleys up here
         to the northwest part of our territory is just gorgeous country up here known as
         Soltage (ph),sutich, and kwekwayéx kwelháynexw is our way of explaining our
         connection to these areas, these wild spirit places.
5294.                You follow the Haida height of land, anything that flows to the west
         here would be the seashell Sechelt territory. Anything that flows to the north is
         the LillooetLil’wat, our neighbours, all the way down through Howe Sound,
         anything that flows into atsnach Atl’Kítsem and Toknowits (ph)Texwnéwets into                   Formatted: Underline
         these water bodies here are considered Squamish territories, all the way to the
         Sunshine Coast, an area known as Swaywi (ph),StelKáya which today is Robert's                    Formatted: Underline
         Creek. Our place of origin is -- one of our stories talks about our first ancestors
         right here in Chkwelhp and Tschung (ph)Schenk where we appeared in this                          Formatted: Underline
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                         Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         physical realm and established ourselves.
5295.                 So this territory certainly has sustained us for innumerable generations,
         for many thousands of years, and we have many stories of change and
         transformation. In our experience as Squamish people, we don't have a land
         bridge story that we came across from some place called Mongolia. That's a
         foreign word in our language. Our creation stories talk about our connections
         right here in this territory and our connections to the other Coast Salish groups.
5296.                 So just to add to the context, my chiefmanship Chieftainship comes
         from this village right here known as Ch'ech'ilmnChKwelhp. So this is part of our              Formatted: Underline
         traditional territory, and the management of this territory was very complex in the
         lineages that were responsible for what we call ta swa7s ts'íts'ap. These are
         professionals that were pre-contact with European cultures.
5297.                 The first ships we discovered in our waters were in 1791 when the
         Spaniards came in, and then subsequently the British came in in 1792, so that's
         very recent history for our people. Before that, we practised a very strong
         economy of resource gathering and management of each of these families that
         inhabited many of these villages. And it's very hard to see on these maps, but ---
5298.                 THE CHAIRMAN: Would the bigger one help if you -- feel free if
         you want to stand up and point it.
5299.                 CHIEF CAMPBELL: Sure.
5300.                 Thank you. I thought I was going to have to use my longhouse voice
         and enunciate for you, but you'll see that many of the areas in the map here are in
         yellow. These would be former or contemporary village sites of our people all the
         way through our territories.
5301.                 The other areas in white writing, I won't ask you to read it or
         understand it, but to indicate these are a lot of the place names and the areas in our
         language. And this certainly isn't comprehensive. This was just put together to
         illustrate some of the traditional and contemporary uses that our people enjoy.
5302.                 You'll notice the tanned areas. These are what we'd call kwekwayéx
         kwelháynexw, which are known -- very difficult to say in English -- but we said
         wild spirit places, which are some of the last non-industrial areas, non-roaded
         valleys in our territory that, in our land use planning, we set aside not only for the
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         benefit of Squamish, but for all of our future generations to enjoy these places that
         hum and resonate with beauty, that have some of the last old growth forest up
         here of the 1,200 year old Douglas firs and cedar trees that are absolutely
         phenomenal places to visit.
5303.                So just in describing the territory, we had families that were highly
         specialized in professions such as tl'elhnáyem, which would be the mountain goat
         hunters or the high alpine specialists. These types of specialists knew how to
         navigate the high alpine realms and do the peaks and gather the resources, the
         obsidians, the goats, the wool. The ladies would be up there picking berries and
         doing things as well as clay and different quarries of stone up there.
5304.                And they would live up there for, you know, many weeks at a time
         where they would gather these goods and bring them down and trade them, not
         only amongst other Squamish families, but to other areas throughout Coast Salish
         where they may not have access to mountain goats, so our people would trade
         with Vancouver Island to the Coast Salish families over there in exchange for
         other goods.
5305.                And this was a practice where many of our tools, actually, in fact,
         came from very good sources of obsidians that were -- that have a fingerprint.
         And they're traced all over well into Montana and many places where you can
         today do science on this and source the origins of these products, many of which
         came from Squamish core territories.
5306.                We have a few very significant mountains to our people. Over here
         we have Nch’Kay, which is Mount Garibaldi. This was one our places of safe
         haven during the great flood post-glaciation when all the waters -- the ice melted.
         The waters rose drastically. A universal story, where our people went to these
         areas for their safe havens.
5307.                We went to Sxeltskwu7Sxeltskwú7, this Ice Cap Peak up here, which                  Formatted: Underline
         was another one of those mountains that was a safe haven for our people. And the               Formatted: Underline
         third mountain is down here in Washington State known as Xwsa7k, which                         Formatted: Underline
         coincidentally is right beside us here, Mount Baker.
5308.                So this triangle represented the safe haven of Squamish territory where
         we would go to during the great flood. And when the waters receded, the people
         found themselves again traumatized and having to adapt post-flood, and that's
         where we developed many of these professions over the last many thousands of
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                       Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         years after the great Ice Ages.
5309.                So some of the saltwater hunters, known as tchatwe
         (ph),nexwschátwilh would be the canoe carvers. We had seven makes and
         models of canoes that we used from we call hot rods to limousines. These were
         all different styles and shapes of canoes adapted to the inlets and the rivers and
         the trade, crossing the Salish Sea and beyond that.
5310.                Those people managed stands of timber such as down here in the
         bottom part in what is now Kitsilano and Jericho. These were big stands of cedars
         that were suitable for the big canoes, the 60-foot dugout canoes, for the post and
         beam longhouses that our Coast Salish people used, as well as these stands over
         here known as huphayet (ph).Xépxpayay. These were large stands of cedar that                   Formatted: Underline
         made a lot of settlers rich.
5311.                When they first came to our territories, they started a lot of these mills
         and whatnot where our people at one time participated and then got marginalized
         in those industries but other professions of our people would continue on with
         each of the families and their lineages. They were expected to pass these
         knowledges down. So you’d have the nux punem (ph)nexws pénem the plants
         and medicines. You’d have the Skwta’a7tsKwtsi7ts, the ritualists, the Skwomtens
         (ph)sxwumptn, the medicine peoples.                                                            Formatted: Underline
5312.                You would have nuxtlunts (ph),nexwslhént the weavers, you know, the
         swéwkw'elh, those that wove the mountain goat wool blankets. Many of the
         families had these responsibilities that collectively created a strong economy
         amongst our people.
5313.                So the Siyáms, those that were groomed from young ages to be like
         relay runners, they accepted those -- the stewardship bestowed on them. They
         were expected to continue that strong management of our territories and pass it
         down to the next generation.
5314.                And those ones that rised (sic) and who were groomed were
         considered Siyám, what we call today Chiefs. So those were like hereditary
         Chiefs. They were the ones that were responsible -- the masters that were
         responsible for continuing to organize and mobilize the people to continue to go
         out into those territories.
5315.                So today, we have many of the hereditary Chiefs that still remember
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                            Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                             Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         those teachings of their families of where their lineages connect them from and
         what their family’s forte or their professions were that were practised for many,
         many generations.
5316.                 So that’s a little bit of an explanation of the type of hereditary Chiefs
         and how we’re groomed in these ancient knowledges and how that connects to the
         future descendants and how we apply that in a modern context.
5317.                 So part of that transfer of knowledge continues today in many different
         forms. We have Latash Kanum (ph)Kínem is one of our youth workers here that
         brings the kids out onto the land. We just went on a canoe journey this summer
         where we continue to paddle throughout our waters here in what is now Burrard
         Inlet and up into Indian Arm.
5318.                 We take kids and paddle throughout Toknowit (ph),Texwnéwets                            Formatted: Underline
         throughout Howe Sound here. And since 1993, we started these big tribal
         journeys where we paddle to one another’s territories of our neighbouring tribes.
         So this summer, we went to Waglisla, known as Bella Bella, on the central coast
         of B.C. where we took about 43 of our youth to connect them not only to Coast
         Salish, but to the other tribes along the coast here so that they can recognize their
         connection as Indigenous people and as First Nations to the neighbouring tribes.
5319.                 And as we collectively have this resurgence of knowledge of the
         canoeing and of the songs and the regalia and the language that go along with
         those protocols, so when we go into each other’s territories, if we’re going to
         canoe across from XwayxwaySwaywí, from Ambleside over to Sna-na-mook
         (ph)snenéymexw, Nanaimo or somewhere, part of the protocol is that we don’t                         Formatted: Underline
         just enter those territories. We sing our songs and we ask permission from those
         hereditary Chiefs and matriarchs to ask permission to come into their lands and
         their territories. And there’s a reciprocation that takes place that the youth are
         witness to and they engage and participate in to see that continuity of grooming
         them in their responsibilities.
5320.                 And that’s something, as we did here today, and thank you for also
         recognizing the unceded territories of the Stó:lō where we are convening these
         meetings. So that’s part of that protocol that we are trained in, that transfer of
         knowledge.
5321.                 So I’ll talk a little bit about -- a little bit more about the governance.
         And the Squamish Nation traditionally governed itself, as I mentioned, with the
Transcript                                                                         Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                       Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         hereditary Chiefs. Those hereditary Chiefs amalgamated in 1923 to collectively
         form the Squamish Nation and this was in response to, as I mentioned, 1791, the
         first European contact.
5322.                Eighteen twenty-seven (1827), we have Fort Langley here on the
         Fraser River which, you know, the Fort Langley journals recite 200 canoes at a
         time of Squamish travelling up and down the river participating in the economy
         and the bounty of the salmon and the eulachon fisheries and the other resources
         that were gathered and that were once plentiful.
5323.                We then experienced the gold rush mentality and the successions of
         gold rush mentality with European arrivals that wiped out the fur trade by the
         1840s on this part of the coast. We seen the gold rush that happened where
         people -- we had a big influx into the territories that moved, you know, north and
         then down into California.
5324.                But those people came in. You know, it was tenuous because they
         were staking claims to Aboriginal lands at that time and our people experienced
         mass depopulation in the 1800s with epidemics.
5325.                So many of the families were hit hard when many of these villages,
         such as Titemtsen Títemtsen down here, were hit pretty hard by the epidemics that
         were introduced by Europeans, foreign diseases that we weren’t accustomed to.
5326.                So those people had to then move and gather in the bigger villages of
         Temtemixwtn Temtemíxwtn and AtsnachÁtsnach, ChichelxwikwChíchelxwikw,                         Formatted: Underline
         Eslha7anÉslha7an, Xwmelchstn and all of these villages that are still presently               Formatted: Underline
         located in Burrard Inlet here, where our people continue to reside with the Tsleil-
         Waututh and the Snohomish Skwxwú7mesh as well as our Homuthqueam                              Formatted: Underline
         (ph),XwméthKwiyem the Musqueam families over here along the mouth of the                      Formatted: Underline
                                                                                                       Formatted: Underline
         Fraser.
5327.                So when they were experiencing mass depopulation, we -- it was also
         compounded and exacerbated with the introduction of The Indian Act. And I
         believe that was 1870s or something like this where the federal government then
         imposed legislative oppression that corralled native people, forcibly removed us
         from areas like in Stanley -- what is now Stanley Park. Many of our villages in
         these areas, the people were removed off of those lands and forced to reserves.
5328.                So there was expropriation or confiscation of our -- of our lands and
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                         Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         our villages to make way for settlers, without compensation to our people. And
         the Squamish were never idle in that process. We continued to challenge the
         Crown.
5329.                And in 1906, as we mentioned, we travelled to England to implore the
         Crown of that day to seek honour in their dealings with our people. That fell on
         deaf ears at that time.
5330.                Nineteen thirteen (1913) we were forcibly removed from the Senakw,
         one of the big villages here in False Creek. And the Chiefs responded and the
         communities responded over the next decades to establish the amalgamation in
         1923, which then seen our hereditary Chiefs come together to collectively form
         the Squamish Nation on July 23rd, 1923.
5331.                So those Chiefs continued on, you know, imploring the Crown. We
         weren’t recognized as citizens in our own land until amendments to The
         Citizenship Act in the fifties, mid-fifties, finally implemented in the early sixties
         where we had the right to vote.
5332.                And prior to that, we had no -- no legal recourse to challenge the
         Crown in their attitude that these were all free and vacant lands free for the taking,
         that it was this continuation of this notion of doctrine of discovery and terra
         nullius that these are all just free and vacant lands, justifying the acceptance of
         B.C. into the Confederation of Canada and moving along those types of colonial
         attitudes and practices.
5333.                So we followed our hereditary system up until 1981 where we then
         had a referendum to switch over to a custom election, a four-year term, where
         anyone of age of majority of 18 or over could be nominated and elected to -- as a
         Councillor. So we currently have 16 elected Councillors.
5334.                We don’t elect our Chiefs. We’re hereditary Chiefs. But we have the
         Chair and Co-Chair, and we have our Co-Chair, Ts’élkwílem, Byron Joseph is
         here. He served as Co-Chair for -- since the last -- I won’t -- since the last Ice
         Age, I was going to say, but ---
--- (Laughter/Rires)
5335.                CHIEF CAMPBELL: Probably the last 30 or so years, 35 years he’s
         served as one of our leaders along with Talallshamcane Telálsemkin Siyám.                        Formatted: Underline
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         Chief Bill Williams served as a Co-Chair for many decades where they seen and
         witnessed firsthand the changes along with Chief Gibby Jacob, who was in there.
5336.                And our two Siyáms here have been elected and recognized leaders in
         our community since 1981. They directly witnessed these changes as we moved
         from a hereditary Chief as our official government to an elected system that is still
         the practice today.
5337.                So many of us as hereditary Chiefs continue to sit on elected positions
         as we’re nominated, and it’s a democratic process of election by our members to
         vote every four years on who they want to see. But the 16 elected positions are
         directly related to the 16 hereditary Chiefs that came together in ’23 to form our
         government -- our traditional government.
5338.                So today, we have a population of approximately 4,000 people in the
         Squamish Nation where the majority is youth under about -- I believe the last stats
         were around 60 percent or so were under the age of 30. We should get that
         verified but to indicate that we’re largely a young population. The majority, I
         believe, are on reserve. Probably half of our people are on reserve. The other
         half live throughout our territory and abroad, such as Vancouver Island and
         Washington State, with their connections to other Coast Salish.
5339.                I talked about our connection to other Coast Salish is notable because
         you’ve heard from Tulalip and Swinomish and Lummi and others that have been
         before you in the last few days.
5340.                It’s important to know that, over the many thousands of years of our
         connection with the Coast Salish, I talked about the trade and commerce, the very
         strong economy that went beyond Coast Salish borders. But also, during times of
         warfare, it was important that the Coast Salish regularly created coalitions to
         stand together in unity and strength to repel invaders as they came into our lands
         to try to usurp our territories and our jurisdiction and our authority.
5341.                The Coast Salish would often come together and create, during times
         of warfare, coalitions that would often ensue battles on the Salish Sea, repelling
         enemies and protecting our resources. And those coalitions, we still reaffirm
         those ties today as Coast Salish people when we go on those tribal journeys, as I
         mentioned, with our youth.
5342.                It’s important that we recite those stories so that they know that, at
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         times of conflict, we also pulled together and came together under the nationhood
         of Coast Salish.
5343.                 We have always used our resources. As mentioned, ours is a very
         bountiful territory with many resources that have sustained us and continue to
         sustain us. Down here, in Lheklhukwaytn, which is Burnaby Mountain, and this
         area, it comes from the term thilquoy (ph),ihukway which is the Arbutus trees.
         And lhúkway ihukw is to peel, to peel off something.
5344.                 It was very, very rich in sea urchins. This was one of the best areas for
         harvesting sea urchins, which happens to be one of my favourite foods, which I
         can no longer harvest in this particular area. The cumulative impact.
5345.                 But we have rafts of ducks. At one time, the migratory ducks used to
         just be thick in these secluded inlets that provided safe havens for the migratory
         fowl.
5346.                 We have a very important story here. If you go from Titemtsen to
         LheklhukwaytnLheklhúkwaytn, you have Kanamoth (ph),Kánamut which is one                          Formatted: Underline
         of another story of origin around the New Brighton Park area. There’s a creek                    Formatted: Underline
         there where the PNE is today.
5347.                 That area talks about the origins of some of our people that emerged
         there, and they had established themselves there and lived and had some relation
         that connected us as, again, in the families there. But they then were wiped out
         during the diseases.
5348.                 So you have XepxpayayXépxpayay, which is East Van, and a very                       Formatted: Underline
         important area here called kwachaysskwachýs, which connects to this water body                   Formatted: Underline
                                                                                                          Formatted: Underline
         over here, just off of TemtemixwtnTemtemíxwtn.
5349.                 We believe that the water is sacred, that it is life giving, that it has a
         spirit, and that is a water realm. And in our story, these areas connect through
         these ground fed water, SkwachaysSkwacháys.
5350.                 You can go into those marshes and sloughs, and the underwater
         aquifers will connect you to other sources of lakes such as Deer Lake and
         Burnaby Lake and this area out here, just off of -- the lakes over by Buntzen and
         whatnot. These are all connected by groundwater, groundwater fed. And those
         are sacred areas of ours that represent doorways into the spirit realm.
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                          Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
5351.                 So when you go into your maxlemot (ph),máyeksmut into your trance,                   Formatted: Underline
         and you go through these places and you’re visioning, you can reappear in some
         of these realms where you learned very important sacred information from those
         spirits, be it the spirit of the sturgeon or of the seal people or what it might be.
         And when you come to again, back into this physical realm, you then have a lot
         more of the responsibility and keys of knowledge that are important to managing
         these areas.
5352.                 We have many place names throughout Burrard Inlet and many
         villages. There are some big burial grounds here, I’ll call Smemchus, where
         many people reside today in their condos. They’re built right atop of many of our
         graveyards.
5353.                 You have Haiwask(ph)Xaywá7esks is a village here which was one of                    Formatted: Underline
         the best elk hunting areas in our territory. The elk were the first species to be                 Formatted: Underline
         extirpated with the settlers, the first settlers that came into this area.
5354.                 Some of the best sturgeon hunting grounds were in this area around
         False Creek and Burrard Inlet where they’d use long poles and they’d feel around
         for the fish. And they would be able to gaff the sturgeons as well as
         stohwets(ph),stelxwéts’ the octopus hunting that was really rich off of                           Formatted: Underline
         PapiyokPápiyek, known as the Brockton Point.                                                      Formatted: Underline
5355.                 And you have the big village of XwayxwayXwáyxway, the                                Formatted: Underline
         Lumberman’s Arch, and lhilhxi7elsh lhilhxí7elsh is Slwash Siwash Rock off of                      Formatted: Underline
                                                                                                           Formatted: Underline
         Stanley Park is one of our ancestors who was transformed into a stone. He was
                                                                                                           Formatted: Underline
         immortalized to demonstrate to each generation the importance of preparing
                                                                                                           Formatted: Underline
         ourselves for parenthood. And those -- parents know that it’s important that we
         prepare ourselves for that responsibility. So the story of Slwash Siwash Rock,
         lhilhxi7elshlhilhxí7elsh, demonstrates the values of family and of parenthood and                 Formatted: Underline
         how that man was praying and meditating and bathing himself.                                      Formatted: Underline
5356.                 When the transformers came along, they told him, " Slhx̱i7lshtemí7
         chexw ka", they said, “Get out of the way.” And he wouldn’t break his
         concentration, so they immortalised him. They turned him into stone to remind us
         all of those duties and responsibilities.
5357.                 So a lot of our stories are written throughout the lands in these place
         names.
Transcript                                                                       Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                          Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
5358.                 You have these important areas. Skewkwànts (ph)stítewekw is a place
         of clay that was used to manufacture mountain goat wool blankets. And then you
         have Senakw, which was a very major metropolitan centre for Coast Salish in
         proximity to all of the other Coast Salish tribes. They can come around the corner
         here and visit amongst our Coast Salish people here in Senakw.
5359.                 Iy’a’l’mexw Iyélmexw is the big village over in Jericho. And then
         you have all the pharmaceuticals that came out of these areas as well as on the
         north side of Burrard Inlet, you have AtsnachÁtsnach, which is the present village
         of our Tsleil-Waututh family.
5360.                 St'itsmaSt'ítsma, which were the fishing grounds and fishing weirs that
         are just in those mud flats. I don’t know what the mud flats are called in English,
         but just off of Maplewood flats.
5361.                 So that’s a village site there of at St'itsmaSt'ítsma, and then you have
         the big villages of Ch'ich'elxwi7kw, which is recorded with -- the first early                   Formatted: Underline
         Europeans recorded 600-foot long houses in that area. That’s why we call them
         “longhouses” because they would build -- butt it up against each other to be a
         contiguous house. But in fact, they’re all compartmentalized, if you will, but it
         made it look as a really long single-sloped roof houses our Coast Salish people
         used. That was one of the large villages there with big longhouses.
5362.                 You have Xa7élcha, which is a creek that we swim in today known as                  Formatted: Underline
         Lynn Creek. It’s a beautiful bathing creek. A few of us were there this morning
         to purify ourselves at daybreak, preparing ourselves to have a strong mind, strong
         body, connect to nature and to the keke7nex Xexe7ének Siyám, Creator ,and give                   Formatted: Underline
         thanks.                                                                                          Formatted: Underline
                                                                                                          Formatted: Underline
5363.                 Then you have ElhkayemElhkáyem, which is the Place of Snakes here.                  Formatted: Underline
         It’s where the gardener snakes like to ball up and reproduce.                                    Formatted: Underline
5364.                 And then you have many villages along here, including Xlahan
         (ph),Éslha7an which is the village that I was born and raised on right here. We
         have our businesses there, Mosquito Creek Marina. Many of our offices. You
         have marinas down here in Lynnwood, our current Squamish operations.
5365.                 You have Tl’alhema7elksTl’alhemá7elks, which is Salty Tasting
         Creek here. I don’t know what it’s called in English, but it’s
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         Tl’alhema7elksTl’alhemá7elks, McKay Creek.
5366.                 And then you have Xwmelchstn, which is known as Capilano. And                      Formatted: Underline
         Capilano is an English way of saying, Cayaplanoch (ph), Kiyaplánexw who was                     Formatted: Underline
         one of our great war generals. A big lanoch Iánexw name just like Kitsilano and                 Formatted: Underline
         Capilano are big umbrella names that connect us back many thousands of years.
         You go down into West Van, it’s XwayxwaySwaywí. And Ch'tl'am, which were
         great deer hunting grounds here.
5367.                 You have Stk'illstkíil, which is good rock fishing areas. You have                 Formatted: Underline
         SkiwitsutSkíwitsut, Lighthouse Park, which means to knife your canoe 90 degrees
         as you blade and go up Howe Sound.
5368.                 These were all good areas with different benches of urchins and
         rockfish and eelgrass and things out there that were very good productive grounds
         for the herring and the different species that would come seasonally to these
         waters.
5369.                 So the Elders would say when the tide goes out, the table was set
         because it was such a bountiful area for our people to harvest.
5370.                 And I know that the two gentlemen here are anxious to share their
         experience when they were young boys on oyster harvesting and duck hunting
         and whatnot in these areas.
5371.                 But we can continue right along and just explain like the whole
         territory if we had enough time. In fact, I would like to take you out there and
         show you would be even better to immerse you in those experiences firsthand,
         you know, being your Indian guide to show you the territory and recite these
         stories is pretty important.
5372.                 Bowen Island is KolelakomKwilákem. We have a small little island
         here called -- not Smuth’muthulch (ph)smélhmelhelch, it’s -- yeah, it’s a snake
         island, I'm trying to think -- oh, it’s probably on this map here. I was right,
         Smuth’muthulch (ph).smélhmelhelch. So Smuth’muthulch (ph)smélhmelhelch is
         actually a big serpent that’s coiled up and was transformed into this island, I don’t
         know what it’s called in English, but it’s just right off here off of Whytecliff Park
         and our people would go by there. We wouldn’t really necessarily go on that
         island because it was considered a serpent power, only those that wanted to obtain
         that type of training and power.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
5373.                 There's other places on these islands, Lhaxwm, Anvil Island, which
         was also a big serpent power up on top of that peak. You have the story of
         Sunuth’kai (ph),Sínulhkay which is one of our big double-headed sea serpents                   Formatted: Underline
         that climb the chief mountain, etched the black mark into it. Hutchtal
         (ph)Xwéchtaal who is not with us, but one of our ancestral name was the serpent
         slayer who pursued the Sunuth’kai (ph)sínulhkay, and eventually slayed it up here              Formatted: Underline
         in the northern part of our territories.
5374.                 So everywhere you go, you know, you have the Twin Sisters here,
         they’re known as Ch'ich'iyúy Elxwíkn, The Lions in English. So they’ll talk
         about the mounds mountains on the north shore, these are two ste7k’nech
         (ph),schelhnéch known as two princesses, chief’s daughters who were
         immortalized and transformed into these mountains during one of these times of
         warfare when there was battles amongst the northern tribes and our Coast Salish
         people. They just continued to kill each other and these daughters implored for
         peace, they asked for peace and they created peace and Xexá:lsXays transformed                 Formatted: Underline
         them and immortalized them into those twin sisters. Again, to remind us each
         generation to live together in peace and more amicably with each other.
5375.                 So there’s many, many stories that we can recite throughout the
         territories. I'm going to continue on because I could spend all day telling you
         about the place names and the mythology, but -- so I talked about the protection
         of our -- of our lands. There's many battles that took place just off of Skiwitsut
         out here, when the northerners would come down. We would have scouts in these
         areas that would protect these doorways. We had battle stations over here in
         Aulksen (ph),Élksen this point of land out in Point Grey that would observe the                Formatted: Underline
         canoes as they came and went.
5376.                 They would have tywiktáywilh, the sleek fast canoes that were
         sprinters, that would paddle out and intercept anyone coming into our waters.
         And those sprinters would then report back to other villages, and if it was
         imminent danger, they would muster the people and they would send out the big
         wítex, the big war canoes that would be loaded with slings and rocks, bows and
         arrows, wattlesatlatl’s, and all the various tools that they would then engage in
         battle to protect our waters and territories.
5377.                 They could call upon the families from Tsleil-Waututh, from
         Hul'q'umi'num, from all of these villages throughout these areas to come in and
         repel people during times of warfare. And there was many battles that took place
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         up here in Howe Sound in our ofand around our islands called Kwum
         KwumKwém Kwem and Nanish Nínech Kwum Kwém KwumKwem, known as
         Defence Islands; still many loved ones buried in these areas and there's burial
         grounds throughout our territories.
5378.                 Part of the challenge, not only with these types of NEB processes, but
         other governmental processes, is that we’re not afforded any protection of our
         graveyards that they're under the grave -- under the archaeological branch where
         other Canadians would expect their loved ones to be protected under the
         Graveyard and Cemetery Act.
5379.                 There's these dynamics that we’re continuing to deal with that
         continue to marginalize First Nations’ people and alienate us and make us
         invisible from sharing these beautiful stories. So I'm going to continue on with
         more of our contemporary processes, because I’ve shared a lot about the historic
         context of our lineages and our connections.
5380.                 But I’d like you to now turn your attention how the Squamish has
         undertaken processes intergovernmental or otherwise, to protect and enhance our
         aboriginal rights and title. I’m sure you're all familiar with the Chilcotin case, the
         Tsilhqot’in, as of recent. This is something that’s certainly been in the hearts of
         many First Nations people in -- for many generations of effort to get to where we
         are today.
5381.                 And as I mentioned before, we were not recognized as citizens in our
         lands, so we had no legal recourse under Canadian legislation to protect our
         territories from the influx of settlers, who then claimed -- claimed our lands and
         became very affluent at our expense.
5382.                 But in order to counter that, the Squamish developed our own Xay
         Temixtemixw, known as the Land Use Plan, which was conducted -- it started in
         ’99, went through the early 2000, was finalized, I believe, in 2003, where we then
         merged it with the provincial LR&PLRMP Process, Land and Resource
         Management Planning Process. That’s where our community identified these
         wild spirit places which comprise about 50,000 hectares; they represent about 8
         percent of Squamish territory. We -- our territory is 6,732 square kilometres.
5383.                 And we didn’t ask anyone’s permission, we said “These are important
         places to us.” And they're -- it’s really hard to describe the importance of them in
         a Western sort of methodology, because Western methodology does not have
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         spirituality in their vocabulary when it comes to management of these types of
         places.
5384.                  So it was very challenging, but what we settled on was conservancies;
         that there would be co-management of conservancies to demonstrate the ability
         for us to move forward and work together on planning processes that would still
         recognize Aboriginal uses of rights and title of hunting. And we opened up the
         other areas where we acquired TFL 38, Tree Farm Licence 38 from Interfor,
         where we control about -- just over 200,000 hectares under the Forest Licence.
5385.                  We’ve engaged in a number of IPPs, Independent Power Projects,
         where we have six of them up and running in our territories to look at more
         renewable energy, and green sources of energy, and sustainable uses of our
         territory that would not adversely impact the environment, or have minimal
         impact. There were very important values that had been instilled in us from our
         hereditary systems, from our teachings. And it's something that our community
         still said is important to us today in how we engage in business.
5386.                  So with that land use planning, we also developed a lot of youth
         programs where we said, “Why; why have these areas up here if there's not a
         youth connection?” So we wanted to ensure that our young people were afforded
         the opportunity to go here and be immersed for weeks at a time in our traditional
         training techniques of bathing, of swimming in the waters, of carrying rocks under
         the lakes, of really pushing them to do fasting and solos and whatnot, and
         teaching them a lot of the techniques of our traditional training.
5387.                  So these continue to be training grounds where we bring up youth. As
         I mentioned, my friend over here is bringing youth up there next week. We’ve
         been bringing youth up there up into these areas for a few years now,
         reconnecting them, for a number of years in fact.
5388.                  With that we then built the youth programs to became ambassadors for
         our cultural centre up here in Squeak Skwikw in Whistler. You know, if you ever
         have a chance, please come up to Whistler and visit the Squamish Lil’wat
         Cultural Centre where you’ll see our young people being the ambassadors,
         directly interfacing with the general public, welcoming them to a living museum,
         to an area where they're able to showcase the continuity of our tradition through a
         venue such as the Cultural Centre.
5389.                  Along the highway here we created the naming and recognition, the
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                       Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         Sea to Sky Highway, Highway Number 99, where you’ll see a lot of the signage
         in our language. It’s not in French and English, it’s in SkokomishSkwxwú7mesh,                  Formatted: Underline
         and people don’t know how to read it or understand what it means, but it                        Formatted: Underline
         immediately conveys a message that we’re still here, that you know, it’s important
         to recognize the Squamish’s history.
5390.                 We are also engaged, as I mentioned, in the context of the Coast Salish
         of all the other tribes. We're also engaged with the Coast Salish gathering, which
         is approximately 60 or so Coast Salish tribes that have come together, both trans-
         boundary and the Canada-U.S. side to start looking at the health of the Salish Sea.
         And working with what is our vision for marine use planning, building on land
         use planning, how do we then look at marine use planning and look at what world
         class safety really, really looks like and what has been the cumulative impact that
         we’ve had, and where is the decision-making that indigenous people bring to the
         table, as opposed to being treated as stakeholders in our land where we’re going
         right back to the sixties, where we might as well not even be citizens in our own
         lands the way that these regulatory processes have continued to marginalize First
         Nations people.
5391.                 That’s been something that all Coast Salish has stood together to say,
         “This is unacceptable, we must come together and look at what is our truth and
         how do we look to the long-term sustainability and protection of the Salish sea.
5392.                 So the Coast Salish gathering has been one of those opportunities to
         get together and strategize on those types of issues and look at the science as well
         as the traditional ecological knowledge in bringing those two disciplines together
         and saying, "How does that help us to do visioning and planning and expand on
         the coalitions to protect the sacred -- the water and all of the species that live
         there".
5393.                 We’ve seen a revitalization of Howe Sound in the last number of years
         and that’s, again, because of the work of many of the individuals here and others
         that have held these companies accountable and the pulp mills in the -- one of the
         worst single source polluters was coming out of Britannia Mines where we had
         huge dead zones here in Howe Sound where we couldn’t eat the sustenance -- the
         food from these areas, the prawns, the bottom fish.
5394.                 We’re now seeing a revitalization of herring biomass coming in here
         and spawning along Sla-Holtswiyát and other areas in our territory.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                        Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
5395.                We’re seeing the orcas coming in and hundreds of porpoises coming in
         and the kwanase (ph),Kwenís the big grey whales and whatnot, are all coming
         back to these areas where we’re seeing a revitalisation. So in our visioning and
         our planning, it’s taken a very monumental effort to get to that place.
5396.                And this eminent imminent risk that is being posed by this Trans
         Mountain pipeline with increased shipping and whatnot, we ask ourselves, you
         know, how does that meet the metrics of the Squamish Nation in our timeline, in
         our studies, in everything we’ve built since amalgamation in ‘23 to get to where
         we are in our relations with the Crown.
5397.                We’re saying how does this bring benefit to us, how is it of interest to
         the Squamish Nation and who, ultimately, is the one benefiting or the affluence
         that is being generated and who is ultimately bearing risk.
5398.                So it necessitates that we engage in planning processes and as my good
         friend here, Kelts'-TkinemKéltstkinem said, we haven’t been afforded those                     Formatted: Underline
         resources to adequately look at those potential risks and impacts.
5399.                So there’s many things the Nation is doing to continue exercising our
         authority and our connection to our territories. We are not assimilated people.
         We simply adapt to our ever-changing environment.
5400.                So I’m going to -- I’m going to leave it at that. I’m going to turn it
         over to Kelts'-TkinemKéltstkinem once again to introduce our next speaker.                     Formatted: Underline
5401.                And thank you for your patience in allowing me to very quickly
         highlight some of the thousands of years of history of our Squamish people and
         our relation, the continuity of that tradition. So I’m very pleased to share that
         with you this afternoon.
5402.                THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Chief Campbell.
5403.                And Mr. Bruce, feel whenever you think is appropriate for a short
         break, we’re happy to oblige. We’ll leave that up to you because you’re the one --
         we don't want to break the trend of your evidence.
5404.                Thank you.
5405.                MR. BRUCE: I think right now would be a good time to take a short
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                     Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                     Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
         break. And I also wanted to let the Panel know that Sekyu Siyám will be
         providing some concluding remarks at the end of our presentation.
5406.               Thank you.
5407.               THE CHAIRMAN: And the Panel will probably keep any questions
         we may have or Trans Mountain have until the end as well.
5408.               MR. BRUCE: Thank you.
5409.               THE CHAIRMAN: And we’ll take a 15-minute -- 3 o’clock, if that’s
         fine with everybody?
Transcript                                                               Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                         Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
--- Upon recessing at 2:42 p.m./L’audience est suspendue à 14h42
--- Upon resuming at 2:54 p.m./L'audience est reprise à 14h54
IAN CAMPBELL: Resumed
RICHARD WILLIAMS: Resumed
DAVID JACOBS: Resumed
5410.                THE CHAIRMAN: So understand, Mr. Bruce, it's -- Mr. Jacob is
         next. Am I correct?
5411.                MR. BRUCE: Yes, you are correct.
5412.                So I'd like to introduce Paitsmauk, David Jacobs, respected Elder of
         the Squamish Nation.
5413.                And maybe, Paitsmauk, you could tell us what it means to be an Elder
         and what the role of an Elder is in the Squamish community.
--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRÉSENTATION ORALE PAR MR. DAVID
JACOBS:
5414.                MR. JACOBS: First of all, I want to thank you for giving this
         opportunity to listen to our people, our Squamish people, and the concerns we
         have. I thank you for that.
5415.                As an Elder of the nation is something that our people cherish Elders
         of our nation because of the wisdom. And the wisdom that they gathered is from
         their parents and their parents.
5416.                What we teach in the communities today, which I teach in the
         communities today, is something that we don't write down. My grandfather told
         me you start writing things down, you'll forget. So when I talk to you, you will
         listen and you'll start to understand more of what I'm saying.
5417.                So I followed that to this day as an Elder of the nation of teaching my
         children, my grandchildren and my great-grandchildren, teaching them to honour
         and respect the Elders of our nation that one day, when you get old like me --
         because I consider myself old now in a sense that I used to look up to and I talked
         about and I called them "old people" because I don't like really using the term
         "ancestors" because I didn't talk to my ancestors, but I talked to my grandfathers.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
         That was my teachings.
5418.                 What we say in our language snewayelh is the teachings that you get
         as a child, your way of life. So as an Elder today, I follow those teachings,
         snewayelh. It's important for us.
5419.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk.
5420.                 Can you describe your Squamish lineage for us, please?
5421.                 MR. JACOBS: Up on the chart there, up on the wall, you see on the
         right side is my father's side of the family, which I have come, Lakiya.
5422.                 My father was born and raised in our village, Xwmelch'stn. My
         grandfather, Tsenawton. My great-grandfather, they call him Squamish Jacob,
         Katxmeltxw. Khayhilton, Paitsmauk, Sklapchen, these names in my family are so
         important because every name there is connected to a village, to a river, to the
         ocean, to water. It is so important that those names be remembered.
5423.                 When we pass on those names to our children and grandchildren and
         great-grandchildren, when -- that's when we tell them the history, the story of
         those names.
5424.                 On the right -- the left side, my mother’s side, she was from
         Snuneymuxw, Nanaimo. Very, very strong family from Snuneymuxw. That was
         my first language when my mother opened my eyes, spoke to me, Snuneymuxw,
         my father, Squamish.
5425.                 So those names you see there, the families, is very, very dear to me.
         Those names are carried by my family. I could get into it more, but that really
         opens the eyes a little bit to where I’m from, my lineage, Squamish,
         Snuneymuxw. We talk a thousand years, those names come from there.
5426.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk. Can you tell me where the
         generations of your family lived in Squamish territory?
5427.                 MR. JACOBS: Well, my father was born in Vancouver. My
         grandfather, as well, born in Vancouver. Great grandfather, Tsitsusem, today it’s
         called Potlatch Creek, but that’s where he was -- he come from that village,
         Tsitsusem. Paitsmauk, the name I carry, Tsitsusem. Skeloptchin (ph) Tsitsusem,
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                           Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
         that was the village of my family.
5428.               MR. BRUCE: And did your grandfather live on one of the Reserves
         in the Vancouver area?
5429.               MR. JACOBS: My grandfather lived in, they call it, or it’s known
         today as Capilano. You can see on the map at the -- in that area there, that’s
         where he lived. Our family lived there from my grandfather and my great
         grandfather. That was the village that we -- they lived at and I lived at.
5430.               MR. BRUCE: And your children and grandchildren live on the
         Capilano Reserves?
5431.               MR. JACOBS: I have five children, 13 grandchildren, I think at last
         count about 20 great grandchildren, I think at the last count. I haven’t talked to
         my grandchildren lately, so I’ll do that when I get home, and maybe I’ll have to
         fix that number.
--- (Laughter/Rires)
5432.               MR. JACOBS: But we all live on the Capilano Reserve, in that
         village. I’m very fortunate that I see my grandchildren, great grandchildren every
         day. But the good thing about it is when it gets dark, they can go home. I don’t
         have to put up with them.
5433.               MR. BRUCE: Can you tell us about your upbringing on the Burrard
         Inlet and Capilano Indian Reserve, please?
5434.               MR. JACOBS: Well, I was raised there and I lived not far from the
         other families that --if look back at it on that village there, when I was -- before I
         went to residential school there was nine houses and the Lions Gate Bridge on
         that Reserve. That was it. So I’ve seen everything from building levenon (ph)
         everything that’s put on that village I’ve seen built. Many, many changes. So I
         was -- seen all of that, the changes.
5435.               MR. BRUCE: Did you do any activities such as collecting shellfish
         or anything like that when you were younger?
5436.               MR. JACOBS: Before residential school we used to go down the
         beach. Well, we lived on that village there, Xwmelchstn, Capilano. Our homes
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
         were on the waterfront. We used to go down -- my father brought us down to the
         beach, digging clams, getting oysters, crab, codfish, seaweed. So basically when
         the tide went out, our table was set. It was abundance of seafood for us. We
         never had to worry about that, that food. It was always there. We used to -- we
         learned from my grandfather and my granduncle that -- how to preserve that -- the
         clams and the oysters. We would preserve them for the winter use. During
         residential school, at times when we would get -- allowed to get home, we would
         still go down and dig clams and oysters.
5437.                Then in the mid-fifties, the industrial age began in the harbour. The
         dredges came in and destroyed those beds, clam beds. They destroyed them
         forever. We cannot go down the beach anymore, get clams, or anything in front
         of our village. It’s gone. We -- I go over to Snuneymuxw to my cousins, my
         family over there, and I get some from them. They give me buckets of clams, and
         oysters, and it’s the only way I can enjoy that food anymore.
5438.                In my wildest dreams I would never have thought they would destroy
         that, take our food away from our mouths. But that happened. It’s -- I can’t tell --
         I can’t teach my grandchildren, my great grandchildren how to dig clams, get
         crab, cook the crab, dry the seaweed. I can’t do that. It’s gone. I don’t know
         how to explain that to my grandchildren.
5439.                All we see outside from our windows looking down the beach are
         freighters, ships, in and out. That’s why I’m afraid today what the damage that if
         anything happened, it would destroy our home because that harbour, that bay
         there that’s the home of the Squamish people. It’s always been a home, our
         home.
5440.                We look at the maps. We show the territories of the Squamish. I
         don’t like to use the word “territory”. I say, “That is our home. That is our
         home”. That land will never go away. Our Squamish people will never go away,
         so we got to be careful what we do today.
5441.                MR. BRUCE: Paitsmauk, can you maybe paint a picture for us of
         what the area looked like when you were a young boy in the early fifties?
5442.                MR. JACOBS: Well as I said earlier there was nine houses, the
         landscape bridge. Strangely enough, there was one car -- one truck on that whole
         reserve, one old truck. It used to belong to Old Mathias.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                          Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                            Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
5443.                 There were no roads, there were little trails. And the Water Board had
         a road coming down our village.
5444.                 I’ll tell you a little thing happened here. I was involved in a trial in
         Vancouver sitting in the courtroom one time and then I explained that there was
         no water -- running water or electricity in our house. This is the mid-fifties. They
         looked across there and they said, “I can’t believe this. Of the third-largest city in
         this country on the Indian Reserve, there’s no running water.”
5445.                 So I’ve seen the changes. But the days -- those days of our -- the food
         was a-plenty for us. The deer would come down the rivers and they would lick
         the salt off the rocks. There was a lot of deer. We didn’t have to go to the
         mountains; the deer came to us.
5446.                 It was -- unless you’ve -- can vision of something that you go on an
         island and there’s nothing but you and plenty food and peaceful, that’s what it
         was like in those days. Things have changed.
5447.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk.
5448.                 Can you tell us the importance of the longhouse to the Squamish
         people?
5449.                 MR. JACOBS: I belong to the longhouse. I’m Chairman of the
         committee that runs the present-day longhouse.
5450.                 My grandfather was longhouse CO, and he wore the paint. My mother
         as well wore the paint. Our family wore the paint. That’s the ones that the
         traditional dances in the longhouse.
5451.                 The longhouse for our people celebrates from birth to death, our whole
         lives, things of origin from the longhouse where we blessed children with one of
         the most sacred -- the most sacred things that our Squamish people we own, the
         sxwayxway mask. That is the importance of our people that -- this sxwayxway
         mask.
5452.                 We bless babies, puberty rights, namings that match the names that we
         hand down family to family, all with the sxwayxway mask.
5453.                 And after life, we celebrate when we have -- we show the picture we
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
         call memorials. We gather the people and celebrate an individual’s four years
         after the passing, a big celebration. And in the longhouse, there’s so much talk
         about unity, respect, togetherness because our people invited to other longhouses,
         we bring something, a gift to help the family who are celebrating, sharing.
5454.                 When we go to the longhouse the families that are celebrating, they
         look at us, acknowledge us. That’s a sign of respect. The old people used to say,
         “You have respect for yourself, other people will have respect for you”.
5455.                 You always hear those words in the longhouse, respect one another,
         especially honour your Elders. That is so important. That’s the importance of
         learning, as I said earlier, snewayelh. That’s what you learn, you teach.
5456.                 I today, I emphasize with my children about a longhouse. It’s been
         here for 1,000 years, 1,000 years.
5457.                 I sit there some nights watching the work go on and sit there until
         2:00, 3:00, 4:00 in the morning and I think our people have done this for
         thousands of years. What’s happening outside those doors doesn’t matter; we’re
         still here.
5458.                 Our traditions and values that we’ve been taught are with us, they’re
         still with us today. Our families and others, we always talk about, you know,
         well, they say, “Well, gee, that’s nice of you to bring one or two sacks of clams to
         help them for the work, some salmon, some ducks, deer meat”.
5459.                 But they always talk about, is there still a lot of deer left, is there a lot
         of fish left, the clams. Make sure you leave enough for the next peoples to come
         along. Don’t take it all.
5460.                 So we just said, “Ah” -- to the people, we shake our head, “Ah, we’re
         listening; we’re listening”. But then when they destroyed the clam beds in front
         of our village, no one was listening.
5461.                 It’s saddening, especially when I think back and I reflect on the old
         people on our village. They didn’t speak too much English. They couldn’t read
         the newspapers. It was hard for them to understand what was going on in the
         world. No one would tell us, tell the old people.
5462.                 So today you are telling us something; I appreciate that. I’m not a
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                           Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                            Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
         learned man. I just went to residential school.
5463.                  When I got out of residential school, I still wasn’t allowed to go to
         high school. That was the law. It’s hard to reflect because it hurts. It hurts.
5464.                  MR. BRUCE: Paitsmauk, in the longhouse, is there spiritual
         practices?
5465.                  MR. JACOBS: That has been going on ever since I opened my eyes
         because my mother was Seyowen (ph), my grandfather. There today, yes, they
         are going on.
5466.                  Times when my grandfather moved from the waterfront where we
         lived, he moved up to in Park Royal area. He built a house. He built a little --
         they called it a Shaker Church, another little building on the back, and on the end
         on the gabled roof he put a cross. But our people used to gather there, they used
         to sing, dance because, as you know, our traditions -- the longhouse tradition was
         outlawed, was banned; we could not practice that.
5467.                  So my grandfather thought about it a bit, so he put a cross up on the
         top of the roof and the policemen drove by and they look at, “Oh, it’s just a
         church. That’s okay. We don’t have to bother them.” He kind of fooled them a
         little bit, but we still practised our -- the longhouse traditions, and it goes today.
5468.                  It’s kind of difficult because our longhouse is in the middle of the
         third-largest city in this country and it’s -- we have difficulty with it because our
         longhouse practice is so private that who knows? Who knows what’s to come?
5469.                  MR. BRUCE: Can you tell us where the longhouses are located in
         the Burrard Inlet area?
5470.                  MR. JACOBS: There’s two of them, one at Xwmelchstn and one at
         Chichelxwikw, Seymour on the -- one little one there. That’s the two that I’m
         aware of that are used today in practice in those two.
5471.                  But there were many at one time. Every little village they had homes,
         houses, longhouses. On the north side of the inlet where our villages were, there
         was a longhouse. On the south shore where our people lived, there was a
         longhouse.
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
5472.                 You could always tell. You’d see the smoke. My grandfather told me,
         he said, “When you see that smoke when the fire is built, that’s the time to go
         because there’s no calendar. There’s no watch. There’s no time. When them
         fire’s are lit, you go. You go and help.”
5473.                 MR. BRUCE: Is there any connection between the longhouse and
         the rivers, creeks, and ocean?
5474.                 MR. JACOBS: Sorry?
5475.                 MR. BRUCE: Is there any connection between the longhouse and the
         rivers, creeks, and ocean?
5476.                 MR. JACOBS: Because of all of the -- the travelling, the movement
         of -- our people would move from different villages by canoe to go to longhouses
         bringing food, blankets, baskets. So there was movement to the longhouse
         always.
5477.                 It was -- the Squamish people were very well known as basket makers.
         And that was a trade that they had -- our people had, these baskets. And it was
         great because, you know, you could transport your clam, your oysters, your
         salmon in the big -- in the canoes. I’ve seen that. I’ve seen that, put them in the
         baskets.
5478.                 My mother told me her granny, Halanamit, from Senamuk (ph) and
         family, they used to paddle across the Salish Sea in their big canoe. We’re going
         over there, Skwxwú7mesh. They’re having a potlatch. We’re invited. We’re
         invited.
5479.                 They’d put their families in the canoes and they would paddle across,
         middle of winter. But they had to be there because they were invited. You never
         disappointed a family when you were invited. You never make an excuse because
         you don’t want to shame your family.
5480.                 That’s important. That’s still today, that’s important for our people,
         never to shame. Never shame one another. That’s what we’ve been taught;
         taught as children.
5481.                 MR. BRUCE: Are any resources from Squamish waters used in the
         longhouse ceremonies or for regalia?
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
5482.                MR. JACOBS: Part of the ceremonies. When we -- the new ones,
         the new dancers, xekselkwelh dancers. Xekselkwelh, we call them. They’re new.
5483.                When we bring them around the house for the first time, we spread
         feathers, duck feathers all on the floor because it’s new. They’re new. They’re
         babies. They’re new. They cannot touch the dirt at that time, so they put them on
         the feathers to walk. It’s because their dance, their light. We get the ducks and
         cover the floor.
5484.                We get all the foods for the longhouse ceremonies, and across the
         Xwmelchstn Xwayxway is where I mentioned the mask, the cedar masks. They
         come from there. Long story there, but it was important for us to know and
         always mention that our families here owned, belonged to that. Those ceremonies
         for our people here in the valley, we go to their ceremonies with respect.
5485.                MR. BRUCE: Sekyú Siyám mentioned in his presentation getting
         prepared for this day, taking a bath. Is that related to the longhouse culture?
5486.                MR. JACOBS: You're taught that as part of initiation to cleanse
         yourself because your new baby -- what you do with your new babies, you bath
         them, cleanse them. And that continues through your life, to cleanse yourself, to
         wash, go in the river.
5487.                It sounds crazy for some people who don't understand it. In the middle
         of winter -- you're going down to have a bath in the river in the middle of winter,
         and they say, "Oh, you're a little bit crazy". I don't know.
5488.                But when you begin that as a young age, it's just another thing that you
         do. It's part of who we are. It's part of what we do. That is important.
5489.                MR. BRUCE: Do any Squamish people do this bathing practice in
         the Burrard Inlet area?
5490.                MR. JACOBS: Yes, we do. Sometimes at some point because the
         accessibility at times for the rivers and streams in this area, developments are
         going -- are covering every stream and river there is. It's difficult for us to have
         privacy. We do use the rivers and the bays, the salt water at times, but yes, we've
         always used that.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                          Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs
5491.                 You see, you have to put yourself back a long ways, that everything
         that there is there today that you made use of is because this is the way it is. This
         -- you try to understand. At times it's difficult, but even now, when I say you bath
         and you cleanse yourself, well, yes, you do that today, but not in the fashion that
         we do our cleanse. To get that cold, cold water, what is the first thing you do?
         You holler. You scream "cold".
5492.                 You see, I am a mask dancer. I have a mask; I dance. I go back. I
         holler. I wake it up. I wake up what was given to me a long time ago. It's here.
         And I only understand it as being Sḵwx̱wú7mesh.
5493.                 You see, people, you know, the mistake they made when they called
         us Indians, then they called us -- now they're calling us First Nations and they
         call us Aboriginal, a lot of things. But when I look at my families, the
         Sḵwx̱wú7mesh, that's what we have inside here, Sḵwx̱wú7mesh. That's who we
         are. To me that is so important when I look at my brothers and sisters and family,
         Sḵwx̱wú7mesh. It's because they carry that what's inside of us.
5494.                 The genealogy you look, that's where we -- that's where it come from.
         They did this hundreds of years ago. They pass it on.
5495.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk. I have one last question for
         you.
5496.                 So would you say that the longhouse is the hub of Squamish culture?
5497.                 MR. JACOBS: What we have that's been passed on to us from the
         old peoples, it is so important to Squamish because we all look -- as I said, we
         look at the genealogy. They're connected.
5498.                 On my father's side, we're talking about my father's grandfather, Kay-
         Tulk. It's the same as my brother here, the same family. The same family. My
         partner on this side here, my great-great-grandmother, and my brother on this side
         was his sister. And we understand that -- how close-knit we are and yet we're --
         you know, we live -- today we live different lives. Times we sit down and reflect,
         we're together as one.
5499.                 It all begins at the longhouse. The importance of the longhouse to our
         people is everything, everything in life that -- as I understand it. When I open the
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                   Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         doors in the longhouse, it all comes alive and life to our people. I can't compare it
         to anything else because I don't know anything -- others' beliefs and religions. I
         don't. I just know my own, what I've been taught.
5500.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk.
5501.                 I will now move on to Xwelxwelacha Siyám, Chief Dick Williams.
5502.                 MR. JACOBS: Could I say one more?
5503.                 MR. BRUCE: Okay. Paitsmauk actually would like to say some
         more words here.
5504.                 Thank you.
5505.                 MR. JACOBS: Just one thing that I always think about. I think about
         love and our homelands and our villages. It's love for that. It's like the wind. It's
         still with us. It'll never go away.
5506.                 For that, I thank my grandfathers. I thank them, and I thank you.
         O'siem.
5507.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you.
5508.                 So Xwelxwelacha Siyám, can you describe the roles you have in the
         Squamish community?
--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRÉSENTATION ORALE PAR CHIEF
RICHARD WILLIAMS:
5509.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: My role? Since '77 we implemented a -- yeah,
         my role in the nation, kind of difficult to address that, but my official capacity is
         as fisheries officer under the by-law, fisheries by-law in -- enacted in 1977 by
         Council. And you had to have an officer within that, and been employed under
         that description and now fisheries manager, to this day, under the revised 1992
         By-Law No. 16 amending our by-law, fisheries by-law, for our people under the
         Indian Act, Section 81, and protected by the Statutes of Instruments Act where the
         -- we've been fighting the government since we implemented that, and even prior
         to that. And that's why we enacted the by-law.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                     Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5510.                  You're marginalizing us, eliminating us from access to our own
         resources within our own Reserves, and criminalizing members of our tribe that
         were attempting to subsist not just with salmon, with other things. If they could
         find something to do to us that was within their parameters, they did that. Not just
         DFO; the provincial police, prior to ‘56-‘57, and members of other -- I could go
         on about whatever.
5511.                  But I have also been on Council since April of 1977. I was elected --
         after my third effort to run for Council, I was elected, and along with 15 other of
         my compatriots. And we are an amalgamated tribe since 1923.
5512.                  Prior to that, because the amalgamation came because the government
         took over half of our allocated Reserve lands that were supposed to be set aside
         for us and protected under the protection of the Federal Crown, the exact opposite
         was happening, so we formed an amalgamated tribe after 10 years of discussion,
         as has been identified earlier.
5513.                  Again, I was on Council until '93, was not re-elected. I was the elected
         -- the first time I was elected, we were there for life. It was changed in '81 to
         four-year terms.
5514.                  I got up to 1993. I was not re-elected, was not successful on that term
         or the next one. Not -- 2001, again, I was -- applied to be on Council. And to this
         date, again, I think it was 2013, the last election, I was successful again. They
         have to put up with me for another four years from then.
5515.                  The issue here as well is for purposes of my role -- and I am hereditary
         Chief. I did not claim to be a Chief. My family identified I was the next in line
         from our generation.
5516.                  My grandfather, Chief Edward Williams, was one of the founding
         Chiefs of the amalgamation in 1923.
5517.                  MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Siyám.
5518.                  Can you tell us when you were born?
5519.                  CHIEF WILLIAMS: I was born in 1948, February 25th.
5520.                  MR. BRUCE: Where did you grow up?
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                     Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5521.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: I grew up first three and a half years at
         Eslhá7an, Mission IR No. 1 as identified under the Reserves. We were in a rental
         home. My Dad and mother were renting a home because they started a new
         family.
5522.                 And '53, we moved to Xwmelchstn, Mathias Road, 209 Mathias. And
         they had a wartime house that was -- they got a -- at that time, a -- I guess you call
         it a loan from the Department of Indian Affairs. They used our capital funds and
         moved a wartime house on the Reserve.
5523.                 We paid for the cost of moving it and we -- the -- I think it was $4,000
         per move was identified as being the total cost for the foundation, as well as the
         move and chimney placed in the middle. And we had a wood stove and I guess
         you'd call it ice box in one corner. That was how they were constructed.
5524.                 And grew up there until 1971. The condominiums were being built at
         North Vancouver in Block 123 of IR No. 1. We received that back in '62 because
         of the expropriation by the -- who were these people, anyway? The black robes,
         anyways, these nuns or priests or whoever. They got title because they were
         going to teach the kids.
5525.                 And at that time, they attempted to sell it off and were advised they
         had to return it back to Reserve status if there was to be any disposition of it. And
         they also had an elementary school there that was discontinued, and there was 40
         or 42 residences of condominiums built there for low income and social housing.
5526.                 And the band still is paying a mortgage on it to this day. I think
         another 35 or 40 years of payments are due on that.
5527.                 Nineteen -- I think five months before my oldest daughter started
         school, we were approved our own house; I think it was 1975 or '74. We moved
         in in 1975, I think.
5528.                 And we moved back to Xwmelchstn, my present address where I live
         today.
5529.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you.
5530.                 Could you tell us a little bit about what fishing means to you
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                   Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         personally and how you learned fishing and how you teach your children?
5531.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: My experience of fishing and teaching fishing
         and what it means to me is that our people have always fished, generational and
         commercially, as well as for personal use. My great-grandfather, Chief Dick
         Williams, was a victim of expropriation of his whole Reserve when our people
         were -- and others of our tribe were -- went up north to go to the fishing grounds
         where the canneries were, up Nights Inlet and Rivers Inlet and these huge
         canneries were offshore, and the fish were so numerous that people could go up
         there and access them.
5532.                 The majority of boats did not have motors; they had sails and oars.
         They -- my great-grandfather, Captain Louie, had an East Hope engine in his boat,
         and he towed about 15 or 20 boats of extended family members and other
         community members up to that area.
5533.                 The men went out daily to get the fish. The ladies and the young
         women worked in the canneries to process those fish in those canneries at that
         time for -- from the late 1800s up until the canneries closed and the fish started
         becoming fewer.
5534.                 And when they did close the canneries up there, the women continued
         to work in the canneries closer to home in Steveson and West Vancouver, North
         Vancouver, Vancouver, Fraser River, that type of thing where -- up until the mid-
         sixties, I think, the majority of them closed down.
5535.                 Getting back to fishing, what it means to me is it was taught to me by
         example by my grandparents, my uncles, my grand-uncles and my relatives. We
         fished trouting, foreshore fishing, hand-line at first when I was a young kid, going
         to the beaches with my -- with the people. And Xwmelchstn, where a large
         amount of the families had moved to different homes that were -- had electricity
         in them somewhere else and that were in a new subdivision.
5536.                 The issue here is the majority of them all had fruits -- fruit trees and
         berries and all sorts of sustenance that was seasonal, plums, apples, cherries,
         currants, blackberries, strawberries, raspberries. All the broad range where all the
         people had storage places for their preserves on the north sides of their homes,
         and it was very evident that they had that. We also had, I don’t know if you call it
         fishing, but oysters, clams, crabs, prawns and that type of thing.
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                    Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5537.                  And in season, coho in July right through to January in the Capilano.
         In the Squamish it’s anywhere from end of September to the end -- middle of
         December for coho.
5538.                  Dog salmon, we still catch them and smoke them and delivery it to the
         Elders on reserve and put them in the freezers for dinners and funerals.
5539.                  We do about three loads a year. That’s about 200-300 sides every
         load. We do that ourselves and provide for our own people, and we have a budget
         for it for doing those things.
5540.                  Getting -- teaching the younger ones is having people along that want
         to fish, to be able to show them and demonstrate different methods of doing that
         by -- with rods in the Squamish River, how to make nets and how to set nets,
         where to set them and the appropriate times of year for which fish are available
         and when they are available.
5541.                  We have -- we’re attempting as well to -- under my young associate,
         Christopher Lewis, wanting to have us get our people back out onto the Salish Sea
         and other areas where we have traditionally fished in the Gulf of Georgia as well
         as in the Fraser River up until 2003-2004 when DFO got one of our neighbours to
         prohibit us from fishing in their area because we wanted to help another group
         have access for the sockeye resource at that time.
5542.                  For purposes again of wanting to make sure that -- I get off the subject
         here about teaching kids how to fish. But what we’re doing is attempting to re-
         access resources that we know we’ve always done, generational, early 1800s.
5543.                  The original speaker that was talking about 200 canoes coming down
         the river, that was just the first wave of people coming back because they had
         their quota or their winter supply. There were still more people than that up river
         yet still in the fishing grounds because there’s only so much space for people to
         process and to dry the product once you get it, and people had to make room for
         other people.
5544.                  And we were not the only tribe up there. All the tribes from Puget
         Sound, Juan de Fuca, Saanich tribes, Cowichan, all the Desolation Sound tribes,
         Lummi, all of the different peoples that had access to this river, Great River, for
         those resources.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                    Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5545.                It was not just salmon. It was ducks, geese, bottom fish, sturgeon,
         cranberries, any and all the medicines. That time of year as well was used for
         trading goods from the interior, the grease trails, the different times of the year,
         for inter-marriages of daughters that needed husbands and, if people had eligible
         bachelors, the majority of the time the ladies went to the husbands' villages. But
         if they needed men and there was too many men in one village, they would
         accommodate and send the men to the different villages. And all of this stuff is
         documented.
5546.                I was a part of the Kitsilano trial, being an observer along with
         Paitsmauk, for eight years. And they wanted us to document who we were, what
         are place names were, who the people were and what their names were, what year
         it was. And all of this is documented in the Langley Journals.
5547.                So when they started building Fort Langley, our people gave them
         fish, gave them seal meat, gave them deer meat, helped them with, I guess,
         probably trade goods that they needed and sustenance.
5548.                And as well, I think there was some of the members at that time were
         becoming nuisances because they were getting into the alcohol as well. So there’s
         -- it wasn’t all one way or it wasn’t all good. So there are those things in the
         journals.
5549.                And our people were not the only ones there. There was records of a
         huge amount, and these people from Fort Langley were trading for furs as well as
         fish and they were sending salted fish to Europe and other colonies to provide a
         variety of sustenance for those people as well.
5550.                Getting back to our own young people, we have, I guess you call it,
         different departments where we have under-privileged children, we have people
         that have not had the opportunity to get out into our river systems.
5551.                I was taught by my uncles and by my grand-uncles through them
         showing us, not telling us. Be there, do it and understand what’s needed. Safety
         measures, how to operate canoes, how to -- in -- since the fifties, how to operate
         outboard motors.
5552.                The majority of the teachings was safety on the water and not wear
         white man’s boots when you’re out there.
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                   Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5553.                No, it might be funny but it’s very dangerous. You’ve got to be safe
         than sorry.
5554.                The other issue as well is the opportunities by people. People take for
         granted what we’ve had to do to provide sustenance back in the day. There was
         no such thing as this low income -- or what do you call it now, poverty level?
         There was no such thing as that in the fifties.
5555.                You started hearing poverty level in the sixties and seventies, I think,
         after the hippie generation where people weren’t working and, all of a sudden,
         they had to provide for them. That’s when I started hearing about it, anyway.
5556.                But we still have our young people out in the rivers and whatever, and
         under protecting -- trying to protect them and keep them separate from other
         fishermen that aren’t members so we could properly -- and our guardians that we
         hire seasonally help them understand slip jigs, what proper process is, respect for
         other fishermen when they’re out there, times to fish in, dangers of what happens
         if the dam -- we have a dam that we have, Cleveland Dam on the Capilano, and
         dangers of that.
5557.                Just two weeks ago, a huge amount of non-band members -- or non-
         members. I don’t know what colour they were, but they weren’t ours. They were
         trapped just below the upper levels and they had to be moved off by rescue
         people.
5558.                We also, for purposes of wanting to make sure we’re doing the right
         thing and seen to be doing the right thing, help people understand hunting and
         fishing is hand in hand. And you don’t just go out hunting or you just don’t go
         out fishing. You try to utilize time if and when it’s available to do those things if
         and when it’s -- the opportunity arises.
5559.                MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Xwelxwelacha Siyám.
5560.                You mentioned in the fifties there was no poverty in the community.
         You were using the -- the Squamish Nation was using the resources, and you
         provided us a very good overview of the Squamish history to date.
5561.                I was wondering if you could tell us a little bit what it was like fishing
         as a young boy in the Mission and Capilano Reserves.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                          Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                     Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5562.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: Yes. At Mission, remembering what was
         happening there at that time as well, they had canoe races in the summer months.
         In the spring, they were training.
5563.                 And there was very, very, big populations of herring. And my parents
         and other people in the community would go down along the Mosquito Creek,
         we’d call that creek. The old timers call it First Creek.
5564.                 And when the tide goes out, they would put out a bunch of cedar
         boughs down on a log, hanging into the water and, two days later, they would go
         back and they would have about two and a half, three inches of herring and
         herring roe covering all the branches that were in the water. And they tried to put
         it where the log wouldn’t go dry on the ground. So we had that happening.
5565.                 We use to catch crabs along the -- there was a large -- very large mud
         bank at the bottom end of Mosquito Creek, right in front of the Uslahan (ph)
         Reserve, and we used to get crabs there and dig clams down along where the
         creek was emptying because that was where the water was the cleanest.
5566.                 We would be fishing and we’d catch flounders and cod off the end.
         Then we’d catch trout in the creeks. And coho did go into those creeks in quite a
         few numbers, up into Mahan Creek. And I think, for purposes again of not being
         in the fifties, I think it was the mid-sixties, they put -- how do you call it -- these
         sewer trunks because it was straight down from the Upper -- Upper North
         Vancouver to right down to the Marine Drive to where the major trunks running
         east-west, they’d have them run down the creeks.
5567.                 They ran -- at that time, they ran it, and it became a flume after that.
         There was no more fish that was available and there was nowhere for the fish to
         spawn and/or sit out of the current. It was just a straight creek.
5568.                 They did the same thing with Sister Creek in the mid-seventies, and all
         of the people above -- we went on a helicopter ride. All the people in the upper
         levels had swimming pools.
5569.                 DFO was accusing us of killing all the fish off and these people would
         drain their pools in the winter so that they wouldn’t crack their swimming pool
         walls and we’d see the water go blue from time to time. And this would kill all
         the smelts and the small ones no matter where they were in the river system and in
         the creek system.
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                    Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5570.                 We often wondered why there was no -- no small trout in those creeks
         when I was a youth. The fish would come back into Capilano and they would
         turn off in there and we would catch a few up there, but usually we would not
         have any trout caught in those -- those systems because of the effluent coming out
         of those swimming pools.
5571.                 And I think in the mid-eighties, there were some restrictions from
         emptying the --emptying their pools directly into the creeks. By then, all the fish
         are decimated.
5572.                 Did you want me to talk about Capilano as well, or...?
5573.                 MR BRUCE: Sure. I think you’ve segued into a pretty critical
         question that I had for you is, what has the Squamish Nation done to preserve the
         right to fish within its territory?
5574.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: Yeah. Well, what we’ve done and attempt to
         do is we’ve enacted a by-law in 1977 and amended it in ’92. We have
         arrangements with DFO for them. We got stream keepers, they call them.
5575.                 They fund a whole bunch of non-Indian stream keepers, West Van and
         North Van and other places and as well the hatcheries. And they’ve discontinued
         the -- DFO has discontinued supporting the hatchery in Seymour, and the
         steelheaders have taken that over.
5576.                 We, under the by-law, have the ability to capacity build and introduce
         our different spawning areas in the Squamish Valley where we do have side
         streams that are totally within the reserves. And we attempt to try to get, I guess
         you’d call it, capital infrastructure put in so we can do just that.
5577.                 But to this date, we have not ever been -- had the opportunity. We had
         communication with the Chehalis people, who have very successful efforts in
         their area. They’re on the Harrison. And we’ve -- we were a part of their effort to
         deal with it, but because we’re fighting DFO in Court all the time, they don’t fund
         us with anything other than this other thing from ’93.
5578.                 So for our purposes, we attempt to give recommendations back to
         DFO on rewatering streams that they’ve put dikes in to protect the Town of
         Squamish, the Valley, Garibaldi Heights or Garibaldi Lowlands or whatever they
Transcript                                                                    Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                     Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         called and Brackendale and other areas that, for their reasons, they just put huge
         dikes in to protect their infrastructure.
5579.                 What we try to do is put butterfly traps -- have them recommend to put
         butterfly traps as well as access for rewatering. Even the Mamcem, which they
         put into the Squamish River because the town of Squamish is below sea level -- in
         1930 or 1929, whenever it was, they -- because they didn’t want two rivers
         flooding on both sides of town, they’d rather have one side protected and the
         other side, it’s the reason why they call it the Mamcem Blind Channel.
5580.                 They killed a hell of a lot of our resources off. We used to have
         eulachons in there and smelts and sturgeon, all other sorts of our resources our
         people used to use and all the different things where we’re trying to make sure
         that we want to have the best practices identified, but the government and the
         government permits for industry, pulp mills, mercury being contaminant in the
         estuary at Squamish as well as Britannia, a mine that’s been there since the 1800s.
5581.                 Just got acid water coming out of that mine ever since they’ve opened
         it, but very self-evident when -- when they had to close the whole of Howe Sound
         because of the mercury poisoning as well as the acid -- acid -- not acid rain, but
         when it rains, it goes down into the mine and the mine overflows and goes into
         the creek and everything turns black and purple and not normal colours for our
         environment.
5582.                 We attempt to agree with the hatchery people to make sure that we can
         provide for our people with different things. And we do have the ESSR yearly,
         but it’s not part of our normal thing. But we have had good cooperation with the
         -- with the hatchery people because of the ongoing agreement with -- with DFO
         for purposes of -- we have a kind of a -- I guess you’d call it an uneasy truce at
         this time. But we normally notify West Van and North Van for helping when we
         have guardians, and DFO has a totally adversarial approach to -- we should not be
         a part of the management. We should be part of some stakeholder somewhere.
         That’s their approach. They always approach us with that.
5583.                 So it’s not a matter for me to tell people what to do or not to do. I’m
         telling you the experiences we have to deal with.
5584.                 If Indians or tribes of Indians sign a piece of paper that says DFO is all
         power authority, they’ll give them everything they want for a couple years and
         then have that hanging over them for the rest of their lives. We choose not to do
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                     Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         that.
5585.                 MR. BRUCE: Xwelxwelacha Siyám, could you confirm for me that
         -- does the by-law apply to the Capilano River?
5586.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: Yeah, the by-law itself, our Squamish Nation
         by-law, applies on reserve. There is a decision in -- I’m not too sure what year it
         was. It may have been ’93 or ’97 or -- I’m not too sure what it was.
5587.                 We had went to Court and they identified that any reserve that has a
         boundary on the river, the authority only goes to midstream, if that, if it’s on one
         side. If it’s -- there is no reserve on the other side of the river, we have no
         authority to deal with the issues on that component, but there are parts of reserves
         that we have.
5588.                 Capilano, for instance, we have a straight line boundary on the north
         side and we have a straight line boundary on the south side, so we own both banks
         of the river and the jurisdiction belongs to the people that control the by-law.
5589.                 And the by-law says our Council have the jurisdiction in that case.
         And DFO has not challenged us on that because I don’t think their lawyers have
         found a loophole to get rid of us yet and they’ve left us alone since -- since those
         other Court cases.
5590.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Xwelxwelacha Siyám.
5591.                 I think now -- I’m looking at the time. I think we have about 15
         minutes left, and we wanted to have some time for Xálek’/Sekyú Siyám to do
         some concluding remarks. And I think right now would be a great time to do that.
5592.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: Could I say one more thing?
5593.                 MR. BRUCE: Sure. We'll have some more remarks from Chief
         Dick.
5594.                 CHIEF WILLIAMS: I'm not used to these things.
5595.                 Just for purposes, again, of having our position identified and who we
         are and what we represent, this map that you see on the easel here is our core
         territory map. It is our primary territory where we have our villages and our
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                   Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         resources that are exclusive to us.
5596.                We have secondary resource areas that our people have travelled since
         before contact, and those are in conjunction with tribes, our neighbours, that we
         don't over-rule them. We have, I guess you'd call it, political protocols with those
         people. And we agree -- it's almost as if we're trading access to their resources
         when they can have certain access to our resources that we agree upon without the
         interference with anybody else other than our own jurisdiction.
5597.                And for purposes of maintaining how we do that and when we have
         done that, none of the evidence that has been given so far has been identifying our
         access and our presence on the Fraser River.
5598.                Prior to the reserves system being established, Squamish Charlie was
         compensated for his house and his barn and his animals where the railway ran a
         railway trestle over the Fraser and the right-of-way across his party destroying
         everything that was his there. There was a permanent residence with a barn, with
         fences and with livestock and chickens and pigs. And all of those were taken
         away and fed to the workers.
5599.                It is documented, and his name was Techuxanem. And that was the
         same name that our hereditary Chief, Chief Joe Mathias, carried and was given at
         the longhouse at Xwmelchstn.
5600.                The other thing is, Denny Jack, he grew up there. The White men
         made the colony capital at New Westminster and moved all of the Indians across
         the river. Denny Jack grew up there.
5601.                And my Uncle Willie used to bring him there in the fifties to visit
         where his boyhood area was that he actually grew up and fished and hunted from,
         and his parents grew up and lived there as well. And that reserve was
         expropriated by the Crown and all of the people had to move off.
5602.                Oh, by the way, as well, Old Mama, Siyelia (ph), that's where she got
         Johnny Baker at Annacis Island. He was one of the sailors off one of those ships
         visiting that place. And that's where some of our great-grandparents and parents,
         grandparents, come from. I'm one of them.
5603.                Thank you very much.
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                           Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                      Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5604.                 MR. BRUCE: Thank you.
5605.                 So I've outlined in my introduction a number of constraints that are
         impacting on the Squamish Nation providing fully-informed information today,
         namely, the lack of funding to properly review the application to conduct the
         studies and to obtain technical advice that Squamish required to discuss impacts
         on its interests.
5606.                 Despite these constraints, Xálek’/Sekyú Siyám, can you tell us the
         concerns Squamish has with this project proceeding?
5607.                 If I could just ask you to put up the last slide of the project? Thanks.
5608.                 CHIEF CAMPBELL: (Speaking in native language.) I'm very
         honoured to have this opportunity to provide some closing remarks on behalf of
         the Squamish Nation. And this is a very complex matter that brings to mind a
         number of issues and concerns that the Squamish have in relation to the
         legitimacy of Canada to issue rights within the territories of our Coast Salish
         people.
5609.                 First of all, the Squamish Nation does not consent to this project, to
         Kinder Morgan's application. We weren't afforded the opportunity to engage in
         the initial project,. tThat was installed prior to us being citizens in our own
         country or any legal recourse that was afforded to the Squamish to protect our
         interests with the advent of Port Metro Vancouver and these types of operations
         within our territories.
5610.                 We do not consent to the Canadian government assuming jurisdiction
         of our sovereignty and our Aboriginal rights and title. This is a question of
         authority for us where we are not a vanished race. We are not in a museum
         behind glass where tradition is something 200 years ago. Tradition is today.
5611.                 It is that continuity of tradition that will leave a legacy for our
         collective futures.
5612.                 The Siyams Siyáms talked about a concept in our language called
         siyamintssiyamínts, which means to conduct yourself as a SiyamSiyám, with
         integrity and honour. These go along with our responsibilities and our obligations
         to adhere to our laws.
Transcript                                                                       Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                   Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5613.                 Not once in any of these processes have I seen the respect afforded to
         us. Just as successive governments in the past have neglected to recognize
         Squamish authority and governance to make decisions in our own territories,
         these laws are not being adhered to, in my observation of this process thus far.
5614.                 We have real words called chiyax chíyax that are real stories and real             Formatted: Underline
         history that's been handed down for many thousands of years, and
         snewayelhsnewáyelh, which are our laws and our teachings.
5615.                 There still seems to be a confusion in this country that this foundation
         of this country is premised off of French and English. That is the story that -- the
         myth that continues to be told. And it neglects our own true identity; that which
         is a country founded on many solid First Nations, indigenous nations that have
         made this country what it is and continue to contribute to the quality of life that
         Canadians are afforded when many First Nations still are dealing with abject
         poverty, even in urban settings like this.
5616.                 We are not going to manage welfare. We're going to manage wealth.
         But it isn't going to be at the expense of our integrity for the wilful destruction of
         our relationship to our lands and waters and our territories.
5617.                 We've been invisible in our own land for far too long. We're not even
         sure, sitting here and sharing with you the vast history and knowledge of our
         people, how this will be used. I don't know how you, as Panel Members, will take
         this and absorb it and balance it so that we can move away from being treated as
         stakeholders in our own land. Sso even the process I am unsure of, the procedural
         fairness of how we've even gotten to this point because, to me, it comes with
         baggage. And that baggage is hard to articulate in three hours to you the
         experience that the Squamish have had with all levels of government in this
         country.
5618.                 Our archaeology and the science talks about a minimum of 9,800 years
         of use and occupation. When you look at the history before that when all the
         water was locked in ice, the sea level was a lot lower than it is today, so much of
         our history is under water, under 60 metres of water today.
5619.                 So Canada continues to perpetuate this myth that we crossed a land
         bridge and that somehow minimizes the legitimacy of our connections to this
         land.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                    Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5620.                 We have terms called eslhelhekwhiwseslhélhekwhiws, which is a very
         spiritual term. It talks about our interconnectedness to creation. Our language is
         largely a verb-based language, as opposed to English, which is largely noun-based
         in relation. Where in English you'll say "that's a rock", there's no real relation to
         it. In our language is -- that rock is a connection; it's at play.
5621.                 Value isn't given in English to things like the Salish Sea unless it's
         economically viable, and that is only one compartment of our connection. We've
         always had a strong economy from this territory.
5622.                 So we have to dispel that this is a free and vacant land and that the
         government has legitimacy to issue these types of rights to this Kinder and this
         Morgan. We don't know who these people are or why they should have rights in
         our territory because we did not consent to that, free prior informed consent.
5623.                 Everything in our territory is named in English. We have English Bay,
         British Properties, Howe Sound, Vancouver, Fraser River. Nothing here indicates
         that our history is your history, that it doesn't just start with 1791 or with B.C.
         joining Confederation, but it spans well beyond that.
5624.                 So this is an opportunity to redefine those relationships with Canada
         because they continue to go abroad internationally with FIPA.
5625.                 They continue to arbitrarily change laws and legislation around
         omnibus Bills 38 and 45. Those are arbitrary decisions that do not reflect our
         Aboriginal laws or our consent.
5626.                 We are not signatories to those international agreements that this party
         here would like to have recognized as being legitimate. We are a true signatory to
         those contractual agreements. Without our signature on those agreements, who is
         giving away the rights to our lands and our waters?
5627.                 The cumulative impact -- we're well beyond this issue of probability.
         Our minds go to the issue of consequence, of catastrophic events that have been
         experienced by many other peoples, Exxon and BP and Kalamazoo and many
         other offshore drilling catastrophes, seismic. There are many issues that we have
         with this product.
5628.                 We’ve been to the tar sands. We’ve met with the Athabascan
         Chippewa, and we signed on to the Save The Fraser Declaration, the Salish Sea
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                          Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                      Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         Declarations. These are important to us. These are important steps in building
         that awareness of who and what we are as a people.
5629.                 The ability to clean up this type of product, we are not satisfied that
         Canada is capable of the propaganda that they will put out to say that this is world
         class. With dispersants, with the impacts to the surface, the subsurface, the sea
         floor, the intertidal, the ability to truly manage this type of product and the
         sustainability or the long-term impacts that this poses the risk to my
         grandchildren. And if it’s jobs to clean up, then we’re not interested. We don’t
         want to clean up this type of mess that is carcinogenic.
5630.                 Personally I prefer eulachon oil versus Alberta oil in my food. I don’t
         want to see the operations of this leaking into our waters and contaminating our
         crab, our shellfish, all those things that me and my children enjoy eating.
5631.                 This area that we're talking about, Lhekw'ihukw'aytnLheklhúkwayten,                 Formatted: Underline
         this was the traditional calving grounds of the yew yews, of the killer whales.
         They have also been displaced as a result of this industrial activity. We have
         tremendous love for the killer whales and we want to see this area revitalized as
         Howe Sound has been seeing the killer whales returning, the herring biomass.
5632.                 Is this conducive to that type of revitalization? We have serious
         doubts. Titemtsen is a village, I explained to you early on, in Port Moody. You
         could see that there is a -- the quickest path from Titemtsen down here to the
         Fraser River to Kikayt to our old villages, it’s about nine kilometres. Our people
         use the entire area. It wasn’t site specific of our strength of title.
5633.                 We ask Canada, where is their strength of title, British Columbia, in
         the absence of First Nations being a party to decision making, environmental
         stewardship.
5634.                 We are not enemies of the state. We have inherent responsibilities to
         protect the sacred. We are decision makers. We are in an era called “truth and
         reconciliation” in this country, and I ask you, “What are the actions that go with
         truth and reconciliation? What does it look like?”
5635.                 When we were in Africa last year, we visited South Africa and
         Namibia. We visited these places and seen the changes from their oppressive
         legislation, from apartheid to world leaders like Mandela who effected positive
         change. And we ask ourselves in Canada, “Is this part of your vision, is it part of
Transcript                                                                      Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                   Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         your dream to see reconciliation? And what does that look like?"
5636.                Is it national reform of laws and policies that truly bring First Nations
         to the table as decision makers and as governments, as stewards and incorporating
         our laws, incorporating western-based science because we’re not here to impede
         economy.
5637.                We understand economy. We were a very affluent people for a very
         long time, and that’s changed by design over the last number of decades. And
         that’s unacceptable.
5638.                We have an Elder in Tsleil-Waututh, Ta7a, she says, “We’re smart
         enough to know better. We have innovation, we have renewables. We continue
         to contribute to carbon emissions and global warming”. She goes, “We’re going
         to be known as the age of stupidity if we don’t change our way”.
5639.                And those are profound words coming from our Elders because they
         have firsthand seen the cumulative impact of industrialization of our territories
         and the loss of sustenance, loss of spiritual connections, that newcomers have
         come into our lands assuming this jurisdiction.
5640.                So we’re here to reaffirm that I don’t know what you want to do with
         this information, but we do not provide consent. And it’s an honour to share our
         story with you today, to share a small piece of our history through these place
         names and these images. And again, it would be even better to get you out on the
         land to show you firsthand.
5641.                Again, our history is your history and we know that these affluent
         people next to us here, who they represent. They wish to continue to make more
         and more money at our expense, and that’s something that our membership do not
         feel is something we can support.
5642.                So thank you for listening. It’s an honour to be here. And thank you
         to our legal team for bringing this together along with our Elders, all of our Chiefs
         and our matriarchs, our family that are here today. I really appreciate all of our
         community members.
5643.                Again, thank you to the Stó:lō for allowing us in your territory to share
         a small piece of our history with you this afternoon.
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                        Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                    Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
5644.                THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Chief Campbell.
5645.                And we’ve been asked to -- been offered an invitation a number of
         times throughout the last -- what was it, last week and this week, to go on to the
         land and to go on to the river and everything else. And we would all love to and
         we’ve all kind of agreed that in -- perhaps in another time when we’re past this,
         that it would be of great honour to do something like that. Sure.
5646.                Perhaps I could offer Trans Mountain, Ms. Oleniuk, if you wish to ask
         any questions of clarification at this point to ---
5647.                MS. OLENIUK: On behalf of Trans Mountain I’d just like to thank
         the Squamish Nation for your presentation, and we have no questions, sir.
5648.                THE CHAIRMAN: I’m just trying for -- if I may, Chief Campbell
         and also Chief Williams made some mention about it. And I understand the
         hereditary Chiefs and your responsibility from the beginning of the Chiefs to --
         for the protection and management of the land and the water and that now that’s
         fallen to the Council as the -- for that protection, enforcement.
5649.                And Chief Williams talked about the relationship with DFO and the
         management of the Capilano River, for example, and the by-laws and the strength
         of those by-laws.
5650.                And you also mentioned, Chief Campbell, the wild spirit places and
         the co-management of that aspect of it.
5651.                I was just interested in the Burrard Inlet. I am aware that there’s the --
         you know, there’s the two shores, the north shore and your home is there along
         the north shore, but also use on the south shore.
5652.                Is there any sort of protection management of those waters in the
         Burrard Inlet that you are involved in, that you have any wish to have in or have
         any been recognized of that and any management of that and protection of those
         particular waters in the Burrard Inlet? I’d be interested to understand that aspect
         of it.
5653.                CHIEF CAMPBELL: Thank you for the question, and also thank
         you for recognizing the Squamish Land Use Plan was a very powerful tool to
         remove the ambiguity of where the Squamish’s vision is for the northern part of
Transcript                                                                   Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                       Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                   Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         our territories.
5654.                 We’ve now engaged in starting the scoping of a marine use planning
         process that would look at, primarily beginning with Howe Sound, in the
         inventory of the types of sponge reefs and the building blocks that will facilitate
         sustainable revitalization of those waters as well as the -- I guess, working with
         the Coast Salish gathering, as I mentioned in my presentation on the Salish Sea in
         a broader context from headwater to sea floor, from mountaintop to sea floor.
         And there, we’ve looked at engagement with Environment Canada and EPA on
         the U.S. side on having more strengthening of the relationships to work with those
         entities in how we would look towards co-management.
5655.                 Port Metro Vancouver, we’ve attempted to create some sort of, I don't
         know if it was an MOU or a protocol of some sort. That didn't go very far with
         Minister Oliver, who really pushed a lot of these issues and how we can get
         involved with the federal aspects as well as the Port Metro Vancouver aspects of
         business.
5656.                 We've looked to other First Nations on how they've managed to
         engage elsewhere on the coast, such as the coastal simshan (ph),Tsimshian the
         Prince Rupert Port, you know, the larger context of decision-making, of economic
         activity, as well as environmental, those three pillars. So those are our aspirations
         is to certainly have the First Nations recognized and participating, as opposed to
         bearing the risk.
5657.                 THE CHAIRMAN: I appreciate the clarification.
5658.                 And we heard, and I think you probably referred to it is the joint -- is it
         the Pacific Marine Council or Pacific Management Council that the Tulalip and
         the others have mentioned that. Is that in the -- the three parties, six parties to
         that? So that's part of what you refer to as the big marine study that's going on?
5659.                 CHIEF CAMPBELL: Yes, thank you.
5660.                 Yes, absolutely, with the other Coast Salish intervenors we've been
         able to meet with them to strategize on those types of next steps.
5661.                 And I'd like to thank my colleague. Councillor Chris Lewis also
         wanted to mention in our explanation with the Vancouver Aquarium and other
         groups, that we're looking at science-based MOUs with more of those types of
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
                                                         Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
                                                    Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
         entities that are able to look at science as well as TEK.
5662.                So restoration of our Mosquito Creek, Seymour and Mackay Creeks
         and salmon enhancement, to answer your first question -- I apologize -- but those
         are some of the activities that the nation is engaged in, to just lightly touch on
         those areas to let you know that we've certainly been proactive to look at ways
         that we can revitalize Burrard Inlet and incorporate our TEK, traditional
         ecological knowledge.
5663.                Thank you.
5664.                THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you for that.
5665.                The Board, the Panel don't have any further questions of clarification,
         and I understand you may wish to close with a prayer. Am I correct?
5666.                So perhaps I'll close and then we can close formally with a prayer, if
         that's your wish. In another life, that's been my recognition is to open and to
         close. So if it's fine with you, I'd be -- we'd be -- the Panel would be pleased for
         that.
5667.                We would like to acknowledge the information you've shared with it,
         the voices from your heart that you have brought to us today. And I want to
         assure you that what you have shared with us today we will consider and we will
         have -- and we will consider it along with everyone else we will hear and have
         heard already of whether we decide to -- whether or not to recommend approval
         of this project.
5668.                I also recognize before we finish the -- those who have travelled with
         you and the other chiefs and members of the Squamish Nation that you have
         brought with you, and you have travelled, and I wish you all to travel safely home
         back to your communities.
5669.                With that, we are adjourned and we will reconvene at 9:00 a.m. on
         Thursday, November the 13th in Kamloops, British Columbia.
5670.                (Closing prayer)
--- Upon adjourning at 4:43 p.m./L'audience est ajournée à 16h43
Transcript                                                                     Hearing Order OH-001-2014
RATCLIFF & COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r s
:. mhﬂ—ﬁjwf
July 27, 2018 '
File No. 12-0005-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710thAve sw
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File No. 0F—Fac-Oil—T260—2017—10 01 — Hearing Order MH-048-2018
Squamish Nation Written Evidence
We are legal counsel for the Squamish Nation in respect of their intervention in the National
Energy Board (the “Board”) hearing for the Project.
Please ﬁnd enclosed the following evidence of the Squamish Nation to be ﬁled with the Board:
1. Squamish Nation Written Evidence (with appendices); and
2. Squamish Traditional Use and Occupancy Study: F inal Report (redacted).
Yours truly,”
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP
MILH/EEEE'E. BRADLEY
Enclosure
cc. List of Participants
Phone: 504-933-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators, 221 West Esplanade. North Vancouver, BC V7M 3J3

                                                                                                                                          Hearing Order MH-048-2018
                                                                                                                                  File No. OF-Fac-Oil-T260-2017-10 01
                                                                                                                        Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)
                                                                                                                                   Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
                                     Schedule A - Organizational chart for comments on inadequacy of IR responses
                                                                 City of Burnaby’s
                                         Trans Mountain’s         explanation for          Trans Mountain’s response to                 City of Burnaby’s
   IR #            IR Wording
                                          response to IR     claiming IR response to                    Motion                                 reply
                                                                  be inadequate
          Please indicate whether       This request is not Request not addressed.       Questions regarding the pending        The request remains
  1.1 (a)
          Trans Mountain will commit    relevant to the     As acknowledged by the       transaction with the Government        outstanding. Trans Mountain
          to ensuring that all          scope of the        NEB in reference (i) in      of Canada are not relevant to the      does not address whether it
          successor owners of the       Application and is  the IR, there is an          Application or the list of issues set  will make the commitment
          project are bound by Trans    outside the List of existing deal to sell the    out in Hearing Order MH-048-           requested. The City of Burnaby
          Mountain's commitments        Issues in Hearing   Trans Mountain Pipeline      2018 (“List of Issues”) and are thus   relies on its previous
          made during this hearing.     Order MH-048-       system, including the        out of scope. Trans Mountain           submissions for claiming the
                                        2018.               existing Westridge           notes that, in section 6 of the        response is neither full nor
                                        Commitments are     Delivery Line. The ability   Hearing Order, the Board               adequate. The information
                                        typically           of future owners of the      confirmed that “[a]ny order or         sought is both relevant and
                                        incorporated as     pipeline to fulfill the      decision issued by the Board can       necessary to the NEB's review
                                        conditions to a     commitments made by          include conditions. Conditions         of the Project and falls squarely
                                        Board Order or      Trans Mountain in this       outline requirements that a            within the List of Issues to be
                                        Certificate of      hearing, including those     company must meet in relation to       considered in the hearing for
                                        Public              commitments that do          a project. The Board’s standard        the Project.
                                        Convenience and     not form part of the         conditions require companies to
                                        Necessity           conditions for the           implement all of the commitments
                                        (“CPCN”) granted    project, is a critical issue and undertakings that were set
                                        by the Board, who   that needs to be             out in the project application
                                        provides            addressed before this        and/or during the hearing. … All
                                        regulatory          hearing proceeds. There      conditions imposed by the Board
                                        oversight over the  is no point in Burnaby       are enforced pursuant to the NEB
                                        compliance to       seeking commitments          Act.” No further response is
                                        those               from the current             required.
                                        commitments.        pipeline holder, if they
                                        Please also see     will not be operating the
                                        response to         pipeline in the future.
                                                                                                                                                                  1
01539895
                                         Squamish Nation
                                        IR No. 1.2(a).
  1.1 (b) If so, please indicate the    Please see         Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          methods by which Trans        response to City   See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          Mountain will ensure that     of Burnaby         to IR No. 1.1(a).      benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          all successor owners of the   (“Burnaby”) IR No.                        in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          project are bound by Trans    1.1(a).                                   response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          Mountain's commitments                                                  Burnaby IR No. 1.1(a). No further the information provided is full
          made during this hearing.                                               response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                                                                                                    Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                                                                                    submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                    response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                    adequate. The information
                                                                                                                    sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                    necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                    of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                    within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                    considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                    the Project.
  1.1 (c) If Trans Mountain is not      Please see         Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          willing to ensure that all    response to        See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          successor owners of the       Burnaby IR No.     to IR No. 1.1(a).      benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          Trans Mountain pipeline will  1.1(a).                                   in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          be bound by commitments                                                 response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          made during this hearing,                                               Burnaby IR No. 1.1(a). No further the information provided is full
          please indicate whether                                                 response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          Trans Mountain will commit                                                                                Burnaby relies on its previous
          to requesting that the Board                                                                              submissions for claiming the
          adjourn this hearing until                                                                                response is neither full nor
          the purchase of the pipeline                                                                              adequate. The information
          is complete and the new                                                                                   sought is both relevant and
          owner can participate in this                                                                             necessary to the NEB's review
          hearing.                                                                                                  of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                    within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                    considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                    the Project.
                                                                                                                                                      2
01539895
   1.2 (a) If the application to relocate Trans Mountain     Request partially          Trans Mountain’s response is          The request remains
          the existing delivery line is  commits to filing  addressed. Trans           sufficient to address the request.    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          granted, please indicate       an application to  Mountain does not          As described in Trans Mountain’s      does not explain why it refuses
          whether Trans Mountain,        decommission the   explain why it refuses to  IR response, the existing delivery    to commit to filing an
          and its successors, will       existing delivery  commit to filing an        line will operate until the applied-  application to decommission
          commit as a condition of       line at an         application to             for relocated line is                 the existing delivery line six
          relocating the existing        appropriate time   decommission the           commissioned, at which point the      months prior to operational
          delivery line to filing an     prior to the       existing delivery line six relocated line will replace the       service of the new installations
          application to decommission    operational        months prior to            existing line. The decommissioning    for the Trans Mountain
          the existing delivery line six service of the new operational service of     application in relation to the        Expansion Project. The City of
          months prior to operational    installations for  the new installations for  existing line will be the subject of  Burnaby relies on its previous
          service of the new             the Project. The   the Trans Mountain         a separate proceeding, the precise    submissions for claiming the
          installations for the Trans    rationale and the  Expansion Project. Trans   timing of which should not impact     response is neither full nor
          Mountain Expansion             timing of the      Mountain refers to the     the authorization to construct and    adequate. The information
          Project? If not, please        decommissioning    response to IR No. 3 of    commission the relocated line. To     sought is both relevant and
          explain Trans Mountain's       application are    the Board, but in that     be clear, the existing line will not  necessary to the NEB's review
          rational for refusing to do    described in       response Trans             be used once the applied-for          of the Project and falls squarely
          so.                            response to Board  Mountain merely states     delivery line is operational, even if within the List of Issues to be
                                         IR No. 3 (A90591)  that the existing          the decommissioning application       considered in the hearing for
                                         that was           pipeline “is required to   remains outstanding.                  the Project.
                                         submitted to the   continue transportation    The requested information has
                                         Board on March     service until the Trans    been provided and Trans
                                         15, 2018.          Mountain Expansion         Mountain’s response is sufficient.
                                                            Project is                 No further response is required.
                                                            commissioned,
                                                            specifically, until the
                                                            three (3) Westridge
                                                            Delivery Lines (two (2)
                                                            of which are authorized
                                                            pursuant to Certificate
                                                            of Public Convenience
                                                            and Necessity OC-064,
                                                            and one (1) which is the
                                                            subject of the s.58
                                                            Application) are
                                                            commissioned.”
                                                            Burnaby’s request took
                                                            into account Trans
                                                                                                                                                               3
01539895
                                                            Mountain’s need to
                                                           have the existing
                                                           pipeline operational
                                                           until the new
                                                           installations in the
                                                           tunnel are
                                                           commissioned, but also
                                                           allowed the Board to
                                                           start the review of the
                                                           decommissioning of the
                                                           existing pipeline so that
                                                           process may begin in an
                                                           efficient manner once
                                                           the tunnel is
                                                           operational. Yet, Trans
                                                           Mountain does not
                                                           provide an explanation
                                                           of its refusal to apply to
                                                           decommission the
                                                           existing line six months
                                                           prior to operational
                                                           service of the new
                                                           installations in the
                                                           tunnel.
  1.2 (b) Please provide the steps and The steps and       Request not addressed.     The IR is out of scope and,          The request remains
          procedures that Trans        procedures that     The Board did not rule     therefore, the Board would not       outstanding. Trans Mountain
          Mountain, and its            Trans Mountain      that the                   benefit from further information     does not supplement the
          successors, would take to    would take to       decommissioning was        in response to this request. The     original response or provide a
          decommission the existing    decommission the    outside the scope of this  issue of decommissioning the         sufficient explanation of why
          delivery line?               existing delivery   hearing, only that the     existing line is not included in the the information provided is full
                                       line are outside of Board would need           List of Issues. Furthermore, the     and adequate. The City of
                                       the scope of this   information and            Board previously stated that         Burnaby relies on its previous
                                       Application, and    argument on the need       “Trans Mountain has not applied      submissions for claiming the
                                       will be described   to make                    to decommission the existing         response is neither full nor
                                       in a future         decommissioning the        delivery line at this time. Trans    adequate. The information
                                       decommissioning     existing pipeline a        Mountain provided its rationale in   sought is both relevant and
                                       application, as     condition of this          its response to the Board’s IR No.   necessary to the NEB's review
                                       stated in response  application. Trans         4 (A91555). Typically the Board      of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                                                             4
01539895
                                        to Burnaby IR No.   Mountain is best placed   would allow a company to make     within the List of Issues to be
                                       1.2(a), and subject to provide information    any application for               considered in the hearing for
                                       to Board review.    on the steps and          decommissioning or                the Project.
                                                           procedures to             abandonment when the company
                                                           decommission the          deems it appropriate to do so.”1
                                                           existing pipeline and the The Board did not suggest that it
                                                           timelines associated      would consider matters associated
                                                           with those steps and      with decommissioning the existing
                                                           procedures, so that the   delivery line within the scope of
                                                           Board has full            the current Application.
                                                           information before it in  No further response is required.
                                                           order to formulate an
                                                           effective condition.
  1.2 (c) Please indicate whether      Matters             Request not addressed.    The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          Trans Mountain, and its      pertaining to the   See Burnaby response      therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          successors, would make an    future              to IR 1.2(b).             benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          application for              decommissioning                               in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          abandonment as part of the   application are                               response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          decommissioning process?     outside of the                                Burnaby IR No. 1.2(b). No further the information provided is full
                                       scope of this                                 response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                       Application.                                                                    Burnaby relies on its previous
                                       Please see                                                                      submissions for claiming the
                                       response to                                                                     response is neither full nor
                                       Burnaby IR No.                                                                  adequate. The information
                                       1.2(a).                                                                         sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                       necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                       of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                       within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                       considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                       the Project.
  1.2 (d) Please indicate whether      Trans Mountain      Request not addressed.    The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          Trans Mountain, and its      does not have the   Trans Mountain has the    therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          successors, will commit to a authority to        ability to request that   benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          public hearing for the       determine the       the Board subject their   in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          decommissioning and          manner in which     application to a public   response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          abandonment of the           an application is   hearing.                  Burnaby IR No. 1.2(b). No further the information provided is full
          existing delivery line?      considered by the                             response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                       Board. Trans                                                                    Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                                                                                                                         5
01539895
                                          Mountain will                                                                submissions for claiming the
                                         participate in the                                                           response is neither full nor
                                         process                                                                      adequate. The information
                                         determined to be                                                             sought is both relevant and
                                         appropriate by the                                                           necessary to the NEB's review
                                         Board for its                                                                of the Project and falls squarely
                                         assessment of the                                                            within the List of Issues to be
                                         future                                                                       considered in the hearing for
                                         decommissioning                                                              the Project.
                                         application.
  1.2 (e) If the application to relocate The manner in       Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          the existing delivery line is  which the existing See Burnaby response    therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          granted, please indicate       delivery line will  to IR 1.2(b).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          whether Trans Mountain,        be                                         in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          and its successors, will       decommissioned                             response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          commit at this time to         is outside of the                          Burnaby IR No. 1.2(b). No further the information provided is full
          removing the existing          scope of this                              response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          delivery line from the         Application, and                                                             Burnaby relies on its previous
          ground after                   will be detailed in                                                          submissions for claiming the
          decommissioning? If not,       the future                                                                   response is neither full nor
          please explain Trans           decommissioning                                                              adequate. The information
          Mountain's rational for        application.                                                                 sought is both relevant and
          refusing to do so.             Please see                                                                   necessary to the NEB's review
                                         response to                                                                  of the Project and falls squarely
                                         Burnaby IR No.                                                               within the List of Issues to be
                                         1.2(a).                                                                      considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                      the Project.
  1.2 (f) If the application to relocate The extent of, and  Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          the existing delivery line is  the method of       See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          granted, please indicate       remediation         to IR 1.2(b).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          whether Trans Mountain,        associated with                            in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          and its successors, will       the                                        response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          commit at this time to fully   decommissioning                            Burnaby IR No. 1.2(b). No further the information provided is full
          remediating the area of the    of the existing                            response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          existing delivery line,        delivery line is                                                             Burnaby relies on its previous
          including remediation of       outside of the                                                               submissions for claiming the
          sub-surface utilities, assets, scope of this                                                                response is neither full nor
          infrastructure, sediments,     Application, and                                                             adequate. The information
                                                                                                                                                        6
01539895
           soils, other earthen           will be described                                                           sought is both relevant and
          materials, plants and          in a future                                                                 necessary to the NEB's review
          wildlife? If not, please       decommissioning                                                             of the Project and falls squarely
          explain Trans Mountain's       application.                                                                within the List of Issues to be
          rational for refusing to do    Please see                                                                  considered in the hearing for
          so.                            response to                                                                 the Project.
                                         Burnaby IR No.
                                         1.2(a).
  1.2 (g) If the application to relocate Matters            Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          the existing delivery line is  pertaining to      See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          granted, please indicate       consultation and   to IR 1.2(b).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          whether Trans Mountain,        engagement in                             in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          and its successors, will       relation to                               response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          commit to consultation,        remediation of                            Burnaby IR No. 1.2(b). No further the information provided is full
          engagement, and City of        the existing                              response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          Burnaby Information            delivery line area                                                          Burnaby relies on its previous
          Requests to Trans Mountain     are outside of the                                                          submissions for claiming the
          - Westridge Delivery Line      scope of this                                                               response is neither full nor
          Relocation cooperative         Application, and                                                            adequate. The information
          planning with the City of      will be considered                                                          sought is both relevant and
          Burnaby to remediate the       and described in a                                                          necessary to the NEB's review
          existing delivery line area to future                                                                      of the Project and falls squarely
          the standards set by the City  decommissioning                                                             within the List of Issues to be
          of Burnaby? If not, please     application.                                                                considered in the hearing for
          explain Trans Mountain's       Please see                                                                  the Project.
          rational for refusing to do    response to
          so.                            Burnaby IR No.
                                         1.2(a).
  1.2 (h) If the application to relocate Please see         Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          the existing delivery line is  response to        See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          granted, please indicate       Burnaby IR No.     to IR 1.2(b).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          whether Trans Mountain,        1.2(g).                                   in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          and its successors, will                                                 response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          commit to working with the                                               Burnaby IR No. 1.2(b). No further the information provided is full
          City of Burnaby to remove                                                response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          the existing pipeline and                                                                                  Burnaby relies on its previous
          remediate the existing                                                                                     submissions for claiming the
          delivery line area in                                                                                      response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                                                       7
01539895
           compliance with the City of                                                                                          adequate. The information
          Burnaby's bylaws? If not,                                                                                            sought is both relevant and
          please explain Trans                                                                                                 necessary to the NEB's review
          Mountain's rational for                                                                                              of the Project and falls squarely
          refusing to do so.                                                                                                   within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                               considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                               the Project.
  1.2 (i) Please indicate whether       Matters              Request not addressed.       The IR is out of scope and,          The request remains
          Trans Mountain, and its       pertaining to the    See Burnaby response         therefore, the Board would not       outstanding. Trans Mountain
          successors, will commit to    recommissioning      to IR 1.2(b). It is relevant benefit from further information     does not supplement the
          not apply to recommission     of the delivery line to assessing the risks       in response to this request. The     original response or provide a
          the existing delivery line if are outside of the   associated with this         potential future recommissioning     sufficient explanation of why
          the application to relocate   scope of this        application if Trans         of a pipeline that has yet to be     the information provided is full
          the existing delivery line to Application. Such    Mountain plans to            decommissioned is hypothetical,      and adequate. The City of
          the tunnel is granted.        activities would     recommission the             subject to a distinct application    Burnaby relies on its previous
                                        require an           existing line (after a       and approval process, and not        submissions for claiming the
                                        application to the   third pipeline is installed  relevant to the List of Issues. No   response is neither full nor
                                        Board, and subject   in the tunnel),              further response is required.        adequate. The information
                                        to the Board’s       increasing the amount                                             sought is both relevant and
                                        approval.            of product to be                                                  necessary to the NEB's review
                                                             transported through                                               of the Project and falls squarely
                                                             Burnaby with the                                                  within the List of Issues to be
                                                             concomitant increase in                                           considered in the hearing for
                                                             risk.                                                             the Project.
  1.3 (b) Please provide the            The aggregate        Request partially            The IR is out of scope and,          The request remains
          combined total maximum        capacity of the      addressed. The capacity      therefore, the Board would not       outstanding. The ability of the
          capacity of all three         two (2) authorized   of the approved two          benefit from further information     existing two delivery lines to
          pipelines (if approved)       delivery lines are   delivery lines is directly   in response to this request. Details accommodate the capacity of
          through the tunnel.           outside of the       relevant to the need for     regarding the need for the Project   the TMEP is relevant to the
                                        scope of this        the Project – an issue in    were outlined in response to         need for the Project. Trans
                                        Application, and     this hearing.                Burnaby IR No. 1.3(a).               Mountain does not supplement
                                        authorized by                                     CPCN OC-064 lists the various        the original response or
                                        CPCN OC-064.                                      TMEP elements that are permitted     provide a sufficient explanation
                                        Please see                                        under that legal instrument          of why the information
                                        response to                                       (A80871-3). For Burnaby’s            provided is full and adequate.
                                        Burnaby IR No.                                    reference, and in relation to the    The City of Burnaby relies on its
                                        1.3(a). The                                       two (2) delivery lines, the          previous submissions for
                                        maximum                                           authorization is as follows:         claiming the response is
                                                                                                                                                                 8
01539895
          capacity of the           Construct and                neither full nor adequate. The
         relocated delivery        operate two new              information sought is both
         line is                   parallel NPS 30              relevant and necessary to the
         approximately             delivery pipelines           NEB's review of the Project and
         111,290 m3/day            from the Burnaby             falls squarely within the List of
         (700,000                  Terminal to the              Issues to be considered in the
         bbls/day). The            [Westridge Marine            hearing for the Project.
         average                   Terminal]
         throughput rate of As such, the combined capacity of
         the third          the two (2) authorized delivery
         (relocated)        lines is irrelevant to the need for
         delivery line is   the relocation of the existing
         consistent with    delivery line and is not otherwise
         each of the two    relevant to the List of Issues. No
         (2) authorized     further response is required.
         delivery lines,
         which is
         approximately
         33,390 m3/day
         (210,000
         bbls/day). As
         noted in response
         to Board IR No.
         1.93(d.2) in
         proceeding OH-
         001-2014
         (A60392), each
         line will operate
         intermittently,
         and the concept
         of an average
         annual
         (sustainable)
         capacity for each
         line is not
         applicable.
                                                                                                  9
01539895
   1.3 (c) Please provide a comparison   The applied for    Request not addressed.     The IR is out of scope and,         The request remains
          of the combined maximum       capacity of TMEP   The need for the Project   therefore, the Board would not      outstanding. Trans Mountain
          capacity of all three         was informed by    is an issue in this        benefit from further information    does not supplement the
          pipelines through the tunnel  requests from      hearing. The request is    in response to this request. See    original response or provide a
          with (i) the applied for, or  shippers and       directly relevant to that  response to motion regarding        sufficient explanation of why
          approved, capacity with the   includes an        issue and Trans            Burnaby IR No. 1.3(b). No further   the information provided is full
          Trans Mountain Expansion      allowance for spot Mountain has refused to    response is required.               and adequate. The City of
          Project; and (ii) current     capacity, and      provide a response.                                            Burnaby relies on its previous
          committed to capacity from    served to inform                                                                  submissions for claiming the
          shippers.                     the need for the                                                                  response is neither full nor
                                        TMEP in the OH-                                                                   adequate. The information
                                        001-2014                                                                          sought is both relevant and
                                        proceeding, and is                                                                necessary to the NEB's review
                                        outside of the                                                                    of the Project and falls squarely
                                        scope of this                                                                     within the List of Issues to be
                                        Application.                                                                      considered in the hearing for
                                        Please see                                                                        the Project.
                                        response to
                                        Burnaby IR Nos.
                                        1.3(a) and 1.3(b).
  1.3 (d) Please explain why the two    The need for a     Request not addressed.     The IR is out of scope. See         The request remains
          new delivery lines approved   total of three (3) The need for the Project   response to motion regarding        outstanding. Trans Mountain
          by the Trans Mountain         delivery lines was is an issue in this        Burnaby IR No. 1.3(b).              does not supplement the
          Expansion Project with a      described in the   hearing. The request is    The need for a total of three       original response or provide a
          total capacity of 1,400,000   OH-001-2014        directly relevant to that  delivery lines was established in   sufficient explanation of why
          bpd is not sufficient to      proceeding.        issue and Trans            the OH-001-2014 proceeding, and     the information provided is full
          service the increased         Please see         Mountain has refused to    acknowledged in the Board’s         and adequate. The City of
          capacity from the expansion   response to        provide a response. The    Recommendation Report.              Burnaby relies on its previous
          to accommodate the            Burnaby IR Nos.    need for a third NPS 30    However the physical placement      submissions for claiming the
          decommissioning of the        1.3(a) and 1.3(b). pipeline through the       of the existing line was not.       response is neither full nor
          existing pipeline without the                    tunnel was not             Hence, the Board issued Condition   adequate. The information
          need for a third pipeline                        addressed in the NEB       20, which required Trans            sought is both relevant and
          through the tunnel.                              hearing for the Trans      Mountain to file with the Board its necessary to the NEB's review
                                                           Mountain Expansion         decision on whether it intends to   of the Project and falls squarely
                                                           Project. The NEB report    relocate the existing delivery line within the List of Issues to be
                                                           explicitly stated that the to the Burnaby Mountain Tunnel,     considered in the hearing for
                                                           Trans Mountain             details of any required changes to  the Project.
                                                           Expansion Project          the design, construction and
                                                                                                                                                          10
01539895
                                                          application did not      operation of the proposed
                                                         relate to the existing   Burnaby Mountain tunnel, a
                                                         pipeline and that the    discussion of the factors
                                                         installation of a third  considered in deciding to replace /
                                                         pipeline would be part   relocate the existing delivery line,
                                                         of a separate regulatory and an indication of when Trans
                                                         application.             Mountain expects to apply for
                                                                                  Board approval to undertake that
                                                                                  activity. No further response is
                                                                                  required.
  1.3 (e) Please update the evidence  The need for       Request not addressed.   The IR is out of scope and,            The request remains
          with respect to the current TMEP and shipper   See Burnaby response     therefore, the Board would not         outstanding. Trans Mountain
          shipper commitments for     commitments        to IR 1.3(d).            benefit from further information       does not supplement the
          the Trans Mountain pipeline demonstrating                               in response to this request. See       original response or provide a
          system.                     that need are                               response to motion regarding           sufficient explanation of why
                                      outside of the                              Burnaby IR No. 1.3(b). No further      the information provided is full
                                      scope of this                               response is required.                  and adequate. The City of
                                      Application, and                                                                   Burnaby relies on its previous
                                      was established in                                                                 submissions for claiming the
                                      both the RH-001-                                                                   response is neither full nor
                                      2012 proceeding                                                                    adequate. The information
                                      that established                                                                   sought is both relevant and
                                      the toll                                                                           necessary to the NEB's review
                                      methodology for                                                                    of the Project and falls squarely
                                      the TMEP, and the                                                                  within the List of Issues to be
                                      OH-001-2014                                                                        considered in the hearing for
                                      proceeding.                                                                        the Project.
  1.3 (f) Please provide evidence of  The reference to   Request not addressed.   The capacity of the two (2)            The request remains
          shipper commitments or      commitments or     The reference to         authorized delivery lines are          outstanding. Trans Mountain
          demand for 2,100,000 bpd    demand for         2,100,000 bbls/day is    outside the scope of this              does not supplement the
          throughput to the           2,100,000          not incorrect. Based on  proceeding. See response to            original response or provide a
          Westridge Marine Terminal.  bbls/day is        the information          motion regarding Burnaby IR No.        sufficient explanation of why
                                      incorrect. Please  provided by Trans        1.3(b). However, Trans Mountain        the information provided is full
                                      see response to    Mountain, that is the    offers the following for the           and adequate. The City of
                                      Burnaby IR No.     combined total capacity  purpose of clarity.                    Burnaby relies on its previous
                                      1.3(b).            of the three pipelines   2,100,000 bbls/day is the              submissions for claiming the
                                                         through the tunnel (if   combined capacity of all three (3)     response is neither full nor
                                                         approved).               delivery lines if all three lines were adequate. The information
                                                                                                                                                         11
01539895
                                                                                   in continuous service. However       sought is both relevant and
                                                                                  these lines will not be in           necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                  continuous service given that        of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                  these lines will operate             within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                  intermittently. As such, the         considered in the hearing for
                                                                                  concept of an average annual         the Project.
                                                                                  (sustainable) capacity for each line
                                                                                  is not applicable, and does not
                                                                                  reflect the operation of the
                                                                                  delivery lines.
                                                                                  Therefore, Burnaby’s reference to
                                                                                  2,100,000 bbls/day is incorrect,
                                                                                  and does not reflect the
                                                                                  intermittent usage of these lines.
                                                                                  The annualized throughput rate of
                                                                                  the third (relocated) line is
                                                                                  consistent with each of the two (2)
                                                                                  authorized delivery lines, which is
                                                                                  approximately 33,390 m3/day
                                                                                  (210,000 bbls/day).
  1.3 (g) Please provide evidence of Simultaneous       Request not addressed.    The IR is out of scope and,          The request remains
          the demand for three       loading of up to   This request is directly  therefore, the Board would not       outstanding. Trans Mountain
          vessels to be loaded       three (3) vessels  relevant to the need for  benefit from further information     does not supplement the
          simultaneously at the      at the expanded    the Project. The          in response to this request. The     original response or provide a
          Westridge Marine Terminal  Westridge Marine   simultaneous loading of   demand for, sizing of, risks of,     sufficient explanation of why
          as opposed to two with the Terminal was       three vessels (along      environmental impact of, and         the information provided is full
          currently approved         considered in the  with the associated risks operation of the Westridge           and adequate. The City of
          expansion project.         OH-001-2014        and impacts), as          Marine Terminal was addressed in     Burnaby relies on its previous
                                     proceeding, and is justification for a third the OH-001-2014 proceeding, and      submissions for claiming the
                                     outside of the     pipeline through the      authorized by CPCN OC-064. The       response is neither full nor
                                     scope of this      tunnel was not            need for three delivery lines is     adequate. The information
                                     Application.       considered in the OH-     described in response to Burnaby     sought is both relevant and
                                     Please see         001-2014 proceeding.      IR No. 1.3(d), above. No further     necessary to the NEB's review
                                     response to                                  response is required.                of the Project and falls squarely
                                     Burnaby IR Nos.                                                                   within the List of Issues to be
                                     1.3(a) and 1.3(b).                                                                considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                       the Project.
                                                                                                                                                       12
01539895
   1.3 (h) Please explain why a two       Please see         Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          simultaneous vessel loading    response to        See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          schedule cannot be             Burnaby IR No.     to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          accommodated.                  1.3(g).                                   in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
                                                                                   response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
                                                                                   Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
                                                                                   response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                                                                                                     Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                                                                                     submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                     response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                     adequate. The information
                                                                                                                     sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                     necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                     of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                     within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                     considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                     the Project.
  1.3 (i) Please provide an              Risks associated   Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          assessment of the increased    with the loading   See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          risks of loading three vessels activity at the    to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          simultaneously, including:     expanded                                  in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          i. increased spill risk;       Westridge Marine                          response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          ii. increased risk of human    Terminal were                             Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
               error; and                considered in the                         response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          iii. increased risk of         OH-001-2014                                                                 Burnaby relies on its previous
               incident escalation or    proceeding, and is                                                          submissions for claiming the
               domino effect             outside of the                                                              response is neither full nor
                                         scope of this                                                               adequate. The information
                                         Application.                                                                sought is both relevant and
                                         Please see                                                                  necessary to the NEB's review
                                         response to                                                                 of the Project and falls squarely
                                         Burnaby IR Nos.                                                             within the List of Issues to be
                                         1.3(a) and 1.3(b).                                                          considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                     the Project.
                                                                                                                                                     13
01539895
   1.3 (j) Please indicate whether the Matters            Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          boom around the Westridge   pertaining to      See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          Marine Terminal can handle  incident response  to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          a spill from three tankers  at Westridge                              in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          simultaneously when         Marine Terminal                           response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          loading at the Westridge    were considered                           Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
          Marine Terminal.            in the OH-001-                            response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                      2014 proceeding,                                                            Burnaby relies on its previous
                                      and are outside of                                                          submissions for claiming the
                                      the scope of this                                                           response is neither full nor
                                      Application.                                                                adequate. The information
                                      Please see                                                                  sought is both relevant and
                                      response to                                                                 necessary to the NEB's review
                                      Burnaby IR Nos.                                                             of the Project and falls squarely
                                      1.3(a) and 1.3(b).                                                          within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                  considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                  the Project.
  1.3 (k) Please indicate the         Please see         Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          maximum capacity spill that response to        See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          the boom at the Westridge   Burnaby IR No. 1.3 to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          Marine Terminal can         (j).                                      in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          contain.                                                              response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
                                                                                Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
                                                                                response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                                                                                                  Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                                                                                  submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                  response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                  adequate. The information
                                                                                                                  sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                  necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                  of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                  within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                  considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                  the Project.
  1.3 (l) Please provide an           The                Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          environmental impact        environmental      See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          assessment for the loading  impact             to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          of three vessel             assessment in the                         in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
                                                                                                                                                  14
01539895
           simultaneously at the         OH-001-2014                               response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          Westridge Marine Terminal,    proceeding                                Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
          including consideration of    included an                               response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          the impacts to:               assessment of                                                               Burnaby relies on its previous
          i. harbour traffic in         vessel loading                                                              submissions for claiming the
               Burrard Inlet, including activities at the                                                           response is neither full nor
               the use of small boats,  expanded                                                                    adequate. The information
               kayaks or canoes near    Westridge Marine                                                            sought is both relevant and
               the Westridge Marine     Terminal, and is                                                            necessary to the NEB's review
               Terminal;                outside of the                                                              of the Project and falls squarely
          ii. marine animals;           scope of this                                                               within the List of Issues to be
          iii. marine environment;      Application.                                                                considered in the hearing for
          iv. shoreline; and            Please see                                                                  the Project.
          v. ambient noise.             response to
                                        Burnaby IR Nos.
                                        1.3(a) and 1.3(b).
  1.3 (m) Please indicate whether the   The expansion of   Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          Westridge Marine Terminal     Westridge Marine   See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          will have loading arms to     Terminal,          to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          load three vessels            including the                             in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          simultaneously to serve the   number of loading                         response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          third pipeline through the    arms, was                                 Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
          tunnel.                       considered in the                         response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                        OH-001-2014                                                                 Burnaby relies on its previous
                                        proceeding, and is                                                          submissions for claiming the
                                        outside of the                                                              response is neither full nor
                                        scope of this                                                               adequate. The information
                                        Application.                                                                sought is both relevant and
                                        Please see                                                                  necessary to the NEB's review
                                        response to                                                                 of the Project and falls squarely
                                        Burnaby IR Nos.                                                             within the List of Issues to be
                                        1.3(a) and 1.3(g).                                                          considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                    the Project.
                                                                                                                                                    15
01539895
   1.3 (n) Please provide evidence of   The loading of     Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          how the Westridge Marine     vessels was        See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          Terminal will accommodate    considered in the  to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          three vessels loading        OH-001-2014                               in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          simultaneously, including    proceeding, and is                        response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          detailed drawings, plans and outside of the                            Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
          schematics.                  scope of this                             response is required.             and adequate. The City of
                                       Application.                                                                Burnaby relies on its previous
                                       Please see                                                                  submissions for claiming the
                                       response to                                                                 response is neither full nor
                                       Burnaby IR Nos.                                                             adequate. The information
                                       1.3(a) and 1.3(b).                                                          sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                   necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                   of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                   within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                   considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                   the Project.
  1.3 (o) Please indicate whether      Please see         Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          Trans Mountain will commit   response to        See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          to taking a precautionary    Burnaby IR No.     to IR 1.3(g).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          approach and only load one   1.3(n).                                   in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
          vessel at a time to reduce                                             response to motion regarding      sufficient explanation of why
          spill risk. If not, please                                             Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further the information provided is full
          explain Trans Mountain's                                               response is required.             and adequate. The City of
          rational for refusing to do                                                                              Burnaby relies on its previous
          so.                                                                                                      submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                   response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                   adequate. The information
                                                                                                                   sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                   necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                   of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                   within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                   considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                   the Project.
  1.3 (p) Please provide evidence of   Matters            Request not addressed. The IR is out of scope and,       The request remains
          the costs savings in         pertaining to the  See Burnaby response   therefore, the Board would not    outstanding. Trans Mountain
          decommissioning the          decommissioning    to IR 1.2(b).          benefit from further information  does not supplement the
          existing pipeline and only   of the existing                           in response to this request. See  original response or provide a
                                                                                                                                                   16
01539895
           having two pipelines          delivery line are                             response to motion regarding       sufficient explanation of why
          through the Burnaby           outside of the                                Burnaby IR Nos. 1.2(b) and 1.3(d). the information provided is full
          Mountain tunnel.              scope of this                                 No further response is required.   and adequate. The City of
                                        Application.                                                                     Burnaby relies on its previous
                                        Consideration of                                                                 submissions for claiming the
                                        not proceeding                                                                   response is neither full nor
                                        with the                                                                         adequate. The information
                                        relocation of the                                                                sought is both relevant and
                                        delivery line is                                                                 necessary to the NEB's review
                                        contrary to the                                                                  of the Project and falls squarely
                                        intent of this                                                                   within the List of Issues to be
                                        Application.                                                                     considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                         the Project.
  1.3 (q) Please indicate whether the   Please see           Request not addressed.   The IR is out of scope and,        The request remains
          financial viability of the    response to          See Burnaby response     therefore, the Board would not     outstanding. Trans Mountain
          Trans Mountain Expansion      Burnaby IR Nos.      to IR 1.2(b). The need   benefit from further information   does not supplement the
          Project would be impacted     1.3 (n) and 1.3 (p). for this Project is an   in response to this request. See   original response or provide a
          by having only two vessels                         issue in this hearing.   response to motion regarding       sufficient explanation of why
          loaded simultaneously as                           Burnaby and the Board    Burnaby IR No. 1.3(g). No further  the information provided is full
          opposed to three at the                            need to know the         response is required.              and adequate. The City of
          Westridge Marine Terminal                          impacts, if any, if the                                     Burnaby relies on its previous
          if the existing line was not                       Project is not approved                                     submissions for claiming the
          relocated and was                                  and if only two delivery                                    response is neither full nor
          decommissioned.                                    lines are operational in                                    adequate. The information
                                                             Burnaby. This is an                                         sought is both relevant and
                                                             important risk reduction                                    necessary to the NEB's review
                                                             measure that must be                                        of the Project and falls squarely
                                                             considered in this                                          within the List of Issues to be
                                                             hearing.                                                    considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                         the Project.
  1.4 (b) Please provide the evidence   Please see           Request not addressed.   The rationale for the upsizing of  The request remains
          to support the                response to          The response to          the delivery line was provided in  outstanding. Trans Mountain
          determination that the        Burnaby IR No.       Burnaby IR No. 1.3(b)    response to Burnaby IR No. 1.4(a). does not supplement the
          existing NPS 24 pipeline      1.3(b).              does not address this    Trans Mountain’s response is       original response or provide a
          should be upgraded to an                           request, but only        sufficient to address the request. sufficient explanation of why
          NPS 30 pipeline if relocated                       confirms that the annual No further response is required.   the information provided is full
          to the tunnel, given that the                      average throughput                                          and adequate. Trans Mountain
          annual average throughput                          would be only 210,000                                       has not provided the requested
                                                                                                                                                         17
01539895
           would be only 210,000                           bbl/d. This request                                            evidence. The City of Burnaby
          bbl/d.                                          remains outstanding                                            relies on its previous
                                                          and Trans Mountain has                                         submissions for claiming the
                                                          not provided any                                               response is neither full nor
                                                          justification for refusing                                     adequate. The information
                                                          to provide a response.                                         sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                         necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                         of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                         within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                         considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                         the Project.
  1.4 (d) Please confirm whether       Please see         Request not addressed.     Trans Mountain’s response is        The request remains
          Trans Mountain intends to    response to        The response to            sufficient to address the request.  outstanding. Trans Mountain
          increase the capacity of the Burnaby IR No.     Burnaby IR No. 1.4(a)      As described in response to         still does not quantify the
          products to be shipped       1.4(a).            does not address the       Burnaby IR No. 1.4(a), the purpose  increase in capacity of products
          through the NPS 30 pipeline                     question concerning        of the increase in the size of the  to be shipped through the NPS
          from the existing NPS 24                        increase in capacity of    relocated delivery line is for the  30 pipeline (given that the lines
          pipeline. If so, please                         the products to be         purpose of operational efficiency   will be used interchangeably)
          quantify the increase in                        shipped through the        and interchangeability, and to      or justify the need “for an
          capacity.                                       NPS 30 pipeline from       allow for an equivalent capacity of equivalent capacity of 700,000
                                                          the existing NPS 24        700,000 bbls/day in heavy oil       bbls/day in heavy oil service.”
                                                          pipeline.                  service, equivalent to the two (2)  The City of Burnaby relies on its
                                                                                     authorized delivery lines. No       previous submissions for
                                                                                     further response is required.       claiming the response is
                                                                                                                         neither full nor adequate. The
                                                                                                                         information sought is both
                                                                                                                         relevant and necessary to the
                                                                                                                         NEB's review of the Project and
                                                                                                                         falls squarely within the List of
                                                                                                                         Issues to be considered in the
                                                                                                                         hearing for the Project.
  1.5 (a) Please indicate whether      Trans Mountain     Request not addressed.     The results of Trans Mountain’s     The request remains
          Trans Mountain has           has assessed the   Trans Mountain does        risk assessment for the three       outstanding. Trans Mountain
          assessed the specific risks  risks associated   not provide the            delivery lines within the tunnel    has not assessed the specific
          (as opposed to risk          with the relocated information requested      were provided in reference i) to    risks associated with the
          frequencies) of locating a   delivery line      or a justification for not the IR (see Trans Mountain’s        tunnel. Trans Mountain does
          third pipeline in close      consistent with    providing the              response to NEB IR No. 4.3          not supplement the original
          proximity to the two         the requirements   information requested.     [A91555]). The methodology that     response or provide a sufficient
                                                                                                                                                           18
01539895
           approved pipelines and the of Board            Condition 15 did not     was applied is consistent with that explanation of why the
          consequent decrease in     Condition 15 for    relate to the relocation which was used for the Pipeline     information provided is full and
          pipeline spacing. If so,   TMEP (A90803),      of the pipeline to the   Risk Assessment filed with the      adequate. The City of Burnaby
          please provide evidence of which is beyond     tunnel. In any event,    Board pursuant to Condition 15.     relies on its previous
          those risks.               the requirements    other NEB conditions     The consideration of the “domino”   submissions for claiming the
                                     of the Board’s      (for example Condition   effect as required by Condition 22, response is neither full nor
                                     Filing Manual for   22) require the          has application to the Edmonton     adequate. The information
                                     applications made   assessment of the        Terminal West Tank Area, the        sought is both relevant and
                                     under section 58    domino effect of         Sumas Terminal and the Burnaby      necessary to the NEB's review
                                     of the National     releases and the         Terminal, and as the wording of     of the Project and falls squarely
                                     Energy Board Act    cumulative risk. At no   Condition 22 states, is caused by a within the List of Issues to be
                                     (“NEB Act”).        point has Trans          release of the contents of one      considered in the hearing for
                                                         Mountain assessed the    tank on other tanks within the      the Project.
                                                         risk associated with the terminal’s common impoundment
                                                         decrease in pipeline     area(s), or other tanks in adjacent
                                                         spacing.                 areas. As such, consideration of
                                                                                  the domino effect has no
                                                                                  application to the risk of the
                                                                                  relocated delivery line.
                                                                                  The requested information has
                                                                                  been provided and Trans
                                                                                  Mountain’s response is sufficient.
                                                                                  No further response is required.
  1.5 (b) Please provide the steps   The inherent risk   Request not addressed.   It is important to note that the    The request remains
          that Trans Mountain has    mitigations in      Trans Mountain does      portion of the relocated delivery   outstanding. Trans Mountain
          taken or proposes to take  relation to all     not provide the steps    line located in the tunnel has      does not supplement the
          with respect to the        three delivery      that Trans Mountain has  additional mitigation relative to a original response or provide a
          relocation of the existing lines in the tunnel taken to reduce risk to  traditionally trenched installation sufficient explanation of why
          pipeline to the tunnel to  including the       ALARP. The information   due to secondary containment of     the information provided is full
          reduce risk to As Low As   relocated delivery  requested is not found   the tunnel and the tunnel backfill. and adequate. The City of
          Reasonably Practicable.    line are described  in the response to Board The relocated delivery line is      Burnaby relies on its previous
                                     in response to      IR No. 62.1 or in        located away from and in a          submissions for claiming the
                                     Board IR No. 62.1   response to Board IR     manner that will reduce the         response is neither full nor
                                     in relation to      No. 4.3.                 potential of third-party damage.    adequate. The information
                                     Board Condition                              External leak detection will be     sought is both relevant and
                                     15 (A90803).                                 installed in a manner described in  necessary to the NEB's review
                                     Updated failure                              response to Burnaby IR No. 1.9.     of the Project and falls squarely
                                     frequencies                                  The requested information has       within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                                                      19
01539895
                                        including the                               been provided and Trans            considered in the hearing for
                                       relocated delivery                          Mountain’s response is sufficient. the Project.
                                       line was provided                           No further response is required.
                                       in response to
                                       Board IR No. 4.3
                                       (A91555).
  1.5 (d) Please provide an            Trans Mountain     Request partially        Trans Mountain suspects that       The request remains
          explanation for how a leak   described          addressed. The           “prepared” in Burnaby’s            outstanding. Trans Mountain
          from the third pipeline in   anomaly repair     response to Action 11    explanation was intended to be     does not address how leaks will
          the tunnel will be repaired. techniques that    does not address how     “repaired”.                        be repaired that do not occur
                                       are being          leaks will be prepared   All available information in       at the entrances to the tunnel.
                                       considered in      that do not occur at the relation to the IR has been        The City of Burnaby relies on its
                                       response to        entrances to the tunnel. provided and Trans Mountain’s      previous submissions for
                                       Action 11 as a     Trans Mountain only      response is sufficient in the      claiming the response is
                                       result of a Board  notes that “procedures   circumstances. The likelihood of a neither full nor adequate. The
                                       Technical          would be developed and   pipeline leak occurring from the   information sought is both
                                       Conference in      tested to perform an     third delivery line is low given   relevant and necessary to the
                                       relation to the    internal weld repair of  Trans Mountain’s preventative      NEB's review of the Project and
                                       Burnaby            the anomaly.”            approach to ensure the integrity   falls squarely within the List of
                                       Mountain Tunnel.                            of the delivery lines prior to     Issues to be considered in the
                                       Those repair                                backfill, maintaining the delivery hearing for the Project.
                                       techniques would                            lines during operations, and the
                                       also have                                   significant safety factor afforded
                                       application for a                           through the low operating
                                       leak repair.                                pressure relative to the SMYS and
                                       Please see Trans                            no pressure cycling induced crack
                                       Mountain                                    growth. No further response from
                                       response to                                 Trans Mountain is required.
                                       Action 11
                                       (A92235).
                                       It is important to
                                       note, and
                                       referenced in the
                                       Board Condition
                                       26 compliance
                                       filings and
                                       response to
                                       Action 11, Trans
                                                                                                                                                        20
01539895
          Mountain will
         take a proactive
         approach to the
         prevention of
         anomalies prior to
         backfill
         installation and
         during operations:
         -        Prior to
         backfill
         installation:
         undertaking visual
         inspection of the
         delivery line for
         any evidence of
         mechanical
         damage, holiday
         testing of
         coatings, and in-
         line inspections
         (“ILI”) with a
         combination of
         high resolution
         magnetic flux
         leakage and
         geometry tool
         technologies, and
         hydrostatic
         testing.
         -        During
         operations: the
         delivery line will
         be monitored and
         inspected in
         accordance with
         the Trans
         Mountain
         Integrity
                            21
01539895
          Management
         Program (“IMP”).
         The focus of the
         IMP is to
         proactively
         monitor pipelines
         for all threats and
         to take action to
         prevent the
         growth of any
         anomalies before
         they present a risk
         of failure. The
         IMP will require
         various ILI tools to
         be run every five
         (5) years.
         Preventative
         actions planned
         during operations
         include regular
         cleaning pig runs
         to mobilize any
         deposits within
         the delivery line
         to prevent
         internal corrosion,
         and impressed
         current cathodic
         protection, which,
         combined with
         high performance
         coatings, will
         prevent external
         corrosion.
         It is also
         important to note
         that the maximum
                              22
01539895
                                      operating
                                     pressure of the
                                     relocated delivery
                                     line is less than 25
                                     percent of the
                                     pressure at its
                                     specified
                                     minimum yield
                                     strength (SMYS),
                                     providing a large
                                     safety factor and
                                     assurance of no
                                     pressure cycling
                                     induced crack
                                     growth.
  1.5 (e) Please provide an          Maintenance or       Request not addressed.    All available information in       The request remains
          assessment of the risk to  repairs              Trans Mountain does       relation to the IR has been        outstanding. Trans Mountain
          damaging the two approved  undertaken on the    not provide the           provided and Trans Mountain‘s      does not supplement the
          pipelines in the tunnel if relocated delivery   information requested     response is sufficient in the      original response or provide a
          maintenance or repairs are line will take place or provide an             circumstances. The likelihood of   sufficient explanation of why
          required for the third     in the manner        explanation for not       having to conduct an excavation is the information provided is full
          pipeline.                  described in         providing that            low. Please see response to        and adequate. The City of
                                     response to          information. For          Burnaby IR 1.5(d).                 Burnaby relies on its previous
                                     Action 11 as         example, one of the       However, any disturbance for the   submissions for claiming the
                                     referenced in        repair techniques Trans   purpose of repair must adhere to   response is neither full nor
                                     response to          Mountain suggests         the requirements of Trans          adequate. The information
                                     Burnaby IR No.       involves “excavation      Mountain’s Damage Prevention       sought is both relevant and
                                     1.5(d), and in       from the ground surface   Program, which is in accordance    necessary to the NEB's review
                                     accordance with      down to the tunnel in     with the Board’s requirements as   of the Project and falls squarely
                                     Trans Mountain’s     locations where the       set out in the National Energy     within the List of Issues to be
                                     Damage               tunnel depth is 20 m or   Board Pipeline Damage Prevention   considered in the hearing for
                                     Prevention           less, and cut an entry    Regulations – Obligations of       the Project.
                                     Program, which       shaft into the tunnel     Pipeline Companies.
                                     prevents damage      casing in order to access
                                     to buried utilities, the lines, and complete
                                     including adjacent   a conventional repair
                                     pipelines owned      such as sleeve
                                     by Trans             installation or cut-out
                                                                                                                                                       23
01539895
                                          Mountain.          and
                                                            Replacement.” Trans
                                                            Mountain does not
                                                            provide any information
                                                            on the risk such a repair
                                                            technique would have
                                                            on the other pipelines in
                                                            the tunnel, particularly if
                                                            the pipeline spacing is
                                                            decreased with the
                                                            addition of a third
                                                            pipeline.
  1.5 (f) Please confirm that            Not confirmed.     Request partially           The information requested in the   The request remains
          maintenance or repairs to      Please see         addressed. Trans            IR has been provided and Trans     outstanding. Trans Mountain
          the pipeline will not be able  response to        Mountain notes that the     Mountain’s response is sufficient. does not supplement the
          to be undertaken in the        Burnaby IR No.     “IMP will require various   Burnaby has failed to demonstrate  original response or provide a
          tunnel after it is backfilled  1.5(d).            ILI tools to be run every   otherwise. No further response is  sufficient explanation of why
          with concrete.                                    five (5) years”, but does   required.                          the information provided is full
                                                            not indicate what those                                        and adequate. The City of
                                                            tools will be.                                                 Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                                                                                           submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                           response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                           adequate. The information
                                                                                                                           sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                           necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                           of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                           within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                           considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                           the Project.
  1.5 (g) Please provide the lifespan    To clarify, the    Request partially           The information requested in the   The request remains
          of a pipeline transporting     relocated delivery addressed. Trans            IR has been provided and Trans     outstanding. Trans Mountain
          the products proposed to be    line in the tunnel Mountain does not           Mountain‘s response is sufficient. does not supplement the
          put through the third          is subject to      provide the various         The response provides the Board    original response or provide a
          pipeline in the tunnel that is routine            lifespans requested.        with all necessary information     sufficient explanation of why
          not subject to maintenance,    maintenance as                                 pertaining to this matter, and     the information provided is full
          including the:                 stated in response                             supplementing the original         and adequate. The City of
          i. manufacturer's              to Burnaby IR No.                              response will not serve any        Burnaby relies on its previous
               recommended lifespan;     1.5(d). The design                             purpose. No further response is    submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                                                           24
01539895
           ii.  Trans Mountain's asset     life of the delivery                            required.                           response is neither full nor
               management expected        line is 100 years.                                                                  adequate. The information
               lifespan; and                                                                                                  sought is both relevant and
          iii. the actual lifespan of                                                                                         necessary to the NEB's review
               the same or similarly                                                                                          of the Project and falls squarely
               categorized or                                                                                                 within the List of Issues to be
               manufactured pipelines                                                                                         considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                              the Project.
  1.5 (i) If there is a leak in the third Please see           Request partially          See response to motion regarding    The request remains
          pipeline, how will Trans        response to          addressed. Trans           Burnaby IR No. 1.5(d). No further   outstanding. Trans Mountain
          Mountain access the leak?       Burnaby IR No.       Mountain does not          response is required.               does not supplement the
                                          1.5(d).              specify in the response                                        original response or provide a
                                                               to IR 1.5(d) how a leak                                        sufficient explanation of why
                                                               will be accessed that                                          the information provided is full
                                                               does not occur near                                            and adequate. The City of
                                                               either end of the                                              Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                               pipeline.                                                      submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                              response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                              adequate. The information
                                                                                                                              sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                              necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                              of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                              within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                              considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                              the Project.
  1.5 (j) If there is a leak in the third Information on       Request not addressed.     Trans Mountain suspects that        The request remains
          pipeline, will Trans            protocols/mitigati   Trans Mountain does        “tunnel” in Burnaby’s explanation   outstanding. Trans Mountain
          Mountain have to damage         on measures to be    not provide a response     was intended to be “delivery line”. does not indicate whether it
          the Burnaby Mountain            utilized in the      to the request. Trans      The likelihood of having to         would have to damage the
          conservation area to access     unlikely event of a  Mountain’s response to     conduct an excavation is low.       Burnaby Mountain
          the leak?                       leak of any of the   Action 11 contemplates     Please see response to motion       Conservation Area in the event
                                          delivery lines in    “excavation from the       regarding Burnaby IR No. 1.5(d).    of a leak in the third pipeline.
                                          the tunnel were      ground surface down to     This request is premature. Trans    This request is directly relevant
                                          presented in the     the tunnel” in the event   Mountain is not in a position to    to the impacts of the Project
                                          OH-001-2014          of a leak. Burnaby         provide information as to whether   and the ability to respond to
                                          proceeding,          requests more              a leak in the third delivery line   spills from the Project. The City
                                          specifically in      information on whether     could require excavation in the     of Burnaby relies on its
                                          response to          a leak in the third tunnel Burnaby Mountain Conservation       previous submissions for
                                                                                                                                                               25
01539895
                                           NRCan IR No.      could require excavation Area (“BMCA”). Trans Mountain is claiming the response is
                                          2.119 (A66133).   of the Burnaby           exploring opportunities to conduct neither full nor adequate.
                                          Further, and      Mountain Conservation    non-invasive repairs, and will
                                          pursuant to Board Area.                    direct efforts in a manner to avoid
                                          Condition 125,                             sensitive areas such as the BMCA.
                                          Trans Mountain                             In addition, as the specific
                                          will file an                               circumstances of a potential leak
                                          emergency                                  are unknown, the details of the
                                          response plan at                           response measures cannot be
                                          least six (6)                              defined at this stage. Emergency
                                          months prior to                            response plans are currently
                                          commencing                                 under development, and will be
                                          operations. The                            filed with the Board six (6) months
                                          emergency                                  prior to commencing operations.
                                          response plan is                           The requested information has
                                          currently being                            been provided and Trans
                                          developed and                              Mountain’s response is sufficient.
                                          will include                               No further response is required.
                                          locations of
                                          control points,
                                          and tactical
                                          response
                                          measures. These
                                          same measures,
                                          protocols and
                                          response plans
                                          apply equally to
                                          the Project.
  1.5 (k) If there is a leak in the third Please see        Request not addressed.   See response to motion regarding    The request remains
          pipeline, please list all       response to       See Burnaby response     Burnaby IR No. 1.5(j). In addition, outstanding. Trans Mountain
          possible damage or impacts      Burnaby IR No.    to IR 1.5(j).            the request for a list of “all      does not supplement the
          that may occur to:              1.5(j).                                    possible damage or impacts that     original response or provide a
          i. the Burnaby Mountain                                                    may occur” is overly broad,         sufficient explanation of why
               Conservation Area;                                                    requires speculation and places an  the information provided is full
          ii. properties near to or                                                  unfair burden on the proponent.     and adequate. The City of
               adjacent to the leak or                                               Trans Mountain’s response           Burnaby relies on its previous
               tunnel; and                                                           provides the Board with all         submissions for claiming the
          iii. other locations or                                                    necessary information pertaining    response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                                                        26
01539895
                  areas that may be used                                                    to this matter. No further       adequate. The information
                 to access the leak or                                                     response is required.            sought is both relevant and
                 repair the leak.                                                                                           necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                            of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                            within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                            considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                            the Project.
  1.5 (l) Is it possible to replace the    The potential        Request not addressed.     Requests regarding damage repair The request remains
          pipeline in the tunnel, if it is replacement of       The ability to replace     have been adequately addressed.  outstanding. Trans Mountain
          damaged, or once it reaches      the relocated        the pipeline in the event  See responses to motion          does not supplement the
          the end of its lifespan? If so,  delivery line is not of damage or if it         regarding Burnaby IR Nos. 1.5(d) original response or provide a
          how?                             contemplated in      reaches the end of its     and 1.5(j). Trans Mountain’s     sufficient explanation of why
                                           this Application,    lifespan is relevant to    response provides the Board with the information provided is full
                                           nor is it required   issues 4, 6, 8 and 9 in    all necessary information        and adequate. The City of
                                           by the Board’s       this hearing. In addition, pertaining to this matter. No    Burnaby relies on its previous
                                           Filing Manual for    it is relevant to any      further response is required.    submissions for claiming the
                                           applications made    conditions that may be                                      response is neither full nor
                                           under Section 58     imposed on approval                                         adequate. The information
                                           of the NEB Act.      (issue 10).                                                 sought is both relevant and
                                           Trans Mountain’s                                                                 necessary to the NEB's review
                                           focus and efforts                                                                of the Project and falls squarely
                                           will be on                                                                       within the List of Issues to be
                                           preventative                                                                     considered in the hearing for
                                           maintenance as                                                                   the Project.
                                           described in
                                           response to
                                           Burnaby IR No.
                                           1.5(d). Trans
                                           Mountain is
                                           committed to the
                                           safe operation of
                                           the relocated
                                           delivery line in a
                                           manner that
                                           promotes the
                                           safety and
                                           security of the
                                           public and the
                                                                                                                                                            27
01539895
                                        protection of the
                                       environment.
  1.6 (a) What products would be       The products to     Request not addressed.      It would be premature to require    The request remains
          shipped in the upgraded      be shipped on the   The nature and              Trans Mountain to provide this      outstanding. Trans Mountain
          NPS 30 pipeline? Please      relocated delivery  properties of the           information given that the specific does not supplement the
          include the products' name,  line are subject to products to be shipped      products to be shipped are not      original response or provide a
          synonym, and CAS No.         the Trans           in the pipeline if it is    known at this time. The             sufficient explanation of why
                                       Mountain            relocated to the tunnel,    Commodity Approval Process          the information provided is full
                                       Commodity           as compared to the          document linked in the IR           and adequate. The City of
                                       Approval Process.   products currently          response includes a list of         Burnaby relies on its previous
                                       https://www.kind    shipped through the         Commodity Test Data                 submissions for claiming the
                                       ermorgan.com/co     existing pipeline are       Requirements on page 5, where       response is neither full nor
                                       ntent/docs/Comm     relevant to the potential   certain minimum requirements        adequate. The information
                                       odity_Approval_Pr   impacts and effects of      are provided under the column       sought is both relevant and
                                       ocess_Issue_6.pdf   this application (issues    labelled “Satisfaction”.            necessary to the NEB's review
                                       ]. Specific         3, 4, 8, 9 and 10). This is Trans Mountain’s response is        of the Project and falls squarely
                                       products would      critical information that   sufficient. No further response is  within the List of Issues to be
                                       not be known at     Trans Mountain is           required.                           considered in the hearing for
                                       this time.          refusing to provide.                                            the Project.
                                                           Trans Mountain
                                                           provided some
                                                           information on the
                                                           products in OH-001-
                                                           2014, but has not
                                                           provided any
                                                           justification for why that
                                                           information is not
                                                           available for this
                                                           pipeline.
  1.6 (b) What are the properties of   Please see          Request not addressed.      See response to motion regarding    The request remains
          the crude oils to be shipped response to         See Burnaby response        Burnaby IR No. 1.6(a). Trans        outstanding. Trans Mountain
          in the upgraded NPS 30       Burnaby IR No.      to IR 1.6(a).               Mountain submits that the           does not supplement the
          pipeline?                    1.6(a).                                         request is premature given that     original response or provide a
                                                                                       the specific products to be         sufficient explanation of why
                                                                                       shipped are not known at this       the information provided is full
                                                                                       time. Trans Mountain’s response     and adequate. The City of
                                                                                                                                                           28
01539895
                                                                                    is sufficient. No further response is Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                                                   required.                             submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                         response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                         adequate. The information
                                                                                                                         sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                         necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                         of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                         within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                         considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                         the Project.
  1.6 (c) How will the products to be Please see         Request not addressed.    See response to motion regarding The request remains
          shipped in the upgraded     response to        See Burnaby response      Burnaby IR No. 1.6(a). Trans          outstanding. Trans Mountain
          NPS 30 pipeline differ from Burnaby IR No.     to IR 1.6(a).             Mountain submits that the             does not supplement the
          the products shipped in the 1.4(a).                                      request is premature given that       original response or provide a
          NPS 24 pipeline?                                                         the specific products to be           sufficient explanation of why
                                                                                   shipped are not known at this         the information provided is full
                                                                                   time. Trans Mountain’s response       and adequate. The City of
                                                                                   is sufficient. No further response is Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                                                   required.                             submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                         response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                         adequate. The information
                                                                                                                         sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                         necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                         of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                         within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                         considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                         the Project.
  1.6 (d) Has Trans Mountain          Yes. Trans         Request not addressed.    The requested information has         The request remains
          accounted for the potential Mountain has       Trans Mountain does       been provided and Trans               outstanding. Trans Mountain
          increase in heavy crude to  accounted for the  not answer the question   Mountain’s response is sufficient. does not supplement the
          be transported through the  relocated delivery asked. Burnaby asked      In response to Board IR No. 4.3       original response or provide a
          upgraded NPS 30 pipeline in line in its risk   whether Trans             (A91555), Trans Mountain              sufficient explanation of why
          its risk assessment for the assessment as      Mountain had              provided an updated risk              the information provided is full
          relocation of the Westridge provided in        accounted for the         assessment for the delivery lines     and adequate. Trans
          Delivery Line? If so, how?  response to Board  increase in heavy crude   that reflects the addition of a third Mountain’s risk assessment
                                      IR No. 4.3         to be transported         delivery pipeline.                    does not account for the
                                      (A91555).          through the delivery line The response provides the Board       increase in heavy crude to be
                                                         not the relocated         with all necessary information        transported through the third
                                                                                                                                                         29
01539895
                                                          delivery line. Trans        pertaining to this matter. No      delivery line. The City of
                                                         Mountain’s risk             further response is required.      Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                         assessment does not                                            submissions for claiming the
                                                         explicitly account for the                                     response is neither full nor
                                                         increase in heavy crude                                        adequate. The information
                                                         with the concomitant                                           sought is both relevant and
                                                         risks acknowledged by                                          necessary to the NEB's review
                                                         the Board in the report                                        of the Project and falls squarely
                                                         in OH-001-2014.                                                within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                        considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                        the Project.
  1.6 (e) Has Trans Mountain          The emergency      Request not addressed.      The IR is out of scope and,        The request remains
          accounted for the potential response plan for  Emergency response          therefore, the Board would not     outstanding. Trans Mountain
          increase in heavy crude to  the Westridge      measures for the            benefit from further information   does not supplement the
          be transported through the  Marine Terminal is pipeline if it is relocated in response to this request. No    original response or provide a
          upgraded NPS 30 pipeline in outside of the     to the tunnel and the       further response is required.      sufficient explanation of why
          its emergency response      scope of this      increase in heavy crude                                        the information provided is full
          measures at the Westridge   Application, and   through the tunnel are                                         and adequate. The City of
          Marine Terminal? If so,     will be filed with directly relevant to this                                      Burnaby relies on its previous
          how?                        the Board at least hearing (issues 8 and 9).                                      submissions for claiming the
                                      six months prior                                                                  response is neither full nor
                                      to operations                                                                     adequate. The information
                                      pursuant to Board                                                                 sought is both relevant and
                                      Condition 126.                                                                    necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                        of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                        within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                        considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                        the Project.
  1.7 (a) Please indicate the impact  The economic       Request not addressed.      The requested information has      The request remains
          that any change in products impact of a total  In the OH-001-2014          been provided and Trans            outstanding. Trans Mountain
          to be shipped in the NPS 30 of three (3)       proceeding, the Board       Mountain’s response is sufficient. does not supplement the
          pipeline will have on       delivery lines,    did not consider the        Trans Mountain further notes that  original response or provide a
          exports?                    including the      change in product in the    information regarding economics    sufficient explanation of why
                                      delivery line in   existing pipeline if it is  required for s.58 applications are the information provided is full
                                      question, was      relocated to the tunnel,    addressed in the Application       and adequate. The City of
                                      assessed in the    specifically the decrease   (A88837-1) on pages 6-7.           Burnaby relies on its previous
                                      OH-001-2014        in light oil and the        The response provides the Board    submissions for claiming the
                                      proceeding, as     increase in heavy crude.    with all necessary information     response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                                                        30
01539895
                                         described in                                  pertaining to this matter. No     adequate. The information
                                        response to                                   further response is required.     sought is both relevant and
                                        Burnaby IR No.                                                                  necessary to the NEB's review
                                        1.3(a). The                                                                     of the Project and falls squarely
                                        relocation                                                                      within the List of Issues to be
                                        proposed in the                                                                 considered in the hearing for
                                        Application will                                                                the Project.
                                        not impact the
                                        analysis or
                                        conclusions in the
                                        OH-001-2014
                                        proceeding
                                        regarding the
                                        economic
                                        impacts.
  1.7 (b) Please indicate the impact    Please see         Request not addressed.                                       The request remains
          that any change in products   response to        In the OH-001-2014                                           outstanding. Trans Mountain
          to be shipped in the NPS 30   Burnaby IR No.     proceeding, the Board                                        does not supplement the
          pipeline will have on the     1.7(a).            did not consider the                                         original response or provide a
          domestic economy in British                      change in product in the                                     sufficient explanation of why
          Columbia?                                        existing pipeline if it is                                   the information provided is full
                                                           relocated to the tunnel,                                     and adequate. The City of
                                                           specifically the decrease                                    Burnaby relies on its previous
                                                           in light oil and the                                         submissions for claiming the
                                                           increase in heavy crude.                                     response is neither full nor
                                                                                                                        adequate. The information
                                                                                                                        sought is both relevant and
                                                                                                                        necessary to the NEB's review
                                                                                                                        of the Project and falls squarely
                                                                                                                        within the List of Issues to be
                                                                                                                        considered in the hearing for
                                                                                                                        the Project.
  1.9 (a) Please provide the results of The result of the                             There is no explanation of claim. Request addressed.
          the investigation into the    investigation into                            As such, Trans Mountain does not
          external leak detection       the external leak                             offer a response.
          method.                       detection method
                                        stated in the
                                        compliance filing
                                                                                                                                                        31
01539895
                                        for Board
                                       Condition 26 was
                                       described further
                                       in response to
                                       Board IR No. 59.5
                                       (A88930). In that
                                       response, Trans
                                       Mountain
                                       confirmed the
                                       potential
                                       capability for an
                                       external fibre
                                       optic leak
                                       detection
                                       technology for
                                       distributed real
                                       time sensing of
                                       vibration,
                                       temperature and
                                       strain changes
                                       along the length
                                       of an
                                       approximately
                                       one (1) km long
                                       pilot installation.
  1.9 (b) Please describe the external Please see Trans    Request partially       The requested information has      The request remains
          leak detection method and    Mountain            addressed. Trans        been provided and Trans            outstanding. Trans Mountain
          provide evidence of its      response to Board   Mountain does not       Mountain’s response is sufficient. does not provide evidence of
          ability to detect leaks in   IR No. 59.5         provide evidence of the Trans Mountain’s response to       the external leak detection
          tunnels such as the Burnaby  (A88930).           external leak detection Board IR No. 59.5 (A88930)         method’s ability to detect leaks
          Mountain tunnel.                                 method’s ability to     confirms that it was not possible  in tunnels such as the Burnaby
                                                           detect leaks in tunnels to accurately simulate a product   Mountain tunnel or even
                                                           such as the Burnaby     release from a through-wall defect provide the results of the
                                                           Mountain tunnel.        along the pilot installation, but  simulations that were tested.
                                                                                   two simulation techniques were     Trans Mountain’s bald
                                                                                   tested. These simulation           assertion that the fibre optic-
                                                                                   techniques concluded that the      based external leak detection
                                                                                   fibre optic-based external leak    system may provide an
                                                                                                                                                      32
01539895
          detection system may provide an   effective external leak
         effective external leak detection detection system on the
         system on the delivery lines.     delivery line is not sufficient.
         The response provides the Board   The City of Burnaby relies on its
         with all necessary and available  previous submissions for
         information pertaining to this    claiming the response is
         matter. No further response from  neither full nor adequate. The
         Trans Mountain is required.       information sought is both
                                           relevant and necessary to the
                                           NEB's review of the Project and
                                           falls squarely within the List of
                                           Issues to be considered in the
                                           hearing for the Project.
                                                                             33
01539895
L a w y e r 3
J uly 31, 2018
File No. 12—0005-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710th Ave SW
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File N o. OF—Fac-Oil—T260-2017-10 01 — Hearing Order MH—048-2018
Squamish Nation Reply to Trans Mountain Response to Motion of the Squamish
Nation for adequate responses to Information Requests
We are legal counsel for the Squamish Nation in respect of their intervention in the National
Energy Board (the “Board”) hearing for the Project.
Please ﬁnd enclosed the Squamish Nation’s reply to the response of Trans Mountain to the
Squamish Nation’s motion seeking adequate responses from Trans Mountain to its Information
Request N0. 1. We respectfully request that the Board direct Trans Mountain to provide full and
adequate responses to the information requests set out in the attached Schedule A.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF ﬁn COMPANY LLP
H/
MICHELLE L. BRADLEY
Enclosure
cc. List of Participants
Phone: 604-988-5201 0 Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators. 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouver, BC V7M 3J3
01542376

                                                                                                                                  Hearing Order MH-048-2018
                                                                                                                          File No. OF-Fac-Oil-T260-2017-10 01
                                                                                                              Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC (Trans Mountain)
                                                                                                                           Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
                                 Schedule A - Organizational chart for comments on inadequacy of IR responses
                                                          Squamish Nation’s explanation for
                                     Trans Mountain’s                                          Trans Mountain’s response             Squamish Nation’s Reply
 IR #         IR Wording                                       claiming IR response to be
                                       response to IR                                          to Motion
                                                                       inadequate
        Has the federal or       Please see response to  Request not addressed. Trans          Trans Mountain provided its         Request remains
1.1 (b)
        provincial Crown         Squamish Nation         Mountain references the federal       understanding of how the            outstanding. Trans
        delegated procedural     (“Squamish”) IR No.     Crown’s determination in relation to  Crown’s duty to consult will        Mountain has not provided
        aspects of               1.1(a).                 the Trans Mountain Expansion          be fulfilled in relation to the     the information requested
        consultation to Trans                            Project, but does not indicate        Project in response to              or provided a sufficient
        Mountain with                                    whether procedural aspects of         Squamish IR No. 1.1(a).             explanation for why the
        respect to the                                   consultation have been delegated to   The information requested           information requested is not
        Project? If so, please                           it for this Westridge Delivery Line   in the IR has been provided         relevant to the List of Issues
        provide Trans                                    Relocation Project (the “Project”) by and Trans Mountain’s                in this hearing. Squamish
        Mountain’s                                       the federal and provincial Crown.     response is sufficient. No          requests that the Board
        understanding of the                                                                   further response is required.       direct Trans Mountain to
        various roles of the                                                                                                       provide a full and adequate
        federal Crown, the                                                                                                         response to this request.
        provincial Crown and
        Trans Mountain in
        discharging the duty
        to consult and
        accommodate the
        Squamish Nation with
        respect to the Project.
        Has Trans Mountain       Trans Mountain is aware Request partially addressed. Trans    The basis of Trans                  Request remains
1.1 (c)
        assessed the potential   of Squamish Nation’s    Mountain does not provide the         Mountain’s conclusion               outstanding. Trans
        impacts of the Project   prior and ongoing       material on which it’s determination  regarding potential impacts         Mountain has not provided
        on the Squamish          interests in and around that the Project will not impact      on Squamish Nation’s                the information requested
        Nation’s interests in    Burnaby Mountain. In    Squamish’s rights or interests was    interests has been provided.        or provided a sufficient
        the Project area. If so, that regard, Trans      based.                                Further information about           explanation for why the
                                                                                                                                                              1
 please provide that    Mountain is proposing to   the activities associated     information requested is not
assessment and the     design and construct the   with the Project and the      relevant to the List of Issues
material on which that Project in a manner that   potential impacts is included in this hearing. Squamish
assessment is based.   mitigates impacts and      in the Application. No other  requests that the Board
                       risks to the extent        “material” is relevant.       direct Trans Mountain to
                       practicable. Moreover,     The information requested     provide a full and adequate
                       there is no anticipated    in the IR has been provided   response to this request.
                       surface disturbance        and Trans Mountain’s
                       outside the fence line of  response is sufficient. No
                       Burnaby and Westridge      further response is required.
                       Marine Terminals, which
                       are privately owned by
                       Trans Mountain.
                       Therefore, Trans
                       Mountain does not
                       anticipate that the
                       installation of the
                       relocated delivery line
                       will impact Squamish
                       Nation’s rights or
                       interests.
                       As outlined in the
                       Application, Trans
                       Mountain previously
                       approached Aboriginal
                       groups whose traditional
                       territory overlaps
                       Burnaby Mountain,
                       including Squamish
                       Nation, regarding the
                       Burnaby Mountain
                       Tunnel and the two (2)
                       delivery lines that were
                       ultimately approved
                       pursuant to Certificate of
                       Public Convenience and
                                                                                                           2
                                 Necessity (“CPCN”) OC-
                                064. No issues were
                                identified through that
                                engagement, which
                                included field studies and
                                surveys. As part of Trans
                                Mountain’s Aboriginal
                                Engagement Program, all
                                interests and concerns
                                identified by Aboriginal
                                groups are reviewed and
                                considered by Trans
                                Mountain through the
                                ongoing development of
                                the Project and the
                                TMEP.
        Please indicate         Please see response to     Request not addressed. Trans        The information requested     Request remains
1.1 (d)
        whether Trans           Squamish IR No. 1(c).      Mountain does not indicate in the   in the IR has been provided   outstanding. Trans
        Mountain                                           response to Squamish IR No. 1(c)    and Trans Mountain’s          Mountain has not provided
        incorporated any of                                whether Trans Mountain              response is sufficient. As    the information requested
        the evidence,                                      incorporated any of the evidence of indicated in response to      or provided a sufficient
        including the                                      Squamish in developing the          Squamish IR No. 1.1(c),       explanation for why the
        testimony of the                                   application for the Project.        Trans Mountain is aware of    information requested is not
        Squamish Nation                                                                        Squamish Nation’s prior and   relevant to the List of Issues
        witnesses and the                                                                      ongoing interests in and      in this hearing. Trans
        expert report entitled                                                                 around Burnaby Mountain,      Mountain does not indicate
        “Squamish Traditional                                                                  including those interests     whether it incorporated any
        Use and Occupancy                                                                      outlined in the referenced    of the evidence of the
        Study: Final Report”,                                                                  study. Trans Mountain has     Squamish Nation in
        put forward by the                                                                     designed the Project in a     developing the application
        Squamish Nation in                                                                     manner that mitigates         for the Project, but merely
        the Trans Mountain                                                                     impacts and risks to the      states that it is “aware of
        Expansion Project                                                                      extent practicable, which     Squamish
        National Energy Board                                                                  aligns with Squamish          Nation’s prior and ongoing
        hearing in developing                                                                  Nation’s interests. No        interests in and around
        the application for the                                                                further response is required. Burnaby Mountain”.
                                                                                                                                                        3
         Project.                                                                                                                 Squamish requests that the
                                                                                                                                 Board direct Trans Mountain
                                                                                                                                 to provide a full and
                                                                                                                                 adequate response to this
                                                                                                                                 request.
        Please indicate how     The ability of Trans         Request not addressed. The             All relevant information in  Request remains
1.1 (f)
        Trans Mountain has      Mountain to respond to a     potential for a spill from the third   relation to this matter has  outstanding. Trans
        addressed the           spill of diluted bitumen,    pipeline in the tunnel is directly     been provided. It is         Mountain has not provided
        concerns raised by the  particularly if a spill from relevant to the issues in this hearing premature to provide details the information requested
        Squamish Nation         the third (relocated)        and the risks and impacts of the       on emergency response in     or provided a sufficient
        about the ability of    delivery line reaches the    Project on Squamish (see issues 4, 7,  light of Trans Mountain’s    explanation for why the
        Trans Mountain to       marine environment, is       8, and 9). The assessment of spill     obligations pursuant to      information requested is not
        respond to a spill of   outside of the scope of      risk of the relocated delivery line    Conditions 125 and 126.      relevant to the List of Issues
        diluted bitumen,        this Application for the     was not assessed in OH-001-2014.       Trans Mountain further       in this hearing. The Board
        particularly if a spill following reasons:                                                  notes that, pursuant to      has specifically indicated
        from the third pipeline -         The assessment                                            Condition 90, Trans          that “contingency planning
        reaches the marine      of spills for all three                                             Mountain is required to      for spills, accidents or
        environment.            delivery lines, including                                           consult with potentially     malfunctions” is an issue
                                the relocated delivery                                              affected Aboriginal groups   that will be considered in
                                line, was undertaken in                                             (including Squamish Nation) this hearing (Issue 9).
                                Technical Update No. 4                                              in relation to improvements Providing evidence of the
                                (A64687) in the OH-001-                                             to its Emergency             capability and capacity to
                                2014 proceeding, and as                                             Management Program,          respond to a spill,
                                such, was previously                                                including the Emergency      particularly one that reaches
                                considered by the Board                                             Response Plans.              the marine environment, is
                                in approving the TMEP.                                              Trans Mountain’s response    a separate matter from the
                                -         The emergency                                             is sufficient and no further detailed emergency
                                response plans for Line 2                                           response is required.        response plans required by
                                (including the three                                                                             Conditions 125 and 126.
                                delivery lines) and the                                                                          Trans Mountain should not
                                Westridge Marine                                                                                 be able to use Conditions
                                Terminal are in the                                                                              125 and 126 for the Trans
                                process of being                                                                                 Mountain Expansion Project
                                developed and will be                                                                            as justification for refusing
                                filed with the Board at                                                                          to provide evidence relevant
                                least six (6) months prior                                                                       to Issue 9 in this hearing.
                                                                                                                                                            4
                                  to operation of the TMEP                                                                     Squamish requests that the
                                 and the third delivery line                                                                  Board direct Trans Mountain
                                 pursuant to Conditions                                                                       to provide a full and
                                 125 and 126,                                                                                 adequate response to this
                                 respectively.                                                                                request.
                                 -        The ability of
                                 Trans Mountain to
                                 respond to a spill of
                                 diluted bitumen,
                                 including in a marine
                                 environment, was
                                 comprehensively
                                 addressed through the
                                 OH-001-2014
                                 proceeding. The same
                                 Board conclusions and
                                 requirements apply in
                                 relation to the Project.
        Please provide a list of Please see response to      Request not addressed. See           Please see response to      Request remains
1.1 (g)
        the steps involved and   Squamish IR No. 1.1(f).     Squamish response to IR 1.1(f).      motion regarding Squamish   outstanding. See Squamish
        the equipment that                                                                        IR No. 1.1(f). Trans        Nation reply to IR No. 1.1(f).
        will be used in the                                                                       Mountain’s response is
        response to a diluted                                                                     sufficient and no further
        bitumen spill or leak                                                                     response is required.
        from the third pipeline
        in the tunnel,
        including the available
        equipment to respond
        to a spill that
        submerges in the
        marine environment.
        Please indicate how      Please see response to      Request not addressed. The Board     As explained in response to Request remains
1.1 (h)
        Trans Mountain           City of Burnaby             did not determine that the           Burnaby IR No. 1.2(g),      outstanding. Trans
        proposes to address      (“Burnaby”) IR No. 1.2(g).  decommissioning and remediation      matters pertaining to       Mountain has not provided
        Squamish’s concern                                   of the existing line was outside the consultation and            the information requested
        with respect to                                      scope of this hearing. The Board     engagement in relation to   or provided a sufficient
                                                                                                                                                        5
             remediation of the       noted that “typically the Board         remediation of the existing   explanation for why the
            existing pipeline if the would allow a company to make any       delivery line are outside the information requested is not
            Project is approved.     application for decommissioning or      scope of this Application.    relevant to the List of Issues
                                     abandonment when the company            See also Trans Mountain’s     in this hearing. Trans
                                     deems it appropriate to do so”, but     response to Burnaby’s         Mountain does not indicate
                                     that if the “Squamish Nation            motion regarding Burnaby      how it will address
                                     requests the Board deviate from its     IR No. 1.2(b) (A93241). The   remediation of the existing
                                     typical practice, and direct Trans      Board did not suggest that it pipeline – an important
                                     Mountain to apply to decommission       would consider matters        potential accommodation
                                     the existing pipeline at this time, the associated with               measure for Squamish in
                                     Board would require information         decommissioning the           this hearing. Squamish plans
                                     and argument to justify such a          existing pipeline within the  to make argument to the
                                     request.” Squamish will be making       scope of the current          Board that decommissioning
                                     argument to the Board on this point     Application. In addition, the and remediation of the
                                     and has asked Trans Mountain to         Board has previously stated   existing pipeline should be
                                     provide information on whether it       that it will not compel Trans made a condition of Project
                                     proposes to address Squamish’s          Mountain to file something    approval. However, in order
                                     concern. Whether Trans Mountain         which is not yet available    to do so, Squamish needs
                                     will decommission and remediate         and will be filed in the      information from Trans
                                     the existing pipeline is relevant to    future.1                      Mountain on the steps it
                                     the assessment of the impacts of        Given that the IR is out of   plans to take in that regard.
                                     this application on Squamish.           scope, no further response    In applying for the
                                                                             is required.                  “relocation” of a delivery
                                                                                                           line, as opposed to just the
                                                                                                           addition of another delivery
                                                                                                           line through the tunnel,
                                                                                                           Trans Mountain has directly
                                                                                                           put in issue the future state
                                                                                                           of the existing line.
                                                                                                           Squamish requests that the
                                                                                                           Board direct Trans Mountain
                                                                                                           to provide a full and
                                                                                                           adequate response to this
                                                                                                           request.
1
  NEB Ruling No. 33, A81-1, at p 3.
                                                                                                                                      6
         Please indicate          Please see response to      Request not addressed. See              Trans Mountain’s response      Request remains
1.1 (i)
        whether Trans            Burnaby IR No. 1.2(a).      Squamish response to IR 1.1(h).         is sufficient to address the   outstanding. See Squamish
        Mountain will commit                                                                         request. See Trans             Nation reply to IR No. 1.1(h).
        to apply to                                                                                  Mountain’s response to
        decommission,                                                                                Burnaby’s motion regarding
        remove and                                                                                   Burnaby IR No. 1.2(a)
        remediate the existing                                                                       (A93241). No further
        pipeline six months                                                                          response is required.
        prior to operational
        service of the Trans
        Mountain Expansion
        Project.
        If not, please indicate  For reasons provided in     Request not addressed. See              The IR is out of scope. See    Request remains
1.1 (j)
        whether the Squamish     response to Squamish IR     Squamish response to IR 1.1(h).         response to motion             outstanding. See Squamish
        Nation’s concern         No. 1.1(i), not applicable.                                         regarding Squamish IR No.      Nation reply to IR No. 1.1(h).
        about                                                                                        1.2(h). No further response
        decommissioning the                                                                          is required.
        existing pipeline is one
        which Trans Mountain
        is unable to resolve.
        Please indicate          Please see response to      Request not addressed. As               Questions regarding the        Request remains
1.2 (b)
        whether the              Squamish IR No. 1.2(a)      acknowledged by the NEB, there is       pending transaction with       outstanding. Trans
        Government of            and Burnaby IR No.          an existing deal to sell the Trans      the Government of Canada       Mountain has not provided
        Canada, and all          1.1(a).                     Mountain Pipeline system, including     are not relevant to the        the information requested
        successor owners of                                  the existing Westridge Delivery Line.   Application or the List of     or provided a sufficient
        the Trans Mountain                                   The ability of future owners of the     Issues and are thus out of     explanation for why the
        pipeline, will be bound                              pipeline to fulfill the commitments     scope. Trans Mountain          information requested is not
        by Trans Mountain’s                                  made by Trans Mountain in this          notes that in section 6 of the relevant to the List of Issues
        commitments made                                     hearing, including those                Hearing Order, the Board       in this hearing. Squamish
        during this hearing.                                 commitments that do not form part       confirmed that “[a]ny order    requests that the Board
                                                             of the conditions for the Project, is a or decision issued by the      direct Trans Mountain to
                                                             critical issue that needs to be         Board can include              provide a full and adequate
                                                             addressed before this hearing           conditions. Conditions         response to this request.
                                                             proceeds.                               outline requirements that a
                                                                                                     company must meet in
                                                                                                     relation to a project. The
                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                 Board’s standard conditions
                                                                                                require companies to
                                                                                                implement all of the
                                                                                                commitments and
                                                                                                undertakings that were set
                                                                                                out in the project
                                                                                                application and/or during
                                                                                                the hearing. … All conditions
                                                                                                imposed by the Board are
                                                                                                enforced pursuant to the
                                                                                                NEB Act.” No further
                                                                                                response is required.
        If successor owners of  Please see response to    Request not addressed. See            The IR is out of scope. See   Request remains
1.2 (c)
        the Trans Mountain      Burnaby IR No. 1.1(c).    Squamish response to IR 1.2(b).       response to motion            outstanding. Trans
        pipeline will not be                                                                    regarding Squamish IR No.     Mountain has not provided
        bound by Trans                                                                          1.2(b). No further response   the information requested
        Mountain’s                                                                              is required.                  or provided a sufficient
        commitments made                                                                                                      explanation for why the
        during this hearing,                                                                                                  information requested is not
        please indicate                                                                                                       relevant to the List of Issues
        whether Trans                                                                                                         in this hearing. Squamish
        Mountain will commit                                                                                                  requests that the Board
        to requesting that the                                                                                                direct Trans Mountain to
        hearing for the Project                                                                                               provide a full and adequate
        be adjourned until the                                                                                                response to this request.
        new owner of the
        Trans Mountain
        pipeline can
        participate in the
        hearing.
        Please indicate why     The Condition Mapping     Request not addressed. Trans          The information requested     Request remains
1.3 (a)
        Trans Mountain has      attachment to the         Mountain has not indicated why it     in the IR has been provided   outstanding. Trans
        not agreed to adhere    Application serves to     has not agreed to adhere to           and Trans Mountain’s          Mountain has not provided
        to the requirements     identify all pre-         conditions 26, 27, 29 and 143 for the response is sufficient. No    the information requested
        for conditions 26, 27,  construction conditions   Project. Conditions 26, 27 and 29     further response is required. or provided a sufficient
        29 and 143 for the      applicable to the two (2) concern matters that have to be                                     explanation for why the
                                                                                                                                                         8
 Project. authorized delivery lines. dealt with pre-construction. information requested is not
         Conditions 26, 27 and 29                                relevant to the List of Issues
         were not included in the                                in this hearing. Squamish
         Condition Mapping                                       requests that the Board
         attachment, as these                                    direct Trans Mountain to
         conditions are in relation                              provide a full and adequate
         to the construction of the                              response to this request.
         Burnaby Mountain
         Tunnel, which is
         identified to be a
         separate phase of
         construction in Trans
         Mountain’s compliance
         filing pursuant to TMEP
         Condition 10 (A81323). In
         addition, as compliance
         to TMEP Condition 143
         (baseline inspections) is
         required at various
         intervals after
         commencing operations,
         it was not listed in the
         Condition Mapping
         attachment. For
         reference, a description
         of the inline inspections
         for all three (3) delivery
         lines, and in particular
         the relocated delivery
         line, prior to the
         installation of the tunnel
         backfill is described in
         Trans Mountain’s
         response to Burnaby IR
         No. 1.5(d), which is being
         submitted concurrent to
                                                                                            9
                                   this response.
        Please indicate for the   The following pre-         Request partially addressed. Trans    The information requested      Request remains
1.3 (c)
        conditions where          construction conditions    Mountain does not include in its list in the IR has been provided    outstanding. Trans
        information has been      in relation to the two (2) the status of Conditions 26, 27 and   and Trans Mountain’s           Mountain has not provided
        provided to the NEB,      authorized delivery lines  29.                                   response is sufficient. Please the information requested
        those conditions that     have not yet been                                                see response to motion         or provided a sufficient
        the NEB has not yet       determined to be fulfilled                                       regarding Squamish IR No.      explanation for why the
        determined to be          by the Board:                                                    1.3(a). No further response    information requested is not
        fulfilled. If the NEB has -        Condition 15:                                           is required.                   relevant to the List of Issues
        outstanding               Pipeline risk assessment                                                                        in this hearing. Squamish
        information requests      -        Condition 16:                                                                          requests that the Board
        with respect to a         Quantitative Geohazard                                                                          direct Trans Mountain to
        condition, please         Frequency Assessment                                                                            provide a full and adequate
        specify.                  -        Condition 17:                                                                          response to this request.
                                  Valve locations on Line 2
                                  -        Condition 28:
                                  Burnaby Mountain
                                  tunnel option – cathodic
                                  protection
                                  -        Condition 50:
                                  High-voltage alternating
                                  current (AC) interference
                                  -        Condition 51:
                                  Field changes manual for
                                  geohazard mitigation
                                  -        Condition 69:
                                  Fault studies
                                  -        Condition 70:
                                  Strain-based design
                                  -        Condition 104:
                                  Updated engineering
                                  alignment sheets and
                                  drawings
                                                                                                                                                            10
                                  There are no outstanding
                                 requests in relation to
                                 this list of conditions at
                                 this time.
        Please indicate the      Please see Trans           Request not addressed. Trans           The external leak detection   Request remains
1.3 (g)
        accuracy rates of the    Mountain response to       Mountain has not provided              system provides distributed   outstanding. Trans
        leak detection           Squamish IR No. 1.3(f).    information on the accuracy rates of   monitoring using fibre optic  Mountain has not provided
        methods proposed by                                 the leak detection methods             cables that are installed     the information requested
        Trans Mountain with                                 proposed.                              alongside the delivery line.  or provided a sufficient
        respect to the pipeline                                                                    Distributed monitoring has    explanation for why the
        through the tunnel,                                                                        the ability to measure        information requested is not
        including the accuracy                                                                     parameters such as acoustic   relevant to the List of Issues
        rates for detecting                                                                        energy, temperature, strain   in this hearing. Trans
        leaks that do not                                                                          and vibration continuously    Mountain still has not
        impact pressure or                                                                         along the fibre with very     provided the accuracy rates
        flow.                                                                                      high precision. The values of for the leak detection
                                                                                                   these properties are          methods proposed, but has
                                                                                                   continually analyzed by       provided two contradictory
                                                                                                   sophisticated algorithms to   statements – stating that
                                                                                                   recognize if a leak is        “the external leak detection
                                                                                                   occurring. Because the        system can provide very
                                                                                                   signature of a leak is        accurate leak locations” and
                                                                                                   recognized at a location      that “[t]here are a number
                                                                                                   along the delivery line, the  of factors that can change
                                                                                                   external leak detection       the leak location accuracy,
                                                                                                   system can provide very       so it is difficult to define an
                                                                                                   accurate leak locations.      accuracy rate”. Squamish
                                                                                                   There are a number of         requests that the Board
                                                                                                   factors that can change the   direct Trans Mountain to
                                                                                                   leak location accuracy, so it provide a full and adequate
                                                                                                   is difficult to define an     response to this request.
                                                                                                   accuracy rate.
        Please provide an        Please see Trans           Request not addressed. Trans           Trans Mountain notes that     Request remains
1.3 (l)
        analysis of the lifespan Mountain response to       Mountain does not indicate how the     in its motion, Squamish       outstanding. Trans
        of a pipeline located    Burnaby IR No. 1.5(g).     location of the pipeline in the tunnel Nation has asked a different  Mountain has not provided
        in a tunnel such as the                             will impact the lifespan of the        question than originally      the information requested
                                                                                                                                                             11
         one for the Project.                            pipeline.                             asked in IR No. 1.3(l). In any or provided a sufficient
                                                                                              event, the lifespan of the     explanation for why the
                                                                                              pipeline will not change due   information requested is not
                                                                                              to its location within the     relevant to the List of Issues
                                                                                              tunnel.                        in this hearing. Trans
                                                                                              The information requested      Mountain still has not
                                                                                              in the IR has been provided    provided an analysis of the
                                                                                              and Trans Mountain’s           lifespan of a pipeline located
                                                                                              response is sufficient. No     in a tunnel such as the one
                                                                                              further response is required.  for the Project. The
                                                                                                                             response to Burnaby IR No.
                                                                                                                             1.5(g) does not provide such
                                                                                                                             an analysis. Squamish
                                                                                                                             requests that the Board
                                                                                                                             direct Trans Mountain to
                                                                                                                             provide a full and adequate
                                                                                                                             response to this request.
        Please indicate how a   Please see Trans        Request not addressed. The            Burnaby posed a similar IR     Request remains
1.4 (b)
        leak in the pipeline in Mountain response to    response in relation to Squamish IR   (Burnaby IR No. 1.5(j)) and    outstanding. Trans
        the tunnel will be      Squamish IR No. 1.4(a). 1.4(a) does not indicate how leaks in submitted a motion on          Mountain has not provided
        remediated without                              the pipeline will be remediated       similar grounds. See Trans     the information requested
        the need to disturb                             without the need to disturb the       Mountain’s response to         or provided a sufficient
        the area in and                                 Burnaby Mountain Conservation         Burnaby’s motion regarding     explanation for why the
        around Burnaby                                  Area. In fact, the response expressly Burnaby IR No. 1.5(j)          information requested is not
        Mountain.                                       contemplates “excavation from the     (A93241). The request is       relevant to the List of Issues
                                                        ground surface down to the tunnel”    premature, as Trans            in this hearing. Trans
                                                        in the event of a leak (Action 11).   Mountain is not in a position  Mountain’s response is not
                                                                                              to provide information as to   sufficient in the
                                                                                              whether a leak in the third    circumstances, particularly
                                                                                              delivery line could require    given the value of the area
                                                                                              excavation in the area in      to the Squamish, and the
                                                                                              and around Burnaby             need to consider potential
                                                                                              Mountain.                      impacts to Aboriginal
                                                                                              Trans Mountain’s response      interests in this hearing
                                                                                              is sufficient in the           (Issue 7). Squamish requests
                                                                                              circumstances. No further      that the Board direct Trans
                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                           response is required.          Mountain to provide a full
                                                                                                                         and adequate response to
                                                                                                                         this request.
        Please indicate           Please see Trans     Request not addressed. The         Trans Mountain’s response      Request remains
1.4 (c)
        whether Trans             Mountain response to response to Squamish IR No. 1.4(a) to Squamish IR No. 1.4(a)      outstanding. Trans
        Mountain has mapped Squamish IR No. 1.4(a).    does not address groundwater.      pointed to Trans Mountain’s    Mountain has not provided
        groundwater within                                                                response to Burnaby IR No.     the requested information,
        the vicinity of the                                                               1.5(j), which in turn referred but has deferred the
        tunnel. If not, please                                                            to Trans Mountain’s            provision of that
        provide the                                                                       response to IR No. 2.119       information. The mapping of
        justification for                                                                 from NRCan regarding           the groundwater in the
        refusing to do so. If so,                                                         information on                 vicinity of the tunnel and
        please provide that                                                               protocols/mitigation           any potential impact to
        evidence and the                                                                  measures in the unlikely       groundwater from the third
        measures that Trans                                                               event of a leak for the        delivery line is a matter that
        Mountain has taken to                                                             delivery lines (A66133).       must be considered in this
        protect groundwater.                                                              Also, in response to NRCan     hearing, and is relevant to
                                                                                          IR No. 2.120, Trans            Issues 4, 7, 8 and 9. The
                                                                                          Mountain provided              mapping of groundwater,
                                                                                          information on                 and potential impacts to
                                                                                          hydrogeology and hydraulic     groundwater, will not be
                                                                                          head for the Burnaby           addressed in emergency
                                                                                          Mountain Tunnel based on       response plans, and is
                                                                                          site investigation work.       relevant to developing
                                                                                          This matter is relevant to     accommodation measures
                                                                                          the development of the         for Squamish. Squamish
                                                                                          emergency response plan        requests that the Board
                                                                                          required by Condition 125,     direct Trans Mountain to
                                                                                          due at least six months prior  provide a full and adequate
                                                                                          to commencing operations.      response to this request.
                                                                                          As such this request is
                                                                                          premature. The information
                                                                                          requested in the IR has been
                                                                                          provided and Trans
                                                                                          Mountain’s response is
                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                           sufficient. No further
                                                                                          response is required.
        Please indicate        Please see Trans        Request not addressed. The         See response to motion         Request remains
1.4 (d)
        whether Trans          Mountain response to    response to Squamish IR No. 1.4(a) regarding Squamish IR No.      outstanding. Trans
        Mountain has           Squamish IR No. 1.4(a). does not address groundwater.      1.4(c).                        Mountain has not provided
        assessed the potential                                                            As described in response to    the information requested
        for a leak from the                                                               motion regarding Burnaby       on whether it has assessed
        third pipeline to                                                                 IR No. 1.5(b), the delivery    the potential for a leak from
        contaminate                                                                       line installation has          the third pipeline to
        groundwater.                                                                      additional mitigation          contaminate groundwater
                                                                                          relative to traditionally      or provided a sufficient
                                                                                          trenched installation due to   explanation for why the
                                                                                          secondary containment of       information requested is not
                                                                                          the tunnel and the tunnel      relevant to the List of Issues
                                                                                          backfill. The delivery line is in this hearing. Squamish
                                                                                          located away from and in a     requests that the Board
                                                                                          manner that will reduce the    direct Trans Mountain to
                                                                                          potential of third-party       provide a full and adequate
                                                                                          damage. External leak          response to this request.
                                                                                          detection will be installed in
                                                                                          a manner described in
                                                                                          response to Burnaby IR No.
                                                                                          1.9.
                                                                                          The information requested
                                                                                          in the IR has been provided
                                                                                          and Trans Mountain’s
                                                                                          response is sufficient. No
                                                                                          further response is required.
        How would impacts to   Please see Trans        Request not addressed. The         See response to motion         Request remains
1.4 (e)
        groundwater be         Mountain response to    response to Squamish IR No. 1.4(a) regarding Squamish IR No.      outstanding. See Squamish
        determined and         Squamish IR No. 1.4(a). does not address groundwater.      1.4 (c). Trans Mountain’s      Nation reply to IR No. 1.4(c).
        remediated in the                                                                 response is sufficient and no
        event of a leak from                                                              further response is required.
        the pipeline in the
                                                                                                                                                   14
         tunnel?
        Please indicate         Please see Trans        Request not addressed. The           See response to motion        Request remains
1.4 (f)
        whether leaving         Mountain response to    response to Squamish IR No. 1.4(a)   regarding Squamish IR No.     outstanding. Trans
        spilled product in situ Squamish IR No. 1.4(a). does not address whether spilled     1.4 (b). The request is       Mountain has not provided
        is a remediation                                product would be left in situ in the premature and Trans           the information requested
        technique proposed                              event of a spill.                    Mountain’s response is        or provided a sufficient
        by Trans Mountain                                                                    sufficient in the             explanation for why the
        with respect to the                                                                  circumstances. No further     information requested is not
        pipeline through the                                                                 response is required.         relevant to the List of Issues
        tunnel.                                                                                                            in this hearing. The request
                                                                                                                           is not premature.
                                                                                                                           Contingency planning in the
                                                                                                                           event of spills is a matter to
                                                                                                                           be considered in this
                                                                                                                           hearing and is relevant to
                                                                                                                           the impacts of the Project
                                                                                                                           on Squamish. Squamish
                                                                                                                           requests that the Board
                                                                                                                           direct Trans Mountain to
                                                                                                                           provide a full and adequate
                                                                                                                           response to this request.
        Please indicate         Please see Trans        Request not addressed. The           Access to areas in and        Request remains
1.4 (g)
        whether access to       Mountain response to    response to Squamish IR No. 1.4(a)   around the Project footprint  outstanding. Trans
        areas in and around     Squamish IR No. 1.4(a). does not address whether access to   will be restricted. This      Mountain has not provided
        the Project will be                             areas in and around the Project will consists mainly of the tunnel sufficient detail on how
        restricted.                                     be restricted.                       portals on Trans Mountain’s   access to areas in and
                                                                                             property, which is presently  around the Project will be
                                                                                             subject to access             restricted. This is a matter of
                                                                                             restrictions.                 significant concern to
                                                                                                                           Squamish. Squamish
                                                                                                                           requests that the Board
                                                                                                                           direct Trans Mountain to
                                                                                                                           provide a full and adequate
                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                               response to this request.
        Please provide the       The rationale for the    Request not addressed. The OH-001-   Details regarding the need     Request remains
1.5 (a)
        rational for requiring a requirement of three     2014 proceeding did not address      for the Project were           outstanding. Trans
        third pipeline through   delivery lines was       putting a third NPS 30 pipeline      outlined in response to        Mountain has not provided
        the tunnel given the     described in the OH-001- through the tunnel. The necessity of Burnaby IR No. 1.3(a). The     the information requested
        two delivery lines       2014 proceeding. Please  locating a third pipeline in the     information requested in       or provided a sufficient
        approved with the        see Trans Mountain       tunnel with the associated increase  the IR has been provided       explanation for why the
        Trans Mountain           response to Burnaby IR   in risk is an issue that must be     and Trans Mountain’s           information requested is not
        Expansion Project can    No. 1.3(a).              addressed in this hearing. Trans     response is sufficient. No     relevant to the List of Issues
        accommodate the                                   Mountain should not be able to rely  further response is required.  in this hearing. The response
        increase in capacity                              on the OH-001-2014 proceeding                                       to Burnaby IR No. 1.3(a)
        for the Trans                                     that did not consider the existing                                  does not address the
        Mountain pipeline                                 pipeline or the relocation of it,                                   request. Squamish requests
        system.                                           which the Board noted would be the                                  that the Board direct Trans
                                                          subject of [a] separate regulatory                                  Mountain to provide a full
                                                          hearing, to avoid answering the                                     and adequate response to
                                                          request.                                                            this request.
        Please indicate          Please see Trans         Request not addressed. Trans         Trans Mountain’s response      Request remains
1.5 (b)
        whether Trans            Mountain response to     Mountain does not indicate in either is sufficient. See response to outstanding. Trans
        Mountain is willing to   Squamish IR No. 1.5(a).  Squamish IR No. 1.5(a) or Burnaby IR Burnaby’s motion regarding     Mountain has not provided
        decommission the         Please also see Trans    No. 1.3(p) whether Trans Mountain    Burnaby IR No. 1.3(d). The     the information requested
        existing line and not    Mountain response to     is willing to consider as an         need for a total of three      or provided a sufficient
        add a third pipeline to  Burnaby IR No. 1.3(p).   accommodation measure                delivery lines was             explanation for why the
        the tunnel in order to                            decreasing the excess pipeline       established in the OH-001-     information requested is not
        decrease the risk to                              capacity in Squamish territory or    2014, but the physical         relevant to the List of Issues
        the Squamish Nation.                              provide a rationale for refusing to  placement of the existing      in this hearing. The response
        If not, please provide                            do so.                               line was not. Hence, the       to Burnaby IR No. 1.3(d)
        the rational for                                                                       Board issued Condition 20      does not address the
        refusing to do so.                                                                     regarding the potential        request. Squamish requests
                                                                                               relocation of the third        that the Board direct Trans
                                                                                               (existing) delivery line. No   Mountain to provide a full
                                                                                               further response is required.  and adequate response to
                                                                                                                              this request.
                                                                                                                                                        16
             Please indicate         Vessel loadings at the     Request not addressed. The                Trans Mountain’s response      Request remains
  1.5 (c)
            whether any             expanded Westridge         simultaneous loading of three             is sufficient. Trans Mountain  outstanding. Trans
            assessment of impacts   Marine Terminal were       vessels is relevant to this hearing if it will be able to load three     Mountain has not provided
            of the Project to the   considered in the OH-      is a justification for having three       vessels simultaneously at      the information requested
            Squamish Nation took    001-2014 proceeding, are   pipelines through the tunnel. Trans       the Westridge Marine           or provided a sufficient
            into account three      not within the list of     Mountain does not clarify this in its     Terminal with the existing     explanation for why the
            vessels loading         issues for MH-048-2018     response.                                 delivery line and activities   information requested is not
            simultaneously at the   and are outside of the                                               approved as part of the        relevant to the List of Issues
            Westridge Marine        scope of this Application.                                           TMEP. This capability does     in this hearing. Squamish
            Terminal.               Please see Trans                                                     not depend on the current      relies on its previous
                                    Mountain response to                                                 Application to relocate the    submissions for claiming the
                                    Burnaby IR No. 1.3(a).                                               existing line.                 response to be inadequate.
                                                                                                         The IR is out of scope. No     Squamish requests that the
                                                                                                         further response is required.  Board direct Trans Mountain
                                                                                                                                        to provide a full and
                                                                                                                                        adequate response to this
                                                                                                                                        request.
            Please provide an       The emergency response     Request not addressed. Issue 9            The request for an             Request remains
  1.6 (a)
            emergency response      plan for the third         provides that the Board will consider     emergency response plan is     outstanding. Trans
            plan for the third      (relocated) delivery line  in this hearing “[s]afety and security    premature. The Board has       Mountain has not provided
            pipeline through the    will be contained within   during construction of the proposed       previously stated that it will the information requested
            tunnel.                 the pipeline emergency     Project and operation of the Project,     not compel Trans Mountain      or provided a sufficient
                                    response plans which are   including emergency response              to file something which is     explanation for why the
                                    currently in               planning and third-party damage           not yet available and will be  information requested is not
                                    development, and are       prevention.” Issue 8 provides that        filed in the future.2          relevant to the List of Issues
                                    required to be submitted   the Board will consider in this           Trans Mountain’s response      in this hearing. Squamish
                                    to the Board at least six  hearing “[c]ontingency planning for       is sufficient in the           relies on its previous
                                    (6) months prior to        spills, accidents or malfunctions,        circumstances. No further      submissions for claiming the
                                    operations. As such, the   during construction and operation         response is required.          response to be inadequate.
                                    emergency response plan    of the Project.” Trans Mountain has                                      Squamish requests that the
                                    is not available at this   not provided information on how                                          Board direct Trans Mountain
                                    time, and is currently in  emergencies will be responded to,                                        to provide a full and
                                    the process of being       or how damage will be prevented                                          adequate response to this
                                    developed in accordance    and compensated with respect to                                          request.
2
  NEB Ruling No. 33, A81-1, at p 3.
                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                 with the Board’s        third parties.
                                timelines for the pre-
                                operations conditions.
        Please list the         Please see Trans        Request not addressed. Trans          As stated in response to     Request remains
1.6 (b)
        equipment that Trans    Mountain response to    Mountain does not list the            motion regarding Squamish    outstanding. Trans
        Mountain would need     Squamish IR No. 1.6(a). equipment that Trans Mountain         IR No. 1.6(a), requests for  Mountain has not provided
        to respond to a leak in                         would need to respond to a leak in    details about the emergency  the information requested
        the pipeline through                            the third pipeline through the        response plans for the       or provided a sufficient
        the tunnel.                                     tunnel. This request is relevant to   delivery line are premature. explanation for why the
                                                        issues 8 and 9 in this hearing. Trans The available and relevant   information requested is not
                                                        Mountain cannot defer providing all   information regarding leak   relevant to the List of Issues
                                                        emergency response information        detection was provided in    in this hearing. Squamish
                                                        until after the hearing. The Board    Trans Mountain’s response    relies on its previous
                                                        needs to be satisfied that Trans      to Board IR No. 59.5         submissions for claiming the
                                                        Mountain has the capability and       (A88930), which also refers  response to be inadequate.
                                                        capacity to respond to emergency      to Trans Mountain’s filing   Trans Mountain’s response
                                                        events.                               dated March 1, 2017 in       to Board IR No. 59.5 does
                                                                                              relation to Condition 26     not provide the requested
                                                                                              (A81936). That filing        information. Squamish
                                                                                              includes a discussion on the requests that the Board
                                                                                              adequacy of the three        direct Trans Mountain to
                                                                                              selected leak detection      provide a full and adequate
                                                                                              methods. No further          response to this request.
                                                                                              response is required.
        For the equipment       Please see Trans        Request not addressed. See            Please see Trans Mountain    Request remains
1.6 (c)
        that Trans Mountain     Mountain response to    Squamish response to IR 1.6(b).       response to motion           outstanding. Trans
        would need to           Squamish IR No. 1.6(a).                                       regarding Squamish IR No.    Mountain has not provided
        respond to a leak in                                                                  1.6 (a) and (b). No further  the information requested
        the pipeline through                                                                  response is required.        or provided a sufficient
        the tunnel, is there                                                                                               explanation for why the
        any equipment that                                                                                                 information requested is not
        Trans Mountain                                                                                                     relevant to the List of Issues
        currently does not                                                                                                 in this hearing. Squamish
        have access to and is                                                                                              relies on its previous
        Trans Mountain                                                                                                     submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                                                     18
         planning to purchase                                                                                          response to be inadequate.
        that equipment?                                                                                               Trans Mountain’s response
                                                                                                                      to motion regarding
                                                                                                                      Squamish IR No. 1.6 (a) and
                                                                                                                      (b) does not address the
                                                                                                                      request. Squamish requests
                                                                                                                      that the Board direct Trans
                                                                                                                      Mountain to provide a full
                                                                                                                      and adequate response to
                                                                                                                      this request.
        Please indicate the    Please see Trans        Request not addressed. See         Please see Trans Mountain   Request remains
1.6 (d)
        emergency response     Mountain response to    Squamish response to IR 1.6(a) and response to motion          outstanding. Trans
        measures that are      Squamish IR No. 1.6(a). (b).                               regarding Squamish IR No.   Mountain has not provided
        available for the                                                                 1.6 (a) and (b). No further the information requested
        existing pipeline that                                                            response is required.       or provided a sufficient
        would not be available                                                                                        explanation for why the
        if the pipeline is                                                                                            information requested is not
        relocated to the                                                                                              relevant to the List of Issues
        tunnel.                                                                                                       in this hearing. Squamish
                                                                                                                      relies on its previous
                                                                                                                      submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                      response to be inadequate.
                                                                                                                      Trans Mountain’s response
                                                                                                                      to motion regarding
                                                                                                                      Squamish IR No. 1.6 (a) and
                                                                                                                      (b) does not address the
                                                                                                                      request. Squamish requests
                                                                                                                      that the Board direct Trans
                                                                                                                      Mountain to provide a full
                                                                                                                      and adequate response to
                                                                                                                      this request.
        Please indicate any    Please see Trans        Request not addressed. See         Please see Trans Mountain   Request remains
1.6 (e)
        leak detection or      Mountain response to    Squamish response to IR 1.6(a) and response to motion          outstanding. Trans
        other safety measures  Squamish IR No. 1.6(a). (b).                               regarding Squamish IR No.   Mountain has not provided
        that are not available                                                            1.6 (a) and (b). No further the information requested
        because of the                                                                    response is required.       or provided a sufficient
                                                                                                                                                19
         addition of the third                                                                                       explanation for why the
        pipeline through the                                                                                        information requested is not
        tunnel.                                                                                                     relevant to the List of Issues
                                                                                                                    in this hearing. Squamish
                                                                                                                    relies on its previous
                                                                                                                    submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                    response to be inadequate.
                                                                                                                    Trans Mountain’s response
                                                                                                                    to motion regarding
                                                                                                                    Squamish IR No. 1.6 (a) and
                                                                                                                    (b) does not address the
                                                                                                                    request. Squamish requests
                                                                                                                    that the Board direct Trans
                                                                                                                    Mountain to provide a full
                                                                                                                    and adequate response to
                                                                                                                    this request.
        Please provide a      Please see Trans       Request not addressed. See         Please see Trans Mountain   Request remains
1.6 (f)
        comparison of the     Mountain response to   Squamish response to IR 1.6(a) and response to motion          outstanding. Trans
        risks between putting Burnaby IR No. 1.6(d). (b).                               regarding Squamish IR No.   Mountain has not provided
        two pipelines through                                                           1.5 (b) and (c). No further the information requested
        the tunnel versus                                                               response is required.       or provided a sufficient
        putting three                                                                                               explanation for why the
        pipelines through the                                                                                       information requested is not
        tunnel.                                                                                                     relevant to the List of Issues
                                                                                                                    in this hearing. Squamish
                                                                                                                    relies on its previous
                                                                                                                    submissions for claiming the
                                                                                                                    response to be inadequate.
                                                                                                                    Trans Mountain’s response
                                                                                                                    to motion regarding
                                                                                                                    Squamish IR No. 1.5 (b) and
                                                                                                                    (c) does not address the
                                                                                                                    request. Squamish requests
                                                                                                                    that the Board direct Trans
                                                                                                                    Mountain to provide a full
                                                                                                                    and adequate response to
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                       this request.
        Please list the        Please see Trans        Request not addressed. See         Please see Trans Mountain   Request remains
1.6 (g)
        potential emergency    Mountain response to    Squamish response to IR 1.6(a) and response to motion          outstanding. Trans
        events for the third   Squamish IR No. 1.6(a). (b).                               regarding Squamish IR No.   Mountain has not provided
        pipeline through the                                                              1.6 (a) and (b). No further the information requested
        tunnel. Please                                                                    response is required.       or provided a sufficient
        provide a risk                                                                                                explanation for why the
        assessment for each                                                                                           information requested is not
        event, including an                                                                                           relevant to the List of Issues
        assessment of                                                                                                 in this hearing. Squamish
        potential event                                                                                               relies on its previous
        escalation due to                                                                                             submissions for claiming the
        decreased pipeline                                                                                            response to be inadequate.
        spacing in the tunnel.                                                                                        Trans Mountain’s response
                                                                                                                      to motion regarding
                                                                                                                      Squamish IR No. 1.6 (a) and
                                                                                                                      (b) does not address the
                                                                                                                      request. Squamish requests
                                                                                                                      that the Board direct Trans
                                                                                                                      Mountain to provide a full
                                                                                                                      and adequate response to
                                                                                                                      this request.
                                                                                                                                                21
RATCLIFF & COMPANY
L a w y e r s
— '. a: -;*;q.- . .t . r- —
J uly 26, 2018
File No. 13-0010-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710th Ave SW
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File No. OF—Fac—Oil—T260-2017-10 01 — Hearing Order MH—048-2018
City of Burnaby Reply to Trans Mountain Response to Motion of City of Burnaby
for adequate responses to Information Requests
We are legal counsel for the City of Burnaby (“Burnaby”) in respect of their intervention in the
National Energy Board (the “NEB” or the ‘‘Board”) hearing for the Project.
Please ﬁnd enclosed Burnaby’s reply to the response of Trans Mountain to Burnaby’s motion
seeking adequate responses from Trans Mountain to its Information Request N0. 1. We
respectfully request that the NEB direct Trans Mountain to provide full and adequate responses
to the information requests set out in the attached Schedule A.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP
._ - 11f?" WTFH
f [71>
MICHELLE L. BRADLEY
Enclosure
cc. List of Participants
Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500. East Elevators, 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouver, BC VTM 3J3
01539947

Board File No: OF-Fac-Oil-T260-2017-10 01
NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
IN THE MATTER OF
NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
HEARING ORDER MH-048-2018
TRANS MOUNTAIN PIPELINE ULC
WESTRIDGE DELIVERY LINE RELOCATION
AFFIDAVIT 0F DEBORAH BAKER

1, Deborah Baker, Councilor and Co—chair of the Squamish Nation of 320 Seymour Blvd, North

Vancouver, in the Province of British Columbia, AFFIRM THAT:

1. I am an elected Councilor and Co-chair of the Squamish Nation (“Squamish”). I am
responsible for overseeing Squamish’s involvement in the National Energy Board hearing
MH-048—2018 for the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Hearing”). As such I
have personal knowledge of the matters herein deposed to except where stated to be on
information and belief, and whereso stated I believe them to be true.

2. Squamish is an intervenor in the Hearing and under my direction and control Squamish
has prepared and ﬁled evidence in the Hearing.

3. The evidence ﬁled on behalf of Squamish is entitled “Written Evidence of the Squamish
Nation” dated July 27, 2018 and includes three appendices (the “Squamish Evidence”).
Attached to this afﬁdavit and marked as Exhibit “A” is a true copy of the Squamish
Evidence that was ﬁled in the Hearing.

1

8

(a) ﬁsh including, salmon, herring, herring roe, smelt, trout, cod, ﬂounder, and

rockﬁsh;
(b) shellﬁsh including, sea urchins, crab, clams and prawns;
(0) birds including, ducks, pheasant, grouse, geese, and seagull eggs;
((1) mammals including, deer, elk, seals, sea lions, black bears and mountain goat; and
(e) cultural and medicinal plants, seaweed, clay, ben‘ies, broadleaf maple, cedar and

douglas ﬁr and other timber for canoes and longhouses.
However, the availability, health, and abundance of many of these resources has been
impacted by the industrial development within our Territory, particularly in Burrard Inlet.

29. The rivers and streams entering into Burrard Inlet have served as important harvesting,
transport, and cultural locations for Squamish. These waterways have provided a number
of resources, including:

(a) trout and pink and chum salmon in Lynn Creek;

(b) dungeness crab, ﬂounder, cod, trout and salmon in and at the mouth of Mosquito
Creek;

(0) all species of salmon (except sockeye) in the Capilano River;

((1) steelhead, coho, pink, chum and Chinook salmon in Seymour Creek; and

(e) tidal traps at Stitsma (Maplewood ﬂats) and at a7enmitsut in False Creek.

The availability, purity and abundance of many of these resources have been impacted by

the development in and around Burrard Inlet. Squamish is taking an active role in

restoration efforts as described above.

30. The marine and aquatic resources in Squamish Territory also play an important economic
role for Squamish. Squamish traditionally harvested marine and aquatic resources for
sustenance and ceremonial purposes, but also for trading purposes.

31. Salmon are integral to Squamish culture both for food and ceremonial purposes.
Squamish continue to harvest salmon throughout our Territory, but salmon stocks have
been on the decline, and Squamish won'y about maintaining continued access to this

7

98
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs

5491. You see, you have to put yourself back a long ways, that everything
that there is there today that you made use of is because this is the way it is. This
-- you try to understand. At times it's difﬁcult, but even now, when I say you bath
and you cleanse yourself, well, yes, you do that today, but not in the fashion that
we do our cleanse. To get that cold, cold water, what is the ﬁrst thing you do?
You holler. You scream "cold".

5492. You see, I am a mask dancer. I have a mask; I dance. I go back. I
holler. I wake it up. I wake up what was given to me a long time ago. It's here.

. And I only understand it as being Sl_<w;<wﬁ7mesh.

5493. You see, people, you know, the mistake they made when they called
us Indians, then they called us -- now they're calling us F irst Nations and they
call us Aboriginal, a lot of things. But when I look at my families, the
Slngwfﬂmesh, that's what we have inside here, Slngwu7mesh. That‘s who we
are. To me that is so important when I look at my brothers and sisters and family,
Slngwfﬂmesh. It's because they carry that what's inside of us.

5494. The genealogy you look, that's where we —- that's where it come from.
They did this hundreds of years ago. They pass it on.

I 5495. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk. I have one last question for
you.

5496. So would you say that the longhouse is the hub of Squamish culture?

5497. MR. J ACOBS: What we have that's been passed on to us from the
old peoples, it is so important to Squamish because we all look -- as I said, we
look at the genealogy. They're connected.

5498. On my father's side, we're talking about my father's grandfather, Kay-
Tulk. It's the same as my brother here, the same family. The same family. My
partner on this side here, my great-great-grandmother, and my brother on this side
was his sister. And we understand that -- how close—knit we are and yet we're --
you know, we live -- today we live different lives. Times we sit down and reﬂect,
we're together as one.

5499. It all begins at the longhouse. The importance of the longhouse to our
people is everything, everything in life that -- as I understand it. When I open the

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

99
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
doors in the longhouse, it all comes alive and life to our people. I can't compare it
to anything else because I don't know anything -- others' beliefs and religions. I
don't. I just know my own, what I've been taught.

5500. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk.

5501. I will now move on to Xwelxwelacha Siyam, Chief Dick Williams.

5502. MR. JACOBS: Could I say one more?

5503. MR. BRUCE: Okay. Paitsmauk actually would like to say some ~
more words here.

5504. Thank you.

5505. MR. JACOBS: Just one thing that I always think about. I think about
love and our homelands and our villages. It's love for that. It's like the wind. It's
still with us. It'll never go away.

5506. For that, I thank my grandfathers. I thank them, and I thank you.
O'siem.

5507. MR. BRUCE: Thank you.

5508. So Xwelxwelacha Siyam, can you describe the roles you have in the
Squamish community?

--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRESENTATION ORALE PAR CHIEF

RICHARD WILLIAMS:

5509. CHIEF WILLIAMS: My role? Since '77 we implemented a -- yeah,
my role in the nation, kind of difﬁcult to address that, but my ofﬁcial capacity is
as ﬁsheries ofﬁcer under the by—law, ﬁsheries by-law in -- enacted in 1977 by
Council. And you had to have an ofﬁcer within that, and been employed under
that description and now ﬁsheries manager, to this day, under the revised 1992
By—Law No. 16 amending our by—law, ﬁsheries by—law, for our people under the
Indian Act, Section 81, and protected by the Statutes oflnstruments Act where the
-- we've been ﬁghting the government since we implemented that, and even prior
to that. And that's why we enacted the by—law.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 00
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5510. You're marginalizing us, eliminating us from access to our own
resources within our own Reserves, and criminalizing members of our tribe that
were attempting to subsist not just with salmon, with other things. If they could
ﬁnd something to do to us that was within their parameters, they did that. Not just
DFO; the provincial police, prior to ‘56-‘57, and members of other -- I could go
on about whatever.

5511. But I have also been on Council since April of 1977. I was elected --
after my third effort to run for Council, I was elected, and along with 15 other of
my compatriots. And we are an amalgamated tribe since 1923.

5512. Prior to that, because the amalgamation came because the government
took over half of our allocated Reserve lands that were supposed to be set aside
for us and protected under the protection of the Federal Crown, the exact opposite
was happening, so we formed an amalgamated tribe after 10 years of discussion,
as has been identiﬁed earlier.

5513. Again, I was on Council until '93, was not re-elected. I was the elected
-- the ﬁrst time I was elected, we were there for life. It was changed in '81 to
four-year terms.

5514. I got up to 1993. I was not re-elected, was not successful on that term
or the next one. Not -- 2001, again, I was -- applied to be on Council. And to this
date, again, I think it was 2013, the last election, I was successful again. They
have to put up with me for another four years from then.

5515. The issue here as well is for purposes of my role -- and I am hereditary
Chief. I did not claim to be a Chief. My family identiﬁed I was the next in line
from our generation.

5516. My grandfather, Chief Edward Williams, was one of the founding
Chiefs of the amalgamation in 1923.

5517. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Siyam.

5518. Can you tell us when you were born?

5519. CHIEF WILLIAMS: I was born in 1948, February 25m.

5520. MR. BRUCE: Where did you grow up?

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 01
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5521. CHIEF WILLIAMS: I grew up ﬁrst three and a half years at
Eslha7an, Mission IR No. 1 as identiﬁed under the Reserves. We were in a rental
home. My Dad and mother were renting a home because they started a new
family.

5522. And '53, we moved to meelchstn, Mathias Road, 209 Mathias. And
they had a wartime house that was -- they got a -- at that time, a -- I guess you call
it a loan from the Department of Indian Affairs. They used our capital funds and
moved a wartime house on the Reserve.

5523. We paid for the cost of moving it and we -— the -- I think it was $4,000
per move was identiﬁed as being the total cost for the foundation, as well as the
move and chimney placed in the middle. And we had a wood stove and I guess
you'd call it ice box in one corner. That was how they were constructed.

5524. And grew up there until 1971. The condominiums were being built at
North Vancouver in Block 123 of [R No. 1. We received that back in '62 because
of the expropriation by the -- who were these people, anyway? The black robes,
anyways, these nuns or priests or whoever. They got title because they were
going to teach the kids.

5525. And at that time, they attempted to sell it off and were advised they
had to return it back to Reserve status if there was to be any disposition of it. And
they also had an elementary school there that was discontinued, and there was 40
or 42 residences of condominiums built there for low income and social housing.

5526. And the band still is paying a mortgage on it to this day. I think
another 35 or 40 years of payments are due on that.

5527. Nineteen -- I think ﬁve months before my oldest daughter started
school, we were approved our own house; I think it was 1975 or '74. We moved
in in 1975, Ithink.

5528. And we moved back to meelchstn, my present address where I live
today.

5529. MR. BRUCE: Thank you.

5530. Could you tell us a little bit about what ﬁshing means to you

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 02
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
personally and how you learned ﬁshing and how you teach your children?

5531. CHIEF WILLIAMS: My experience of ﬁshing and teaching ﬁshing
and what it means to me is that our people have always ﬁshed, generational and
commercially, as well as for personal use. My great—grandfather, Chief Dick
Williams, was a victim of expropriation of his whole Reserve when our people
were -- and others of our tribe were -- went up north to go to the ﬁshing grounds
where the canneries were, up Nights Inlet and Rivers Inlet and these huge
canneries were offshore, and the ﬁsh were so numerous that people could go up
there and access them.

5532. The majority of boats did not have motors; they had sails and oars.
They -- my great-grandfather, Captain Louie, had an East Hope engine in his boat,
and he towed about 15 or 20 boats of extended family members and other
community members up to that area.

5533. The men went out daily to get the ﬁsh. The ladies and the young
women worked in the canneries to process those ﬁsh in those canneries at that
time for -- from the late 18005 up until the canneries closed and the ﬁsh started
becoming fewer.

5534. And when they did close the canneries up there, the women continued
to work in the canneries closer to home in Steveson and West Vancouver, North
Vancouver, Vancouver, Fraser River, that type of thing where —— up until the mid-
sixties, I think, the majority of them closed down.

5535. Getting back to ﬁshing, what it means to me is it was taught to me by
example by my grandparents, my uncles, my grand—uncles and my relatives. We
ﬁshed trouting, foreshore ﬁshing, hand-line at ﬁrst when I was a young kid, going
to the beaches with my -- with the people. And meelchstn, where a large
amount of the families had moved to different homes that were -- had electricity
in them somewhere else and that were in a new subdivision.

5536. The issue here is the majority of them all had ﬁ'uits -- fruit trees and
berries and all sorts of sustenance that was seasonal, plums, apples, cherries,
currants, blackberries, strawberries, raspberries. All the broad range where all the
people had storage places for their preserves on the north sides of their homes,
and it was very evident that they had that. We also had, I don’t know if you call it
ﬁshing, but oysters, clams, crabs, prawns and that type of thing.

Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014

1 03
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5537. And in season, coho in J uly right through to J anuary in the Capilano.
In the Squamish it’s anywhere from end of September to the end -- middle of
December for coho.

5538. Dog salmon, we still catch them and smoke them and delivery it to the
Elders on reserve and put them in the freezers for dinners and ﬁmerals.

5539. We do about three loads a year. That’s about 200-300 sides every
load. We do that ourselves and provide for our own people, and we have a budget
for it for doing those things.

5540. Getting -- teaching the younger ones is havin g people along that want
to ﬁsh, to be able to show them and demonstrate different methods of doing that
by -- with rods in the Squamish River, how to make nets and how to set nets,
where to set them and the appropriate times of year for which ﬁsh are available
and when they are available.

5541. We have -- we’re attemptin g as well to -- under my young associate,
Christopher Lewis, wanting to have us get our people back out onto the Salish Sea
and other areas where we have traditionally ﬁshed in the Gulf of Georgia as well
as in the Fraser River up unti12003-2004 when DFO got one of our neighbours to
prohibit us from ﬁshing in their area because we wanted to help another group
have access for the sockeye resource at that time.

5542. For purposes again of wanting to make sure that -- I get off the subject
here about teaching kids how to ﬁsh. But what we’re doin g is attempting to re-
access resources that we know we’ve always done, generational, early 18005.

5543. The original speaker that was talking about 200 canoes coming down
the river, that was just the ﬁrst wave of people coming back because they had
their quota or their winter supply. There were still more people than that up river
yet still in the ﬁshing grounds because there’s only so much space for people to
process and to dry the product once you get it, and people had to make room for
other people.

5544. And we were not the only tribe up there. All the tribes ﬁ'om Puget
Sound, J uan de Fuca, Saanich tribes, Cowichan, all the Desolation Sound tribes,
Lummi, all of the different peoples that had access to this river, Great River, for
those resources.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

|

1 04
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5545. It was not just salmon. It was ducks, geese, bottom ﬁsh, sturgeon,
cranberries, any and all the medicines. That time of year as well was used for
trading goods from the interior, the grease trails, the different times of the year,
for inter-marriages of daughters that needed husbands and, if people had eligible
bachelors, the majority of the time the ladies went to the husbands' villages. But
if they needed men and there was too many men in one village, they would
accommodate and send the men to the different villages. And all of this stuff is
documented.

5546. I I was a part of the Kitsilano trial, being an observer along with
Paitsmauk, for eight years. And they wanted us to document who we were, what
are place names were, who the people were and what their names were, what year
it was. And all of this is documented in the Langley J ournals.

5547. So when they started building Fort Langley, our people gave them
ﬁsh, gave them seal meat, gave them deer meat, helped them with, I guess,
probably trade goods that they needed and sustenance.

5548. And as well, I think there was some of the members at that time were
becoming nuisances because they were getting into the alcohol as well. So there’s

| -- it wasn’t all one way or it wasn’t all good. So there are those things in the
I journals.

5549. And our people were not the only ones there. There was records of a
huge amount, and these people from Fort Langley were trading for furs as well as
ﬁsh and they were sending salted ﬁsh to Europe and other colonies to provide a

- variety of sustenance for those people as well.

5550. Getting back to our own young people, we have, I guess you call it,
different departments where we have under—privileged children, we have people
that have not had the opportunity to get out into our river systems.

5551. I was taught by my uncles and by my grand-uncles through them
showing us, not telling us. Be there, do it and understand what’s needed. Safety
measures, how to operate canoes, how to -- in -- since the ﬁfties, how to operate
outboard motors.

5552. The majority of the teachings was safety on the water and not wear
white man’s boots when you’re out there.

. Transcript Hearing Order OH—001-2014
|

1 05
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5553. No, it might be funny but it’s very dangerous. You’ve got to be safe
than sorry.

5554. The other issue as well is the opportunities by people. People take for
granted what we’ve had to do to provide sustenance back in the day. There was
no such thing as this low income -- or what do you call it now, poverty level?
There was no such thing as that in the ﬁfties.

5555. You started hearing poverty level in the sixties and seventies, I think,
after the hippie generation where people weren’t working and, all of a sudden,
they had to provide for them. That’s when I started hearing about it, anyway.

5556. But we still have our young people out in the rivers and whatever, and
under protecting -- trying to protect them and keep them separate from other
ﬁshermen that aren’t members so we could properly -- and our guardians that we
hire seasonally help them understand slip jigs, what proper process is, respect for
other ﬁshermen when they’re out there, times to ﬁsh in, dangers of what happens
if the darn -- we have a dam that we have, Cleveland Dam on the Capilano, and
dangers of that.

5557. Just two weeks ago, a huge amount of non—band members -- or non-

. members. I don’t know what colour they were, but they weren’t ours. They were
trapped just below the upper levels and they had to be moved off by rescue
people.

5558. We also, for purposes of wanting to make sure we’re doing the right
thing and seen to be doing the right thing, help people understand hunting and
ﬁshing is hand in hand. And you don’tjust go out hunting or you just don’t go
out ﬁshing. You try to utilize time if and when it’s available to do those things if
and when it’s -- the opportunity arises.

5559. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Xwelxwelacha Siyam.

5560. You mentioned in the ﬁfties there was no poverty in the community.
You were using the -- the Squamish Nation was using the resources, and you
provided us a very good overview of the Squamish history to date.

5561. I was wondering if you could tell us a little bit what it was like ﬁshing
as a young boy in the Mission and Capilano Reserves.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 06
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5562. CHIEF WILLIAMS: Yes. At Mission, remembering what was
happening there at that time as well, they had canoe races in the summer months.
In the spring, they were training.

5563. And there was very, very, big populations of herring. And my parents
and other people in the community would go down along the Mosquito Creek,
we’d call that creek. The old timers call it First Creek.

5564. And when the tide goes out, they would put out a bunch of cedar
boughs down on a log, hanging into the water and, two days later, they would go
back and they would have about two and a half, three inches of herring and
herring roe covering all the branches that were in the water. And they tried to put
it where the log wouldn’t go dry on the ground. So we had that happening.

5565. We use to catch crabs along the —— there was a large -- very large mud
bank at the bottom end of Mosquito Creek, right in ﬁont of the Uslahan (ph)
Reserve, and we used to get crabs there and dig clams down along where the
creek was emptying because that was where the water was the cleanest.

5566. We would be ﬁshing and we’d catch ﬂounders and cod off the end.
Then we’d catch trout in the creeks. And coho did go into those creeks in quite a

I few numbers, up into Mahan Creek. And I think, for purposes again of not being
in the ﬁfties, I think it was the mid-sixties, they put -- how do you call it -- these
sewer trunks because it was straight down from the Upper -- Upper North
Vancouver to right down to the Marine Drive to where the major trunks running
east-west, they’d have them run down the creeks.

5567. . They ran -- at that time, they ran it, and it became a ﬂume after that.
There was no more ﬁsh that was available and there was nowhere for the ﬁsh to
spawn and/or sit out of the current. It was just a straight creek.

5568. They did the same thing with Sister Creek in the mid-seventies, and all
of the people above -- we went on a helicopter ride. All the people in the upper
levels had swimming pools.

5569. DFO was accusing us of killing all the ﬁsh off and these people would
drain their pools in the winter so that they wouldn’t crack their swimming pool
walls and we’d see the water go blue from time to time. And this would kill all
the smelts and the small ones no matter where they were‘ in the river system and in
the creek system.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 07
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5570. We often wondered why there was no -- no small trout in those creeks
when I was a youth. The ﬁsh would come back into Capilano and they would
turn off in there and we would catch a few up there, but usually we would not
have any trout caught in those —- those systems because of the efﬂuent coming out
of those swimming pools.

5571. And I think in the mid-eighties, there were some restrictions from
emptying the --emptying their pools directly into the creeks. By then, all the ﬁsh
are decimated.

5572. Did you want me to talk about Capilano as well, or...?

5573. MR BRUCE: Sure. I think you’ve segued into a pretty critical
question that I had for you is, what has the Squamish Nation done to preserve the
right to ﬁsh within its territory?

5574. CHIEF WILLIAMS: Yeah. Well, what we’ve done and attempt to
do is we’ve enacted a by—law in 1977 and amended it in ’92. We have
arrangements with DFO for them. We got stream keepers, they call them.

5575 . They fund a whole bunch of non—Indian stream keepers, West Van and
North Van and other places and as well the hatcheries. And they’ve discontinued
the -- DFO has discontinued supporting the hatchery in Seymour, and the
steelheaders have taken that over.

5576. We, under the by-law, have the ability to capacity build and introduce
our different spawning areas in the Squamish Valley where we do have side
streams that are totally within the reserves. And we attempt to try to get, I guess
you’d call it, capital infrastructure put in so we can do just that.

5577. But to this date, we have not ever been -- had the opportunity. We had
communication with the Chehalis people, who have very successﬁil efforts in
their area. They’re on the Harrison. And we’ve —- we were a part of their effort to
deal with it, but because we’re ﬁghting DFO in Court all the time, they don’t fund
us with anything other than this other thing from ’93.

5578. So for our purposes, we attempt to give recommendations back to
DFO on rewatering streams that they’ve put dikes in to protect the Town of
Squamish, the Valley, Garibaldi Heights or Garibaldi Lowlands or whatever they

I Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014
|

9
valuable resource.
Squamish ’5 right to navigate our T erritory
32. In addition to supporting harvesting activities, Squamish communities have traditionally

relied, and continue to rely, on the water ways in and around Burrard Inlet, Southern

Howe Sound, and the lower Fraser River as important transportation corridors. This

movement is seasonal and important for maintaining familial ties, participating in

community activities, accessing sacred sites and transmitting information about cultural
practices from one generation to the next.

33. Lhekw ’lhzi'kw ’aym (Burnaby Mountain) is along a water route used by Squamish people
to travel between Capilano and Indian Arm.

34. Transportation routes were and are speciﬁc with respect to location, directionality, and
timing, reﬂecting the essential aquatic orientation of Squamish people. Examples include:

(a) the use of speciﬁc marine waypoints, visible only from the water, as navigation
and safety aids;

(b) ancestral villages in Howe Sound, like ch ’kw ’elhp and k’ik’elxn, along with a
burial ground on Keats Island are stopover sites at which location-speciﬁc stories
are told;

(c) water—based vantages are important sites from which to teach cultural norms, as
well as water safety and respect, to youth; and

(d) canoe races that cement and maintain intra-tribal and inter-tribal relations
continue to take place in Burrard Inlet, as well as annual tribal journeys
throughout the Salish Sea and Paciﬁc west coast.

Squamish cultural and spiritual practices

35. Burrard Inlet, and the surrounding areas, have been the home of the Squamish since time
immemorial. Squamish’s cultural and spiritual practices are inseparable from the lands
and waters on and in which they are exercised.

36. Numerous Squamish archaeological, cultural and/or otherwise sacred sites exist in and

|
around Burrard Inlet, including shell middens, culturally modiﬁed trees (bark stripping,
8

1 08
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
called and Brackendale and other areas that, for their reasons, they just put huge
dikes in to protect their inﬁ'astructure.

5579. What we try to do is put butterﬂy traps -- have them recommend to put
butterﬂy traps as well as access for rewatering. Even the Mamcem, which they
put into the Squamish River because the town of Squamish is below sea level -- in
1930 or 1929, whenever it was, they -- because they didn’t want two rivers
ﬂooding on both sides of town, they’d rather have one side protected and the
other side, it’s the reason why they call it the Mamcem Blind Channel.

5580. They killed a hell of a lot of our resources off. We used to have
eulachons in there and smelts and sturgeon, all other sorts of our resources our
people used to use and all the different things where we’re trying to make sure
that we want to have the best practices identiﬁed, but the government and the
government permits for industry, pulp mills, mercury being contaminant in the
estuary at Squamish as well as Britannia, a mine that’s been there since the 18005.

5581. J ust got acid water coming out of that mine ever since they’ve opened
it, but very self-evident when -— when they had to close the whole of Howe Sound
because of the mercury poisoning as well as the acid -- acid -- not acid rain, but
when it rains, it goes down into the mine and the mine overﬂows and goes into
the creek and everything turns black and purple and not normal colours for our
environment.

5582. We attempt to agree with the hatchery people to make sure that we can
provide for our people with different things. And we do have the ESSR yearly,
but it’s not part of our normal thing. But we have had good cooperation with the
-- with the hatchery people because of the ongoing agreement with -- with DFO
for purposes of -- we have a kind of a -- I guess you’d call it an uneasy truce at
this time. But we normally notify West Van and North Van for helping when we
have guardians, and DFO has a totally adversarial approach to -- we should not be
a part of the management. We should be part of some stakeholder somewhere.
That’s their approach. They always approach us with that.

5583. So it’s not a matter for me to tell people what to do or not to do. I’m
telling you the experiences we have to deal with.

5584. If Indians or tribes of Indians sign a piece of paper that says DFO is all
power authority, they’ll give them everything they want for a couple years and
then have that hanging over them for the rest of their lives. We choose not to do

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 09
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
that.

5585. MR. BRUCE: Xwelxwelacha Siyém, could you conﬁrm for me that
—- does the by-law apply to the Capilano River?

5586. CHIEF WILLIAMS: Yeah, the by-law itself, our Squamish Nation
by—law, applies on reserve. There is a decision in -- I’m not too sure what year it
was. It may have been ’93 or ’97 or -- I’m not too sure what it was.

5587. We had went to Court and they identiﬁed that any reserve that has a
boundary on the river, the authority only goes to midstream, if that, if it’s on one
side. If it’s -- there is no reserve on the other side of the river, we have no
authority to deal with the issues on that component, but there are parts of reserves
that we have.

5588. Capilano, for instance, we have a straight line boundary on the north
side and we have a straight line boundary on the south side, so we own both banks
of the river and the jurisdiction belongs to the people that control the by—Iaw.

5589. And the by-law says our Council have the jurisdiction in that case.
And DFO has not challenged us on that because I don’t think their lawyers have

' found a loophole to get rid of us yet and they’ve left us alone since -- since those
other Court cases.

5590. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Xwelxwelacha Siyérn.

5591. I think now -- I’m looking at the time. I think we have about 15
minutes left, and we wanted to have some time for Xélek’lSekyu Siyam to do
some concluding remarks. And I think right now would be a great time to do that.

5592. CHIEF WILLIAMS: Could I say one more thing?

5593. MR. BRUCE: Sure. We'll have some more remarks from Chief
Dick.

5594. CHIEF WILLIAMS: I'm not used to these things.

5595. Just for purposes, again, of having our position identiﬁed and who we
are and what we represent, this map that you see on the easel here is our core
territory map. It is our primary territory where we have our villages and our

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 10
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
resources that are exclusive to us.

5596. We have secondary resource areas that our people have travelled since
before contact, and those are in conjunction with tribes, our neighbours, that we
don't over-rule them. We have, I guess you'd call it, political protocols with those
people. And we agree -- it's almost as if we're trading access to their resources
when they can have certain access to our resources that we agree upon without the
interference with anybody else other than our own jurisdiction.

5597. And for purposes of maintaining how we do that and when we have
done that, none of the evidence that has been given so far has been identifying our
access and our presence on the Fraser River.

5598. Prior to the reserves system being established, Squamish Charlie was
compensated for his house and his barn and his animals where the railway ran a
railway trestle over the Fraser and the right-of-way across his party destroying
everything that was his there. There was a permanent residence with a barn, with
fences and with livestock and chickens and pigs. And all of those were taken
away and fed to the workers.

5599. It is documented, and his name was Techuxanem. And that was the

| same name that our hereditary Chief, Chief Joe Mathias, carried and was given at
the longhouse at meelchstn.

5600. The other thing is, Denny J ack, he grew up there. The White men
made the colony capital at New Westminster and moved all of the Indians across
the river. Denny J ack grew up there.

5601. And my Uncle Willie used to bring him there in the ﬁfties to visit
where his boyhood area was that he actually grew up and ﬁshed and hunted from,
and his parents grew up and lived there as well. And that reserve was
expropriated by the Crown and all of the people had to move off.

5602. Oh, by the way, as well, Old Mama, Siyelia (ph), that's where she got
J ohnny Baker at Annacis Island. He was one of the sailors off one of those ships
visiting that place. And that's where some of our gre'at—grandparents and parents,
grandparents, come from. I'm one of them.

5603. Thank you very much.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 11
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5604. MR. BRUCE: Thank you.

5605. So I've outlined in my introduction a number of constraints that are
impacting on the Squamish Nation providing fully-informed information today,
namely, the lack of funding to properly review the application to conduct the
studies and to obtain technical advice that Squamish required to discuss impacts
on its interests.

5606. Despite these constraints, Xélek’/Seky1'1 Siyém, can you tell us the
concerns Squamish has with this project proceeding?

5607. If I could just ask you to put up the last slide of the project? Thanks.

5608. CHIEF CAMPBELL: (Speaking in native language.) I'm very
honoured to have this opportunity to provide some closing remarks on behalf of
the Squamish Nation. And this is a very complex matter that brings to mind a
number of issues and concerns that the Squamish have in relation to the
legitimacy of Canada to issue rights within the territories of our Coast Salish
people.

5609. First of all, the Squamish Nation does not consent to this project, to
Kinder Morgan's application. We weren't afforded the opportunity to engage in

l the initial projectg t$hat was installed prior to us being citizens in our own
country or any legal recourse that was afforded to the Squamish to protect our
interests with the advent of Port Metro Vancouver and these types of operations
within our territories.

5610. We do not consent to the Canadian government assuming jurisdiction
of our sovereignty and our Aboriginal rights and title. This is a question of
authority for us where we are not a vanished race. We are not in a museum
behind glass where tradition is something 200 years ago. Tradition is today.

5611. It is that continuity of tradition that will leave a legacy for our
collective futures.

5612. The Wﬂiyams talked about a concept in our language called
Wimuints, which means to conduct yourself as a Hyamﬁiyam, with
integrity and honour. These go along with our responsibilities and our obligations
to adhere to our laws.

i Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014

1 12
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5613. Not once in any of these processes have I seen the respect afforded to
us. J ust as successive governments in the past have neglected to recognize
Squamish authority and governance to make decisions in our own territories,
these laws are not being adhered to, in my observation of this process thus far.

I 5614 We have real words called ehijtathyg s that are real stories and real
history that's been handed down for many thousands of years, and
I Wwﬁyﬂh, which are our laws and our teachings.

5615. There still seems to be a confusion in this country that this foundation
of this country is premised off of F rench and English. That is the story that -- the
myth that continues to be told. And it neglects our own true identity; that which
is a country founded on many solid First Nations, indigenous nations that have
made this country what it is and continue to contribute to the quality of life that
Canadians are afforded when many First Nations still are dealing with abject
poverty, even in urban settings like this.

5616. We are not going to manage welfare. We're going to manage wealth.
But it isn't going to be at the expense of our integrity for the wilful destruction of
our relationship to our lands and waters and our territories.

5617+ We've been invisible in our own land for far too long. We're not even
sure, sitting here and sharing with you the vast history and knowledge of our
people, h0w this will be used. I don't know how you, as Panel Members, will take
this and absorb it and balance it so that we can move away from being treated as

I stakeholders in our own land._ §so even the process I am unsure of, the procedural
fairness of how we've even gotten to this point because, to me, it comes with
baggage. And that baggage is hard to articulate in three hours to you the
experience that the Squamish have had with all levels of government in this
country.

5618. Our archaeology and the science talks about a minimum of 9,800 years
of use and occupation. When you look at the history before that when all the
water was locked in ice, the sea level was a lot lower than it is today, so much of
our history is under water, under 60 metres of water today.

5619. So Canada continues to perpetuate this myth that we crossed a land
bridge and that somehow minimizes the legitimacy of our connections to this

I land.

|

I Transcript Hearing Order OH—OOl-2014
|

1 13
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
I 5620. We have terms called www.ﬁlhélhékwhiws, which is a very
spiritual term. It talks about our interconnectedness to creation. Our language is
largely a verb—based language, as opposed to English, which is largely noun-based
in relation. Where in English you'll say "that's a rock", there's no real relation to
it. In our language is -- that rock is a connection; it's at play.

5621. Value isn't given in English to things like the Salish Sea unless it's
economically viable, and that is only one compartment of our connection. We've
always had a strong economy from this territory.

5622. So we have to dispel that this is a free and vacant land and that the
government has legitimacy to issue these types of rights to this Kinder and this
Morgan. We don't know who these people are or why they should have rights in
our territory because we did not consent to that, free prior informed consent.

5623. Everything in our territory is named in English. We have English Bay,
British Properties, Howe Sound, Vancouver, Fraser River. Nothing here indicates
that our history is your history, that it doesn't just start with 1791 or with B.C.

j oining Confederation, but it spans well beyond that.
. 5624. So this is an opportunity to redeﬁne those relationships with Canada
' because they continue to go abroad internationally with FIPA.

5625. They continue to arbitrarily change laws and legislation around
omnibus Bills 38 and 45. Those are arbitrary decisions that do not reﬂect our
Aboriginal laws or our consent.

5626. We are not signatories to those international agreements that this party
here would like to have recognized as being legitimate. We are a true signatory to
those contractual agreements. Without our signature on those agreements, who is
giving away the rights to our lands and our waters?

5627. The cumulative impact -— we're well beyond this issue of probability.
Our minds go to the issue of consequence, of catastrophic events that have been
experienced by many other peoples, Exxon and BP and Kalamazoo and many
other offshore drilling catastrOphes, seismic. There are many issues that we have
with this product.

5628. We’ve been to the tar sands. We’ve met with the Athabascan
Chippewa, and we signed on to the Save The Fraser Declaration, the Salish Sea

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 14
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
Declarations. These are important to us. These are important steps in building
that awareness of who and what we are as a people.

5629. The ability to clean up this type of product, we are not satisﬁed that
Canada is capable of the propaganda that they will put out to say that this is world
class. With dispersants, with the impacts to the surface, the subsurface, the sea
ﬂoor, the intertidal, the ability to truly manage this type of product and the
sustainability or the long-term impacts that this poses the risk to my
grandchildren. And if it’s jobs to clean up, then we’re not interested. We don’t
want to clean up this type of mess that is carcinogenic.

5630 Personally I prefer eulachon oil versus Alberta oil in my food. I don’t
want to see the operations of this leaking into our waters and contaminating our
crab, our shellﬁsh, all those things that me and my children enjoy eating.

I 5631. This area that we're talking about, Whatmmcyymagm,
this was the traditional calving grounds of the yew yews, of the killer whales.
They have also been displaced as a result of this industrial activity. We have
tremendous love for the killer whales and we want to see this area revitalized as
Howe Sound has been seeing the killer whales returning, the herring biomass.

5632. Is this conducive to that type of revitalization? We have serious
doubts. Titerntsen is a village, I explained to you early on, in Port Moody. You
could see that there is a -- the quickest path from Titemtsen down here to the
Fraser River to Kikayt to our old villages, it’s about nine kilometres. Our people
use the entire area. It wasn’t site speciﬁc of our strength of title.

5633. We ask Canada, where is their strength of title, British Columbia, in
the absence of First Nations being a party to decision making, environmental
stewardship.

5634. We are not enemies of the state. We have inherent responsibilities to
protect the sacred. We are decision makers. We are in an era called “truth and
reconciliation” in this country, and I ask you, “What are the actions that go with
truth and reconciliation? What does it look like?”

5635. When we were in Africa last year, we visited South Africa and
Namibia. We visited these places and seen the changes from their oppressive
legislation, from apartheid to world leaders like Mandela who effected positive
change. And we ask ourselves in Canada, “Is this part of your vision, is it part of

. Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 15
Squamish N ation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
your dream to see reconciliation? And what does that look like?"

5636. Is it national reform of laws and policies that truly bring First Nations
to the table as decision makers and as governments, as stewards and incorporating
our laws, incorporating western—based science because we’re not here to impede
economy.

5637. We understand economy. We were a very afﬂuent people for a very
long time, and that’s changed by design over the last number of decades. And
that’s unacceptable.

5638. We have an Elder in Tsleil-Waututh, Ta7a, she says, “We’re smart
enough to know better. We have innovation, we have renewables. We continue
to contribute to carbon emissions and global warming”. She goes, “We’re going
to be known as the age of stupidity if we don’t change our way”.

5639. And those are profound words coming from our Elders because they
have ﬁrsthand seen the cumulative impact of industrialization of our territories
and the loss of sustenance, loss of spiritual connections, that newcomers have
come into our lands assuming this jurisdiction.

5640. So we’re here to reafﬁrm that I don’t know what you want to do with
this information, but we do not provide consent. And it’s an honour to share our
story with you today, to share a small piece of our history through these place
names and these images. And again, it would be even better to get you out on the
land to show you ﬁrsthand.

5641. Again, our history is your history and we know that these afﬂuent
people next to us here, who they represent. They wish to continue to make more
and more money at our expense, and that’s something that our membership do not
feel is something we can support.

5642. So thank you for listening. It’s an honour to be here. And thank you
to our legal team for bringing this together along with our Elders, all of our Chiefs
and our matriarchs, our family that are here today. I really appreciate all of our
community members.

5643. Again, thank you to the Stézlo for allowing us in your territory to share
a small piece of our history with you this afternoon.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 16
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams

5644. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Chief Campbell.

5645. And we’ve been asked to -- been offered an invitation a number of
times throughout the last -- what was it, last week and this week, to go on to the
land and to go on to the river and everything else. And we would all love to and
we’ve all kind of agreed that in -- perhaps in another time when we’re past this,
that it would be of great honour to do something like that. Sure.

5646. Perhaps I could offer Trans Mountain, Ms. Oleniuk, if you wish to ask
any questions of clariﬁcation at this point to ---

5647. MS. OLENIUK: On behalf of Trans Mountain I’d just like to thank
the Squamish Nation for your presentation, and we have no questions, sir. .

5648. THE CHAIRMAN: I’mjust trying for -- if I may, Chief Campbell
and also Chief Williams made some mention about it. And I understand the
hereditary Chiefs and your responsibility from the beginning of the Chiefs to --
for the protection and management of the land and the water and that now that’s
fallen to the Council as the -- for that protection, enforcement.

5649. And Chief Williams talked about the relationship with DFO and the
management of the Capilano River, for example, and the by—laws and the strength
of those by-laws.

5650+ And you also mentioned, Chief Campbell, the wild spirit places and
the co-management of that aspect of it.

5651. I was just interested in the Burrard Inlet. I am aware that there’s the --
you know, there’s the two shores, the north shore and your home is there along
the north shore, but also use on the south shore.

5652. Is there any sort of protection management of those waters in the
Burrard Inlet that you are involved in, that you have any wish to have in or have
any been recognized of that and any management of that and protection of those
particular waters in the Burrard Inlet? I’d be interested to understand that aspect
of it.

565 3. CHIEF CAMPBELL: Thank you for the question, and also thank
you for recognizing the Squamish Land Use Plan was a very powerful tool to

remove the ambiguity of where the Squamish’s vision is for the northern part of

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 17
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
our territories.

5654. We’ve now engaged in starting the scoping of a marine use planning
process that would look at, primarily beginning with Howe Sound, in the
inventory of the types of sponge reefs and the building blocks that will facilitate
sustainable revitalization of those waters as well as the -- I guess, working with
the Coast Salish gathering, as I mentioned in my presentation on the Salish Sea in
a broader context from headwater to sea ﬂoor, from mountaintop to sea ﬂoor.
And there, we’ve looked at engagement with Environment Canada and EPA on
the US. side on having more strengthening of the relationships to work with those
entities in how we wOuld look towards co-management.

5655. Port Metro Vancouver, we’ve attempted to create some sort of, I don't
know if it was an MOU or a protocol of some sort. That didn't go very far with

[ Minister Oliver, WWWWMW we can get
involved with the federal aspects as well as the Port Metro Vancouver aspects of
business.

5656. We've looked to other F irst Nations on how they've managed to

l engage elsewhere on the coast, such as the coastal WTshnshian the
Prince Rupert Port, you know, the larger context of decision-making, of economic
activity, as well as environmental, those three pillars. So those are our aspirations
is to certainly have the First Nations recognized and participating, as opposed to
hearing the risk.

5657. THE CHAIRMAN: I appreciate the clariﬁcation.

5658. And we heard, and I think you probably referred to it is the joint -- is it
the Paciﬁc Marine Council or Paciﬁc Management Council that the Tulalip and
the others have mentioned that. Is that in the -- the three parties, six parties to
that? So that's part of what you refer to as the big marine study that's going on?

5659. CHIEF CAMPBELL: Yes, thank you.

5660. Yes, absolutely, with the other Coast Salish intervenors we've been
able to meet with them to strategize on those types of next steps.

5661. And I'd like to thank my colleague. Councillor Chris Lewis also
wanted to mention in our explanation with the Vancouver Aquarium and other
groups, that we're looking at science-based MOUs with more of those types of

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 0
indigenous logging, canoe manufacture), cemeteries, burials, fish traps or ﬁsh weirs,
canoe runs, and rock art.

37. The rivers and creeks within Squamish Territory have been, and continue to be, important
sites from a cultural and spiritual perspective. Maintaining access and the purity and
privacy of these sites is critically important to our people — especially in View of existing
urban and industrial disturbance. Some creeks entering Burrard Inlet, are important to
Squamish for spiritual training and locations for spiritual bathing.

38. The longhouse is the hub of Squamish culture, religion, beliefs, and practices. There are
currently two longhouses located on Squamish Territory — one at xwmelch ’stn (Capilano
Reserve) and one at ch ’z'ch ’elxwi7kw (Seymour Reserve), but there was historically a
number throughout our Territory.

39. The resources needed to support the longhouse tradition are drawn from the waters and
lands in and around Burrard Inlet, including from Lhekw ’lhti'kw ’aytn (Burnaby
Mountain): the masks are made ﬁom local cedar; feathers harvested from local waterfowl
are used to welcome the new xekselkwelh dancers (the longhouse dancers) upon their ﬁrst
entry into the longhouse; and the food used for ceremonial and sustenance purposes is
harvested from the broader Territory. Continued access to these resources is integral to
the longhouse tradition enduring. The longhouse tradition is the thread connecting
thousands of years of Squamish practice and culture.

40. The connection between Territory and culture is an essential component of Squamish
identity. Harvesting in the same places as Squamish ancestors and relatives harvested
allows for the transmission of site-speciﬁc Squamish teachings and history. Being on and
learning from Squamish Territory expresses and reinvigorates Squamish identity.

41. Squamish remains critically concerned that the Westridge Delivery Line Proj ect will
interrupt our cultural practices, impede access to our Territory and impact sites of cultural
importance.

42. The waters in and around Burrard Inlet are used as points to realize Squamish’s spiritual
connection to our Territory. Sloughs and marshes are portals that connect to the aqueous

9

1 18
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Richard Williams
entities that are able to look at science as well as TEK.

5662. So restoration of our Mosquito Creek, Seymour and Mackay Creeks
and salmon enhancement, to answer your ﬁrst question -- I apologize -- but those
are some of the activities that the nation is engaged in, to just lightly touch on
those areas to let you know that we've certainly been proactive to look at ways
that we can revitalize Burrard Inlet and incorporate our TEK, traditional
ecological knowledge.

5663. Thank you.

|

5664. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you for that.

5665. The Board, the Panel don't have any further questions of clariﬁcation,
and I understand you may wish to close with a prayer. Am I correct?

5666. So perhaps I'll close and then we can close formally with a prayer, if
that's your wish. In another life, that's been my recognition is to open and to
close. So if it's ﬁne with you, I'd be -- we'd be -- the Panel would be pleased for

I that.

i 5667. We would like to acknowledge the information you've shared with it,
the voices from your heart that you have brought to us today. And I want to
assure you that what you have shared with us today we will consider and we will
have -- and we will consider it along with everyone else we will hear and have
heard already of whether we decide to -- whether or not to recommend approval

. of this project.

5668. I also recognize before we ﬁnish the —- those who have travelled with
you and the other chiefs and members of the Squamish Nation that you have
brought with you, and you have travelled, and I wish you all to travel safely home
back to your communities.

5669. With that, we are adjourned and we will reconvene at 9:00 am. on
Thursday, November the 13th in Kamloops, British Columbia.

5670. (Closing prayer)

--- Upon adjourning at 4:43 p.m./L'audience est ajournée a 16h43

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1 1
spiritual realms. These portals are found in several locations throughout the area that
would be impacted by the Westridge Delivery Line Project. These stories are central to
Squamish beliefs and mythology, and cement the importance of the water in Squamish
culture. For example:

(a) Xwech 76!, a prominent ﬁgure in Squamish oral history, was transported through
one of these underwater portals after being abducted by the seal pe0ple. Xwech ’tdl
brought back the connection of these realms to the living world and the
sacredness of that connection when he returned four years later. This location is
near the Burnaby Mountain tunnel (along with the Burnaby Terminal and
Westridge Marine Terminal), located north of the site near Temtemixwtn —
Belcarra Park.

(b) One of the Wild People, known as the smc‘zylilh, trained Squamish warriors in the
Capilano River. The Squamish were instructed to carry heavy stones underwater
through the pools on the river, and in so doing, were transcended into the spirit
world.

43. Many of the people in the Squamish community have learned of the different spiritual
sites in our Territory from our parents and our grandparents, as knowledge of these sites
is passed down from one generation to the next by Visiting the sites.

The Westridge Delivery Line Proj ect’s Potential Adverse Impacts on Squamish

44. As described above, the areas in and around Burrard Inlet and the Salish Sea are central
to Squamish identity and culture. They are also key to the modern economic success of
our Nation.

45. The Westridge Delivery Line Project is situated in the heart of Squamish Territory. In
addition to this being our home, we rely on our territorial and reserve lands, and the
lands, waters and resources adjacent to them, to support our people, culture and way of
life, and to practice our Aboriginal rights, including harvesting, cultural, social,
ceremonial and governance rights. These areas are culturally and ecologically signiﬁcant,
are vital to Squamish’s livelihood and economy, and are critical to the survival of
Squamish people and culture.

46. The Westridge Delivery Line Project area contains a concentration of Squamish cultural
and spiritual values. Due to the density and signiﬁcance of the cultural and spiritual

10

1 2
values in the Project area, the lands and waters in this area are very sensitive to further
industrial development. The loss of access to, or availability of, the land, waters and
resources within this part of Squamish Territory would be devastating to Squamish
identity and culture.

47. Given the level of urban and industrial development in certain parts of Squamish
Territory, and the subsequent effects on Squamish’s access to and use of resources, the
maintenance of the remaining intact areas in the Territory is increasingly important.
Lhelcw ’lhzi-kw ’aym (Burnaby Mountain) remains a protected area that has not been
signiﬁcantly impacted by industrial development. The maintenance of the environmental
integrity of, and access to, this area for generations to come is of critical importance to
the Squamish Nation.

48. Squamish would bear the burden of a signiﬁcant portion of the potential risks and
impacts of the Westridge Delivery Line Project. The construction and operation of the
Westridge Delivery Line Project would result in physical impacts from the relocation of
the pipeline and a substantial increase in the risks of spills or other accidents associated
with the tunnel through Lheﬁcw ’lhzi'kw ’aym (Burnaby Mountain). The Proj ect further has
the potential to increase the amount of diluted bitumen transporting through the Territory.

49. Squamish takes our stewardship role within our Territory seriously. As noted above,
Squamish has actively engaged in rehabilitating the marine and terrestrial environments
in the Westridge Delivery Line Project area in an attempt to counteract the effects of
industrialization. The Westridge Delivery Line Project threatens to undermine those
efforts. It is of critical importance to the Squamish and to the continued maintenance of
our Territory that if the Westridge Delivery Line Proj ect is approved that it is subj ect to
the condition that the existing pipeline is permanently decommissioned and the area
remediated.

Consultation

50. Despite the serious nature of our concerns with the Westridge Delivery Line Project, the
federal and provincial Crowns have not engaged, substantively or otherwise, with our

1 1

1 3
concerns with the Project. Squamish has not met with either Crown with respect to the
Westridge Delivery Line Project or been informed about how the Crowns plan to
discharge their respective duties to consult and accommodate Squamish with respect to
the Westﬁdge Delivery Line Project.

Limitations of this Evidence I
51. This evidence was prepared within the constrained timeline set by the National Energy
Board for the review of the Westridge Delivery Line Project. Squamish has not had the
time to commission studies evaluating Westridge Delivery Line Project. Nor has
Squamish been able, in the time allowed, to canvas the Views of all its members about the
potential impacts of the Westridge Delivery Line Project on our rights, title and interests.
12

14
APPENDIX A

i: :7. IN "
. _ " IT_.“
I. _:.-
P _ __ _ . l. . _Ll . I: _ __
ﬁr. ﬁg; .0 :3 '. T] r" .I-hll .
'C] C3] 1;: E: VF“ I 'I -- I'Iﬂ.
.f-_ 1—3 "~..___,._ : : ‘-
* ka‘l‘) '_ - '1 Er.“
|—.l I' ll
‘1'" 51-:
:_. l
'E'. .;'+
"'E 1’ 1'. -
1'5 .- .. p
m '5' I:l||._'.
h :2:
. ' . |' I II .
< . r-
:I ' _
c . ...' _ _ _
O a -
.—. \EI I I - :11“! ..-J'
H E
m m E’n. Elﬁn“?
E m I I." f $3" 1-. ,1. fr“: ‘1. ._, .. ' ..
J m. | 3 1 -- a=- ..gﬂ Mn ,1 . -. :
Ii' .- *‘Tﬁﬂ' I bi" ‘5! “DJ. LE: ii" .-"*"If.-" 1r. Lit; ;-- I
. - - - w: ir:-'.-=";'. --'- 3“: 1*.“ 'E. 1 :3: -~ .E
o I g 21;"... n11: " . ‘*"‘*‘K€;3|IFTE.!JII'FE'FL‘FE’YE“fa5
U El ‘. _gjnﬁff-J £3; . Fm} L_zﬁwiﬁj- ﬂﬂlﬂ :1; .- ﬁf‘iléégliﬁmgﬁia ..j
.I-‘I' .' 314-1.. . '1‘“ F . jg...“ - ,_.-L ﬁt . . 1. +. T .
: xl ##ﬁii 1:2...5'36 £113.! ?fﬂ;‘%$ "‘-"""..I- :21 ER! ' ' I
O m ”5" l M; JE” 3 ﬁ‘ ‘51
. ;-.- - 1' .1»- "l f TE: 4;; - J. I
. ---— -. *1“: _. i. 4E
' 'l" "H!”- .-._-..- mﬁ- ."~' ﬁ‘h. . _' jE
m If I km a: K 3'3 E I - ' "
' ' 7m ""1 . -.-:_L 3-1" . I'
l 'E *l:24-=E-“ 1'! "*~ --
. 1'" .. .i‘: T.1 ”1:" .
-: 1" ' :E Iii '
.2 '9'" 3 {:51}; g! .
I l
' [1”! = l:
- '- - - a J i}!!! I:
' - ii!|i Ii
I i l I l
m --— _ _ __ lll-Imli! ,
__ _ __
I,_
3 II— : r
o- .-
m ' " ' -
' I II' F.
' T '-"' r— .
_"' |I -'
- - --:-".I .I—II
' I5- .3
. - n; '-
r ' .-
I= _ I.I
II .1" I ?' .
' . --.J '-_- -

16
APPENDIX B

.;.-== -—
. ‘.|_—r.'-' :I-EL] , Ii _
' 9 ' ' r. 1..
d'%’ "I ' ' I'EHI v"? _
E] C3 5:: 5-3:, Ir 1 .- _ .l-_;‘ 1' ..
GJHE-Z’ Jr'- . I I ' ' .
iii. 523341.13 '11 .-
. 6:113:55 , '-.—C '
_; ; ;'_ u__F'_'-;__ _ _ _
E 3"} - .. ”E: 3%; .
“— ff HER; . 1| 1 ...|
i. f E ' . I 1.
"" . 1 . i ‘E a E ‘ I"
I - ' ﬂ :1' a s _
m __.I I-"'-1 i “J"— E - r"__
11-! - ﬂ --4'" 1'1 - ' I j
m HRH _...--H_ Eﬁ‘ I 1f ' "'11 ._ .
m 1R "1"" ._.._I‘ -u_--El'_ ~ I i .I ,-""I " :11. l _ - '1! .
_ ﬂat. “..Hﬁl __"ﬁr I: “I I .-
.— .._ _____.I -. g?” : ﬁ __ _______
> _ ﬁ' . .. _
n- hi. ﬂ: ._  
C 51:" I 'E E " r . m
0 ﬁnal“? -: a I ‘ﬁ FEE.
--~._:_~':e... ﬁ 1... . _. . . .3 E3:
.— 2“: _. '-~.._..____;:E" IE? ‘1' I. '1' __. ‘ 5 HIEIE
45 f5 E - '
_.--*"'r-- =r- . II I -: _ - ' .
"' " 'u-- H! -- . __ - - . .. I
W :.'::‘1%' "' "E ' ' g
o- m_ . t: . _ , .-
E 1.. E I17 IE; _ - _, "1- _ f I
K" I a 3'2 9’ E a ' I
.- HM
U, 1. “EEEHN.
ll. . 5 .F” I!
_ ._ . D _ I-I-
_ - 3 . l l: .
'..;:.~._.. _
"fl “3: ,u'. .
. _ .1 -|‘|
"‘1.“ . H” -
”._ _ I.-
-. 1_ ' - _ _

4. The Squamish Evidence was prepared under my direction and control and is accurate to
the 'best of my knowledge and belief.
AFFIRMED BEFORE ME at )
i lﬂﬂ H mm: “5w , in the Province )
01" British Cnlumbia, 0n 1 51' day of ) ,@W m
August, 2018 ) *~—__—_
)
A Commissmner for taking Afﬁdavits for )
British Columbia )
MICHELLE L. BRADLEY
Barrister & Soh’citor
RATCLIFF & COMPANY
#500 - 221 West Esplanade
North Vancouver. B.C. V7M 3J3
(604) 988-5201
2
|

18
APPENDIX C

1 9
‘NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD [“9“ 6°“ Chaim“ I
OFFICE NATIONAL DE L’ENERGIE
W
@ﬁ'
,jn.‘:i§2%_vﬁ5"*riif
Hearing Order 0H-001-2014
Ordonnance d’audience OH-001-2014
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Trans Mountain Expansion Project
Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Projet d’agrandissement du réseau de Trans Mountain
|
VOLUME 12
Hearing held at
L’audience tenue El
Coast Chilliwack Hotel
45920 First Avenue
Chilliwack, British Columbia
October 24, 2014
Le 24 octobre 2014
International Reporting Inc.
Ottawa, Ontario
(613) 748-6043
Canad'él'

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2014 © Sa Majesté du Chef du Canada 2014

as represented by the National Energy Board representee par l’Ot'ﬁce national de l’énergie

This publication is the recorded verbatim transcript Cette publication est un compte rendu textuel des

and, as such, is taped and transcribed in either of the deliberations et, en tant que tel, est enregistrée et

ofﬁcial languages, depending on the languages transcrite dans l‘une ou l’autre des deux langues

spoken by the participant at the public hearing. ofﬁcielles, compte tenu de la langue utilisée par le
participant 2‘1 l’audience publique

Printed in Canada Imprimé au Canada

21
HEARING ORDER/ORDONNANCE D’AUDIENCE
OH-001-2014
IN THE MATTER OF Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC
Application for the Trans Mountain Expansion Project
HEARIN G LOCATIONILIEU DE L'AUDIENCE
I Hearing held in Chilliwack (British Columbia), Friday, October 24, 2014
Audience tenue £1 Chilliwack (Colombie—Britannique), vendredi, le 24 octobre 2014
|
BOARD PANEL/COMITE D'AUDIENCE DE L'OFFICE
I D. Hamilton Chairman/Président
|
I P. Davies Member/Membre
|
A. Scott Member/Membre
I
I
Transcript Hearing Order OH-OOl-2014

22
ORAL PRESENTATIONS/REPRESENTATIONS ORALES
leitsum First N ation
Councillor J anice Wilson
Dr. Bruce Miller
Ms. Glenna Borsuk
Mr. Paul Reid
Mr. J effrey Rath (counsel)
Squamish N ation
Chief Ian Campbell
Chief Richard Williams
Mr. David J acobs
Mr. Aaron Bruce (counsel)
Ms. Michelle Bradley (counsel)
Transcript Hearing Order 011-001-2014

23
ERRATA
0)

Wednesday, Dumber 21, Zﬂld - Vulume 19

Should read:
ORAL PRESENTATIONS/REPRESENTATIONS ORALES
Suquamish Tribe ,
Ms. J an Hasselman (Representative) Mr. J an Hasselman (Representative)
Thurman1 ﬂttuher ‘23, 11114 - Vulumc 11

Should read:
ORAL PRESENTATIONS/REPRESENTATIONS ORALES
Tulalip Tribes
Ms. J an Hasselman (Representative) Mr. J an Hasselman (Representative)
Lummi Nation
Ms. J an Hasselman (Representative) Mr. J an Hasselman (Representative)
Transcript Hearing Order OH—001-2014

24
TABLE OF CONTENTS/TABLE DES MATIERES

6)
Description Paragraph NoJNo. de paragraphe
Opening remarks by the Chairman 4924
leitsum First Nation
Councillor Janice Wilson
Dr. Bruce Miller
— Introduction by Mr. Rath 4942
- Oral presentation by Councillor J anice Wilson 4962
- Oral presentation by Dr. Bruce Miller 4968
Opening remarks by the Chairman 5228
Em—Natim

' Chief Ian Campbell

Chief Richard Williams
Mr. David Jacobs
— Introduction by Mr. Bruce 5245
- Oral presentation by Chief Ian Campbell 5262
- Oral presentation by Mr. David Jacobs 5414
- Oral presentation by Chief Richard Williams 5509
Transcript Hearing Order OH—001-2014

25
LIST OF EXHIBITS/LISTE DES PIECES
(i)
No. Description Paragraph NoJNo. d‘e paragraphe
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

26
UNDERTAKINGS/ENGAGEMENTS
No. Description Paragraph NoJNo. de paragraphe
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

27
Opening remarks
Chairman

--- Upon commencing at 9:02 a.m./L’audience débute a 9h02

4924. THE CHAIRMAN: Good morning, everyone, and ﬁrst of all, I’d
knowledge that we are on the territory of the St6:16 people.

4925. I'd like to welcome you to the oral traditional evidence phase of the
National Energy Board's hearing regarding the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project.

4926. My name is David Hamilton, and I am the Chair of the Panel. And
with me on my left is Alison Scott; and on my right, Phil Davies. We want to
welcome who is here today, both in the hearing room and listening on our
webcast.

4927. I think it's important before we get going to -— in case there's a need for
an evacuation. The emergency exits are behind you ﬁ'om where you entered.
Then there's two exits, leﬁ and right, to take you out safely to the parking lot.

4928. In addition to the Panel, we have a number of staff in the room who
would be able to answer any process-related questions, and you can recognize
them by their metal badges they are wearing.

4929. With respect to the schedule, we will sit from 9:00 until noon today
and take breaks as appropriate for the -- to assist us to get through this morning.

4930. Before we get under way, I just would like to remind the parties of the
Panel's guidance in the Hearing Order and Procedural Direction No. l in regards
to oral traditional evidence.

4931. The Board understands that the leitsum First Nation have an oral
tradition for sharing knowledge from generation to generation, and this
information cannot always be adequately shared in writing. The Board
recommends that those providin g oral traditional evidence focus on their
community's interests and rights.

4932. These hearings are not to hear evidence that will be ﬁled subsequently
in writing, including technical and scientiﬁc information, opinions or views,
advice to the Board on whether to recommend approval of the project or the terms
and conditions that should be imposed, or questions to the Board or other
participants.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

1
This is Exhibit "A" rﬂferred to in the Afﬁdavit
of Deborah Baker, sworn before me at
L MM, Vancu Var, British Columbia
this [5* day ofAugust 2018.
A Cﬂmmissinner or taking Afﬁdavits within
British Columbia
Written Evidence of the Squamish Nation
Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
Hearing Order MH-048-2018
File No. OF—Fac—Oil-T260-2017-10 01
July 27, 2018

28
Opening remarks
Chairman

4933. Sharing your traditional knowledge and stories about the use of your
traditional territory is of value to us. If you wish to share any concerns about the
impacts the proposed project may have on you and your community and how any
impacts could be eliminated or reduced, that would be also helpful to us.

4934. This is the type of information we're here to listen to, and we will use
this information we gather today, along with all other available information, in
considering the possible effects of the proposed project.

4935. We appreciate that you have chosen to be here today. Before
providing oral traditional evidence, presenters will be asked to swear or afﬁrm
that the information you are presenting is accurate and truthful, and to the best of
your knowledge and belief.

4936. With that, I believe we are ready to get under way. And perhaps
before you present your oral traditional evidence, perhaps I would like the
representatives of the Proponent, Trans Mountain, for the record, to introduce
themselves.

4937. MS. OLENIUK: Good morning to the Board and good morning to
the witness panel.

4938. My name is Terri-Lee Oleniuk, and I represent Trans Mountain along
with my colleague to my right, Heather Weberg; to my left is Annie Korver, and
she's a member of Trans Mountain's Aboriginal Engagement Team.

4939. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Ms. Oleniuk.

4940. And before we ask for your witness to be afﬁrmed or sworn that if you
maybe could state at the beginning of your presentation whether you will be
responding to questions orally, in writing, or both.

4941 . So with that, I would pass it over to Mr. Rath, I understand. Thank
you.

4942. MR. RATH: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Panel.

4943. We'd also like to extend our thanks to Kinder Morgan and the Trans

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

29
HwIitsum First Nation — Oral presentation
Introduction by Mr. Rath
Mountain Pipeline people for the work that they've done so far in terms of their
engagement with HwIitsum F irst Nation.

4944. My name is J effrey Rath. I am the general counsel to the HwIitsum
First Nation. I am here today to introduce our panel for the oral history phase of
these proceedings.

4945 . To my immediate right is Councillor J an Wilson of the leitsum First
Nation. Next to her is Dr. Bruce Miller, who will be presenting the bulk of the
oral history evidence on behalf of leitsum F irst Nation today, and I'll be
speaking to that aﬁer the introductions.

4946. Next to Dr. Miller is Glenna Borsuk, a senior adviser to the HwIitsum
First Nation. And next to Ms. Borsuk is Mr. Paul Reid of the Nisga‘a First
Nation, barrister and solicitor and member of Rath and Company, who is also
here as counsel to the HwIitsum First Nation.

4947. With regard to the evidence that will be presented today, it's going to
be presented in the form of a PowerPoint presentation provided by Dr. Miller,
whose curriculum vitae and CV would be available to the Board and to the Panel
upon request.

4948. Dr. Miller is one of the leading experts in the ethno history of Coast
Salish people in British Columbia and, for the purposes of this hearing, has been
ofﬁcially designated in accordance with HwIitsum First Nation history and
tradition and culture as the ofﬁcial repository of the oral histories that he is going
to be sharing today on behalf of the Elders of HwIitsum F irst Nation who are
unable to attend today because of health reasons.

4949. All of the evidence that is going to be presented by Dr. Miller was
gathered in accordance with the culture and traditions of the HwIitsum First
Nation; is the proper oral history of the HwIitsum F irst Nation presided through
the person of Dr. Miller, who is the ofﬁcial repository of this information
currently on behalf of leitsum First Nation and the Elders who could not be
here today.

4950. Chief Wilson himself had intended to be here today to advise you of
this. He, himself, had an unfortunate incident this week with his health and had to
return to the hospital for further monitoring following some fairly extensive
surgery that he's undergone recently.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

30
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Introduction by Mr. Rath

4951. So now, on behalf of leitsum First Nation, to conﬁrm what I've just
advised the Panel, I will now turn things over to -- it would be my honour to turn
things over to Councillor J an Wilson of the leitsum First Nation for some brief
remarks that she would like to make prior to Dr. Miller's presentation.

4952. Thank you.

4953. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Mr. Rath. Perhaps we could have
the witnesses sworn or afﬁrmed ﬁrst before we proceed.

4954. Thank you.

4955. MR. RATH: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

JANICE CASEY PATRICIA WILSON: Afﬁrmed

BRUCE GRANVILLE MILLER: Afﬁrmed

4956. MR. RATH: And Mr. Chairman, one ﬁnal point of order prior to the
commencement of testimony on behalf of our panel, we have elected to answer all
questions that would be presented today, in writing.

4957. Thank you.

4958. THE CHAIRMAN: And I also maybe failed to mention that because
of the time allotted, if you feel that —- at the end of the session that there may be
additional information, you certainly can make a request to ﬁle oral traditional
evidence by electronic means, such as a video or some other method if that's
necessary. I just thought we'd leave that open for...

4959. MR. RATH: Thank you, sir.

4960. There may, in fact, be some additional evidence that we will be
tendering in this regard. Unsurprisingly, like many First Nations in the coast and
in the region, you know, leitsum is involved in quite a bit of ongoing litigation
with Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada and there's some very exciting
Afﬁdavit evidence that will be ﬁled in the Federal Court surely in a ﬁshing case
that we may wish to tender to the Board's -- for the Board's consideration in the
form of sworn Afﬁdavits in the next several weeks, so thank you very much for
that, sir.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

31
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Councillor Wilson

4961. THE CHAIRMAN: All right. And with that, thank you, Councillor
Wilson.

--- ORAL REPRESENTATION BY/REPRESENTATION ORALE PAR

COUNCILLOR JANICE WILSON:

4962. COUNCILLOR WILSON: Panel Members, my name is J anice
Wilson, and I'm a member of the leitsum F irst Nation. I'm also a member of
Council of the leitsum First Nation. I speak here today on behalf of all
leitsum First Nation members, Elders and the Chief in Council.

4963. Dr. Bruce Miller has been asked by leitsum First Nation members,
Elders and Chief in Council to present some important aspects of our oral history
and to provide an overview of our connections to our ancestral territory. The
evidence that will be presented today on behalf of leitsum First Nation by
Dr. Miller is a collection of some of the oral histories of leitsum F irst Nation as
passed down from generation to generation from time immemorial.

4964. Thank you.

4965. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Councillor Wilson

4966. And Dr. Miller.

4967. DR. MILLER: We haven't worked out -- can I say to you when I
want to change the slide just like that? Okay, thank you.

--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRESENTATION ORALE PAR DR. BRUCE

MILLER:

4968. DR. MILLER: Okay. Thank you very much.

4969. This is a presentation regarding leitsum First Nation oral histories.

4970. I want to start by showing you one of the major locations we're talking

' about so you can envision it. Here is leitsum.
4971. leitsum is the leitsum name for the location. It's called, in
Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014

32
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
English, Canoe Pass. 1 may move back and forth between both names, but
anyhow, it's the people and it's the location.

4972. And here is a navigational map just to show you -- give you another
little bit of orientation. You can see the ferry terminal there and you can see the
pass, and you can see Westham Island.

4973. Thank you.

4974. Later on, I'll show you a collection of maps that my colleague, Bill
Angelbeck, and I have prepared from the oral history evidence with leitsum.
This is just to give you a start in thinking about that.

4975. You can see Canoe Pass here, and you can see this represents the
locations for sockeye harvest. Thank you.

4976. The ancestors of the leitsum were also in what is now Stanley Park
in a location here, but probably using resources all through the region.

4977. And I want to say -- can you move that little cursor hand away, j ust for

. elegance. Thank you.

4978. This report represents information about the leitsum First Nation's
traditional use and occupation of the area now known as British Columbia. The
leitsum First Nation represents over 300 Hul'qumi'num people on the lower
mainland of British Columbia, the Gulf Islands and Eastern Vancouver Island.
But I want to say that information's not deﬁnitive and represents what is known
now. I do not represent that it's complete. There is no doubt more information
yet to be acquired.

4979. Since 2009, there's been an oral history project under way with the
leitsum people. Community members have recounted their own experiences
hunting, gathering and ﬁshing, and that of their ancestors. And much of this
project has been undertaken while traveling -- while I've been travelling and my
colleague, Bill Angelbeck, with leitsum people through their waterways and
with them ﬁshing, hunting and gathering. And the results of this work over the
last ﬁve years is presented here.

4980. And we gathered visual evidence of cultural, spiritual and harvesting
practices and obtained detailed accounts of traditional uses of the environment.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

33
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

4981. The trip, the several trips, also allowed us to witness the ongoing
relationship that leitsurn enjoy with the natural environment, both in obtaining a
livelihood and in maintaining spiritual, cultural and social cohesion, all topics that
I'll talk about in more detail. And it enabled myself and my colleague to
understand the way the territory, the waterways, the islands and the other features
of the land and seascape was and is understood by the leitsum.

4982. Finally, the trip also enabled us to witness the damage mainstream
society’s business development and management practices have inﬂicted on
leitsum’s society, culture and ﬁsheries.

4983. Now, you've heard this already, but today's Elders are not here. One
who was intended to be on the panel has passed away, another suffers from
dementia. One is recovering from surgery. And the one gentleman in their
nineties is too old to bear the weight of testimony alone. And so, as you've heard,
they've asked me to provide this information today.

4984. So I'm Dr. Bruce Granville Miller from the Department of
Anthropology at UBC. That's the picture of the Museum of Anthropology.

4985. The leitsum, like their ancestors, the Lamalchi, are members of the
Hul'qumi'num Mustimaxw. Prior to contact, the Mustimaxw employed a seasonal
cycle that saw them winter December to February on the Gulf Islands and
southern part of Vancouver Island and summer March to November on the lower
mainland of British Columbia.

4986. Prior to 1863, the Lamalchi had a winter village at Lamalchi Bay on
what is now known as Kuper Island, although I think it's sometimes being called
Peneleka Island. The site was ideally situated because it was a safe harbouring
place and there were abundant resources nearby to harvest.

4987. There's a picture of Lamalchi Bay and some of the leitsum Band
members at an event there two years ago. And I just included this picture of a
midden on the bay to indicate that this is a place of long occupation, and so shell
middens are refuse collecting over many generations, and the beach there is a
midden site.

4988. Now the background to all this. In 1863, the British Navy bombed and
then burned the Lamalchi village, and colonial authorities subsequently executed

Transcript Hearing Order OH-OOl-2014

34
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
three of their most prominent warriors. The next year, Governor J ames Douglas
allowed the Lamalchi land to be pre—empted. Since the Lamalchi had no access to
their ancestral village site, they were forced to winter elsewhere.

4989. Around 1892, many of the Lamalchi chose to live year round at
leitsum. In accordance with the Hul’qumi’num custom of identifying oneself
with one's village, winter village, the people now identify themselves as
leitsum. So to be clear, the people who were once called Lamalchi are now
called leitsum.

4990. The Lamalchi seasonal cycles. From before contact to 1849, they
employed a seasonal cycle -- I've already said this, but to remind you -- four
months, November to March, at Lamalchi, the bay -- the picture you saw a minute
ago. After harvesting the late-running chum salmon, the last run of anadromous
ﬁsh each year, the Lamalchi focused on harvesting local resources. The Lamalchi
village was ideally situated for a variety of resources listed there. I won't read all
that to you.

4991 . They also supplemented their winter diet by hunting and trapping deer,
elk and so forth and gathering salal, ferns, cedar bark and other things for
medicines, foods and food processing purposes.

4992. In April, the Lamalchi’s seasonal cycle took them to their ancestral
village at leitsum, otherwise known as Canoe Pass, where they would spend
eight months harvesting resources in the lower mainland of BC. leitsum -- I
showed you the picture of it -- was well situated, and still is, because it's not only
located in a prime harvesting location for the runs of ﬁsh, particularly eulachon
and salmon, it was also right in the middle of an important stopover for birds on
the Paciﬁc Flyway.

4993. The Lamalchi also travelled each year to the Coquitlam River and the
Pitt River where they harvested plants for medicinal and food purposes, the
various runs of salmon and sturgeon. They visited relatives there. They hunted
and trapped in the watershed areas. They harvested each anadromous ﬁsh run as
it arrived, beginning with the eulachon, then, in order, the spring salmon, coho,
sockeye, steelhead, and so forth.

4994. In addition, they harvested other species such as clams, crab, shrimp,
sturgeon, and they supplemented their diet by hunting and trapping various
species and gathering a number of plants.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

35
leitsum First Nation — Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

4995. After 1891 -- now, this is a discussion of their seasonal cycle to the
present. The rich history of harvesting within leitsum traditional territory
becomes evidence when one considers that, of the 17 people who gave oral
histories, 13 of them are or had been commercial ﬁshers. A11 17 remained
involved in some portions of ﬁshing, processing of ﬁsh, beach food, land and sea
mammals, plants and other species. And together, it reveals a community deeply
invested in protecting their traditional harvesting activities.

4996. These activities provide a source of food and revenue and feature in
the construction of personal and group identity and ﬁgure prominently in their
spiritual life. The resource activities aren’t just for food, but they create
community solidarity through proximity, through sharing of important activities,
and through the regular practice of reciprocity.

4997. All the leitsum report regular participation of both giving and
receiving gifts of food and exchanging valuable information about subsistence
activities. This reciprocity is important in binding a community to itself and is
characteristic of historic Coast. Salish.

4998. Ijust want to also add again, I’ve heard all these people give this in
testimony to me, but I’ve also witnessed all of these things that I’m talking about
today. Thank you.

4999. That’sjust a picture to give an idea, give a face to the activities I’m
mentioning.

5000. This is Chief Wilson, who’s ill, can’t be here today, and this is the late
Mary Wilson. There were two of the people that we had hoped would have a
chance to come and speak before you.

5001. Inherited knowledge. The oral histories show that the leitsum have
persisted in harvesting in the areas used by their ancestors. They maintain and
use speciﬁc knowledge of the movement of the tides, the location of resources,
and behaviours of particular species. It’s been fun and interesting watching that
process of knowledge exchange among Elders and junior people in the
community.

5002. As an example, J erris Wilson noted the ﬂounder are blown by a
southeast wind off the “ﬂats” of the river to deeper river water. Consequently, at

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

36
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
Canoe Pass, which is shallow, their nets go to the bottom to get the ﬂounder under
these weather conditions. But as I’ve mentioned, there’s an important spiritual
component to all this.

5003. The leitsum continue to practice historical spiritual Observances.
These include the practice of recognizing a relationship with salmon through
setting aside the ﬁrst salmon of the season, cooking it while still on board, sharing
it with all those aboard, and carefully preserving the bones for disposal into the
sea. One Elder noted that this is done so the ﬁsh return the next season.

5004. A variant on this was to carefully set aside the ﬁrst salmon of the
season to cut and distribute to family members once ashore. And another variant
was to bring the ﬁrst ﬁsh back to the Chief for him to eat and distribute. All of
these are a part of what Coast Salish people refer to as ﬁrst salmon ceremonies.

5005. Many of the present—day leitsum people remember details of the
ﬁshing of an earlier period so they’re able to talk about what their ancestors did
before restrictions on ﬁshing activities and before the serious decline in the
number of particular species. Because the practice is to learn ﬁshing and other
activities by observation of their Elders, all the leitsum can recall vividly their
early activities with these now-deceased family members. Many can recall what
the Elders of their youth told them about generations even further back, and these
narratives reach back to the common ancestor, Si’nuscustan, born in the late
1700s.

5006. Canoe Pass to the Gulf Islands. So one of the important things I want
to try to communicate to you is that the village where many of them live now is at
Canoe Pass or leitsum, but they have regular interchange through their territory
in the Gulf Islands.

5007. One of the Elder ﬁshermen, Lindsey Wilson, gave a useful account of
the pattern of economic activities. He observed that the historic village of
leitsum, at Canoe Pass, is situated at the mouth of the Fraser River. There, his
generation and those before him had access to the primary location for salmon
harvesting -- it’s a really wonderful place to harvest salmon -- and to the birds
migrating through the area. This location also gave access to other ﬁsh, including
sturgeon and eulachon. Canoe Pass allowed for direct travel upriver for species
best harvested there. So they’ve got a grand location.

5008. From Canoe Pass, leitsum people use the tides to reach Galiano

i Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014
|

37
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

Island in two and a half hours, where there are two major passes, Porlier Pass,
formerly Cowichan Gap, in the north and Active Pass in the south. The location
of these passes can be seen from Canoe Pass -- something I’ll talk about more
later -- and there are ancestral villages located at each. Movement through the
passes allows the taking of many species.

5009. And so Lindsey Wilson described the outside, the east of Galiano
Island, as the “catcher’s mitt” -— that’s his imagery -- which boats in Canoe Pass
can easily access with the tides. Tides ﬂowing out enabled a return to Canoe Pass.
And Lindsay Wilson suggested that he has preferred to follow a roughly
triangular route through the northern pass, Porlier, through the many islands to
harvest a variety of species, and then go back out Active Pass and back to his
home at Canoe Pass.

5010. Wilson also described the suitability of this complex for harvesting, in
the same day, land mammals, shellﬁsh and a variety of ﬁsh. So that’s a depiction
of it.

5011. So here is where they’re starting and they can follow the tides out
through this pass, access down here and can return back out this way.

5012. MR. RATH: Can you show them the bay on Kuper Island?

5013. DR. MILLER: Yeah, if my eyes were better. This is actually kind of
small.

5014. Yeah. Well, I’ll just go on because it’s too small for me. Carry on.

5015 . Okay. Now, this is depicted visually also by community spiritual
leaders. J ody Wilson is one such.

5016. He’s made silk screens that depict the travel from Canoe Pass to the
Gulf Islands and through the passes described as the Catcher’s Mitt. And so I
found this, to my surprise, when I went to talk to J ody, that he, on his -- he’s a
noted artist. And on his walls, much of what he was depicting showed this
relationship between Canoe Pass and the Islands, the Gulf Islands.

5017. The oral narratives of the leitsum people reveal the use of many
locations and intense resource activities concentrated in locations including Canoe
Pass, Galiano Island, Reid Island, Coquitlam, Porlier and Active Passes. The

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

2

Squamish Nation

1. The Squamish Nation (“Squamish” or the “‘Nation”) is a Coast Salish Nation. Squamish
is a self—identifying Aboriginal Nation and an Aboriginal people. We currently have
approximately just over 4,000 registered members.

2. Since a time before contact with Europeans, Squamish have used and occupied, or assert
that we have used and occupied, lands and waters 0n the southwest coast of what is now
British Columbia extending from the Lower Mainland of British Columbia, and including
Burrard Inlet, English Bay, Howe Sound, the Squamish Valley and north to Whistler (the
“Territory”). We have never surrendered title or rights over our Territory.

3. The boundaries of Squamish Territory encompass all of Burrard Inlet, English Bay and
Howe Sound, as well as the rivers and creeks that ﬂow into these bodies of water. A map
of the Squamish Territory is attached as Appendix “A” to this evidence.

4. Squamish has occupied, governed and sustained ourselves physically, culturally and
spiritually since time immemorial from the areas of our Territory that would be impacted
by the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation. Squamish asserts Aboriginal rights, including
title and self—governance rights, within these areas pursuant to section 35(1) of the
Constitution Act, 1982.

5. Squamish continue to occupy, and be stewards of, our Territory, and harvest resources
throughout our Territory, including from the Capilano River at the entrance of Burrard
Inlet, for food, social and ceremonial purposes. Squamish are protectors of the Salish Sea
and rely heavily on the marine and freshwater resources within our Territory to practice
our Aboriginal rights.

Squamish N ation Reserves and Village Sites

6. Squamish has 24 reserves located throughout our Territory that are extensively used and
occupied by our members.

1

38
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
area around Coquitlam, including Munday Lake and Lost Lake, Alouette Lake,
Pitt Lake and other areas along the Fraser for ﬁshing, hunting, trapping, gathering.

5018. And I want to say that a lot of this is collective activity, and they report
engaging in a number of group-based resource activities. And as I say, I’ve seen
this, including harvesting, processing, and distributing.

5019. J anice Wilson, sitting next to me, described the gatherings during
canning season in which hundreds of cans and mason j ars of salmon were
produced in earlier years before reﬁigerators were available, and leitsum
people relied on this salmon during the winter. They still do rely on this salmon
durin g the winter.

5020. Zoe Wilson noted that leitsum men ﬁshed together in groups and the
leitsurn women, including those living at Gulf Islands and those at Canoe Pass,
gathered for a week at Canoe Pass, gathered from the islands, gathered together
for a week at Canoe Pass to can the ﬁsh.

5021. Zoe recalled her sisters, aunts, grandparents and spouses participating,
as did male relatives. Boats were tied up and ﬁsh were unloaded at a wharf in
front of Stan Harris’ waterfront home at leitsum. Later, I’ll tell you more about
Stan Harris.

5022. Distribution. Many leitsum men report distributing ﬁsh, game and
shellﬁsh to their extended family members. In some instances, people were
permitted to come to the family wharf to take what they wanted and, in other
cases, ﬁshermen took -- themselves took the ﬁsh to relatives.

5023. So there are relatives at Canoe Creek and the Gulf Islands, and these
Elders report that many of these species have been and are taken all over in any
location within their territory with suitable conditions. Their harvesting and
processing patterns were aided by the presence of a set of houses, two wharves
and two net sheds on and near the ancestral village of leitsurn. They were also
able to harvest with leitsurn relatives who lived nearby at ancestral harvesting
sites, Salt Spring Island, Reid Island, and other locations across the Strait of
Georgia and in the Gulf Islands themselves.

5024. As I’ve told you, near the mouth of the south fork of the Fraser River
lies the ancestral village of leitsum. Elders report that this area has oﬁen been
so rich in a great number of species that, for some species, there was no need to

Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014

39
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
go elsewhere.

5025. At Canoe Pass, all species of salmon are harvested along with
ﬂounder, steelhead, sturgeon, eulachon and so forth, and nearby sloughs offered
opportunities for steelhead salmon. Regularly changing sand bars provided
opportunities for harvest. Roberts Bank, just outside the mouth of the Fraser,
yields crab and sockeye. Steveston, eulachon, Point Grey, sockeye and
Tsawwassen Beach yields clams.

5026. One of the areas people talk about is known as the Drop-Off and the
Straits of Georgia. It’s an area where the water depth increases rapidly. It’s a
good place for harvestng a number of species including oyster, crabs, salmon,
ﬂounder, dogﬁsh.

5027. Now back to these passes. The “inside”. Porlier Pass was described
as a location of abundance. Elders reported taking ling cod, rock cod and all
species of salmon, snapper, octopus and so forth.

5028. After travelling across the Straits and passing through Porlier,
leitsum report extensive use of these locations on the inside, that is, inside
Galinao Island, a long island running roughly north to southeast, including
Trincomali Channel, Montague Harbour, the location for oysters, clams, cockle,
salmon. Whaler’s Bay was sought for oysters, crabs, winter and spring salmon.

5029. Now I want to change what I’m doing here a little bit from this general
background to talk about speciﬁc leitsum people and how they describe their
traditional, cultural, spiritual and resource activities.

5030. And I want to start with Chief Rocky Wilson, who was unable to be
here today, who's ill. I’m sorry to hear he's in hospital. He’s a leitsum Elder
who served as Chief of the leitsum since 1999 and is an active commercial
ﬁsher.

5031. He has lived in leitsum, Canoe Pass, his entire life. He’s also an
oral historian of the community, having learned the leitsum way of life and
history from his father, mother, grandmother, uncles, aunts and cousins.

5032. The narratives Chief Wilson learned go back to the time of
Si’nuscustan, who was born in the late 18th century, and link continuously to the
present. So he’s an informed and accurate source of information about leitsum

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

40
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
ﬁsheries and has harvested species in a great variety of locations, including those
used by his ancestors. He has orally footnoted those ancestral practices in a
continuous chain back to the 19th century.

5033. By orally footnoting, I’m -- it’s a term that means referencing
particular Elders and who they were and the grounds of their authority.

5034. His father, Andrew J ohn Wilson, was born on the Coquitlam reserve in
1899, and his mother was on Galiano Island.

5035. MS. OLENIUK: Mr. Chair, I’m terribly sorry to interrupt, but Mr.
Rath just passed the witness a note. He spoke twice to the witness asking him
earlier to indicate something on the record, and I think that’s inappropriate.

5036. If there’s something Mr. Rath has to offer the Panel, perhaps he could
be sworn and affirmed or provide his evidence that way.

5037. THE CHAIRMAN: Mr. Rath.

5038. MR. RATH: Mr. Chairman, as far as things go, I see nothing
inappropriate here. And if the Panel or my friend would like to see the note that I
passed to Dr. Miller, I’m happy to share it.

5039. It’s -- in my experience in dealing with Panels both in this Board and
the National Energy Board, the rules or procedure are somewhat more loose than
they are -- would be in a Court of law. But if there’s some issue in that regard,
I’m happy to take the Court’s -- the Board’s direction on it.

5040. I certainly see no issue, and if my ﬁ'iend ﬁ'om Osler is -- seems to have
a problem with it, I’m happy to hear what the Board has to say about it. I
certainly see nothing inappropriate.

5041, MS. OLENIUK: Sir, it’s inappropriate. It’s contrary to the rules and
it’s contrary to our own Law Society rules as well to -- for a lawyer to interact
with the witness when they’re giving sworn testimony. So I leave it in your
hands, sir.

5042. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Give me a moment.

--- (Short pause/Courte pause)

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

41
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5043. THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I think it is -- there is -- our format, our
process for all traditional evidence is less formal. I would -- the Panel agrees with
that and we do allow counsel to sit with the witnesses. But certainly we’re here to
hear the oral traditional evidence from those who have witnesses on behalf of the
First Nation and the fact that Dr. Miller, he’s been asked to speak on behalf of
them, so it would be appropriate that we keep that to those witnesses only. And

. any interaction between counsel and the witnesses should be at a minimum, if not
none, at this time.

5044. Thank you.

5045. MR. RATH: That's ﬁne, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for that
guidance.

5046. THE CHAIRMAN: Dr. Miller, please continue.

5047. DR. MILLER: There we go.

5048. Anyhow, I was commenting on Chief Wilson’s background and why it
is that he became a noted oral historian of his community.

5049. His father suffered ﬁ'om severe arthritis when Rocky Wilson was a
teenager and, as the youngest of eight children, he was the one who spent time
assisting his dad ﬁshing and hunting. And his father chose him, as is common in
Coast Salish society, to learn the leitsum way of life and history, and he did that
with his father. And he also learned about the leitsum resources and way of life
from all these other relatives that I’ve mentioned. His great-great-grandmother
was a resident of Stanley Park, by the way.

5050. There is Rocky Wilson, and we hope he looks like that very soon.

5051. On August 16th, 2014, I travelled from Vancouver to Canoe Pass,
where I met with Chief Wilson at the Wilson Wharf, which is approximately one
and a half kilometres from the Robert Super Port at the mouth of leitsum,
Canoe Pass.

5052. Rocky lives there in a house his great-grandfather built in 1907. The
house is located within a few hundred metres of the Wilson Wharf, which I’ll
show you, where his boat is tied up.

Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014

|
|

42
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5053. We travelled on that occasion to the mouth of the river. Well, we just
were at the mouth of the river where Rocky gill-netted and made three sets and
harvested sockeye.

5054. That gives you a -- that’s Canoe Pass and you can see the Super Port.

I just want to give you a sense of the proximity of the [ass and the port.

5055. Maybe I should point -- if you could go back to that. This is -- these
are the big cranes and, of course, this is the leitsurn waters.

5056. Now, this concerns the issue of traditional knowledge.

5057. I’ve done this many times, actually, with Rocky and his brother and
his other relatives. But on this occasion, for example, I watched closely as he
ﬁshed, selecting prime ﬁshing locations and then position the net so it would
harvest more effectively. In this case, he selected a hole near Westham Island and
across from Brunswick Point as a good spot to set his nets.

5058. He also exhibited a keen knowledge of the winds and the tides, once
noting that a wind was shifting the location of the salmon and creating a ﬁshing
opportunity. In my opinion, he has a deep knowledge of leitsum’s waters and
ﬁsheries, knowin g where the salmon are running and which route they’ve taken
into leitsum, which is a key issue which I’ll talk about more in a moment.

5059. Over the three days of ﬁshing, he caught 659 sockeye which were
either given to his immediate family or distributed to leitsum Band members,
some of whom don’t have the capacity to ﬁsh themselves.

5060. Now, a second person I want to talk about is Lindsey Wilson. Lindsey
is a Councillor since 2002. He's now 58. He’s an active commercial ﬁsherman
and hunter. I’ve mentioned to him previously in the catcher’s mitt analogy.

5061. Community members regard him as an excellent ﬁsherman, and he’s a
reliable source of information about resource activities and the resource locations
of his predecessors and ancestors.

5062. He has orally footnoted these ancestral practices in a continuous chain
back to the 19th century. He was raised by his grandmother and grandfather and
learned much of the oral traditions ﬁ'om those people. He also learned ﬁshing

I Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

43
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
ﬁ'om his -— observing his grandparents in this activity.

5063. As a child, he wished to emulate his grandfather, Andrew Wilson, a
noted ﬁsher and athlete. And he said -— yeah, I can’t reproduce this well enough,
the emphasis he put into this:

“I always wanted to catchﬁsh since I was born. It ’s the most
fun I have. It '5 very spiritual out there. Everything, the whole
big picture. ”

5064. He engages in ﬁshing and hunting in locations his ancestors had used
and he ﬁshes and hunts throughout the year and states that he would engage in
more activities if it were now ﬁnancially viable and species were abundant and
not restricted by licensure. He harvests a wide variety of sea and land species.

5065. Early in his life, in his twenties, his annual routine worked in the
following manner. In January, February and even into March, he took steelhead
in the Fraser River between Canoe Pass and New Westminster. To do this, he
used a net that he’d made to honour his ancestors. He also took the winter springs
at Galiano Island on the east on the outside and on the west coast, the inside, and
Mayne Island.

5066. In hard times, with no salmon available, he moved across from Canoe
Pass, or leitsum to the Gulf Islands in the winter, to bring back food to family
and friends or, as he would say, they’d do whatever is necessary. This included
winter springs prawns, clams, oysters and deer. In summers, he ﬁshed the Fraser
River. He also ﬁshed Galiano Island for winter springs on both the inside and the
outside in and around Mayne Island.

5067. A third person to tell you about is Dan Wilson. He is a leitsum
Councillor. He is 60. He is an experienced commercial ﬁsherman, trapper, hunter
and net builder. His family occupies the wharf and net shed closest to the mouth
of the Fraser River. I’ll show you a picture of that.

5068. His father, Terry Wilson, is also a commercial ﬁsher and is recognized
as one of the most knowledgeable people about eulachon. His father, Terry
Wilson, is also a tremendous storyteller. I spent a couple of days in his ﬁshing
shed —— net shed listening to -- recently listening to his fun accounts.

5069+ Dan’s harvesting activities have taken him throughout the leitsum

Transcript Hearing Order OH—001-2014

44
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
traditional territory.

5070. Not such a good picture, but here's Dan Wilson. Here's the Wilson
Wharf. And all through this area, the Wilson people have lived historically for
more than a century and then, of course, seasonally for many centuries such that
this whole area has sometimes been called Wilsonville. And Rocky Wilson’s
house was just across the street and over here and the houses of other leitsum
people along in the region.

5071. Fred Wilson is the older brother of Chief Rocky Wilson. He’s 77 now,
a commercial ﬁsher and hunter. He grew up at the family home located at
leitsum.

5072. Fred started commercial ﬁshing, gillnetting in front of the family home
at age eight. One of the interesting things in talking with these folks and being
with them over a number of years is how early they started in their resource
activities.

5073. He obtained -- Fred Wilson obtained his ﬁrst shotgun at 14, shooting
pheasants, and hunted with his brother, Lloyd, and other family members, but he’s
more of a ﬁsherman than a hunter. He hunted with -— ﬁshed and hunted with the
Elders of his own youth. Fred Wilson is a very knowledgeable informant, and
states his information without break to the generation of his great-grandfather,

J ohn Andrew Wilson, born in the early 19th century. He harvests in the areas used
by his ancestors.

5074. Now, next, I want to talk about Stan Harris, and he has particularly
important information.

5075. Mr. Harris was born in 1923 on Salt Spring Island. He noted that he
“grew up everywhere,” throughout the region travelling with his logger-ﬁsherman
dad. Many Coast Salish men were loggers in that period.

5076. Mr. Harris lived in Ladner since 1938, permanently since 1947. In
1938, he came to Canoe Pass with his uncle and cousins, ﬁshed seasonally, and
returned home to Salt Spring Island. He married Chief Wilson’s sister, Pauline, in
1947. And he moved in with his wife next to the Wilson Wharf, which I just
showed you, on Canoe Pass across the street from Chief Wilson’s house and near
the houses of the other members of the Wilson family, including Rosalie Wilson.
So he’s deeply connected with the leitsum network of families. There’s Mr.

Transcript Hearing Order 011-001-2014

45
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
Harris.

5077. In 1948, Mr. Harris noted, ”you could ﬁsh pretty well all year if the
ﬁsh were there. ”

5078. When the salmon runs were over, he would go to the Gulf Islands to
jig cod, dig clams and pick oysters. He would return to Canoe Pass with these
species “by the boatload. " These foods were made available to all of the
leitsum people who wished to take some. Some of the food was sold in
Chinatown at a dollar a sack, which he said was ”good money in those days. ”

5079. Steelheads were ﬁshed at Canoe Pass with nets ”down to Brunswick
Cannery from the bridge. ” Chief Wilson observed that steelhead were often
Christmas dinner, and Mr. Harris noted that there might not be anything else if
money was low.

5080* Good -- good j ob at moving the slides. I appreciate it.

5081. The leitsum community living at Canoe Pass participated in many
activities together, and this included the First Salmon ceremony which I’ve told
you about. When the ﬁrst salmon was caught, Mr. Harris said:

“It was always divided up to all the families, whoever caught
it. Everybody came to the house to get a piece. It was atways
good news, the season started. I never got the ﬁrst ﬁsh. ”

5082. A lament over time.

5083. Fishing locations. Mr. Harris observed that he ﬁshed at the ferry
landing, Sturdies Bay, in Galiano Island at Whaler’s Bay, Montague Harbor,
Ganges, and other locations. He ﬁshed the channel between Kuper or Penelekut
Island and Thetis Island. He put nets across the channel.

5084. Ivan Wilson, the grandfather of Jerris Wilson, who I’ve mentioned, did
a lot of ﬁshing there. Mr. Harris said:

“That ’S where 1 got my start, the other end of Galiano Island. "

5085. He said that he ﬁshed and hunted at “Cowichan Gap”, the old person’s
term for Porlier Pass.

' Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

46
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5086. Most of the Wilsons, he said, came to Mr. Harris” place in Canoe Pass
to gut their ﬁsh during salmon canning season. Everyone did their own cleaning.
Brothers gave ﬁsh to their sisters for the women’s families. And he said:

“The ones who didn ’t ﬁsh were given as much as they wanted -
they had bigfamih'es. ”

5087. Mr. Harris ﬁshed eulachon every year, either by himself or with
someone else. He used a net. These eulachon were shared with everyone. People
were free to pick the eulachon out of the net “like grapes”. This was about
February or March, in early spring, and Mr. Harris said he would go from time to
time for eulachon. Many other family members came, and he said he ”never got
more than we could use. ”

5088. Mr. Harris also took oysters where the Super Port is now located on
Tsawwassen Reserve. There were oysters on the beach where the Ferry Landing
is now. He took them “anywhere along Point Roberts” in the sand on the beach
or glued onto rocks. I’m pausing because -- for emphasis here.

. 5089. Mr. Harris described ﬁshing “right along the shore to the border” in
the area where the ferry is now. The ﬁsh went around the point, following the
shoreline, then in the channel with the tide and into Canoe Pass. So I’m sayin g
this is how it was once.

5090. Sturgeon Channel at Tsawwassen was a location for harvesting
sturgeon. There were, Mr. Harris noted, “thousands ofsmail sturgeon in the river
after spawning. ” He got sturgeon in Canoe Pass of up to seven or eight hundred
pounds, and they were difﬁcult to bring in. He put large ones crosswise on his
boat.

5091. In the 1950s, before the Coal Port and the ferry, Ivan Wilson, with the
help of three or four local J apanese ﬁshermen, winched a massive sturgeon with a
drum onto the boat. Large sturgeon sold for $100. Now, he says, there are no
sturgeon, and Sturgeon Channel itself is lost.

5092. As an aside, there’s a large sturgeon down the hall hanging from the
ceiling in this hotel. It’s not a real one, but it can give you an idea of the size of
sturgeon.

Transcript Heating Order OH-001—20 14

47
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5093. Before the ferry terminal changed the waterscape, the tide ran along x
the beach. I think what I’m saying now is probably the most important thing I
have to tell you today.

5094. Fishermen went to drift out to block the channel with a net and get the
ﬁsh coming out. As the tide went out past Brunswick Point, it pushed the water
south all along the sand bars. Mr. Harris said:

5095. ”It was a diﬂerent game when the F erry came in. Everything sheered
off The pattern [ of ﬁsh migration] was dtﬂerent and ﬁshing was dz'ﬂrerent
altogether. "

5096. The ﬁsh, he said, hit barriers and go on out, not back in again with the
tide. More ﬁsh went through the main channel of the Fraser River instead of
Canoe Pass. With the Super Port, ”our Canoe Pass runs were gone. Now we get
what ’8 left over from other runs. Dribbles. "

5097. Concerning the loss of depth on the Canoe Pass channel, Stan Harris
said:

I “There ’3 always a good channel [formerly t0 the Gulf
Islands]. There ’s n0 channel there now. Now, mainly [water
comes on] the Main Channel. ”

5098, This change in water depth and pattern generally increases the
expenses associated with ﬁshing

5099. Regarding the proposed one and a half mile addition to the Delta Port,
Mr. Harris observed:

“Coal Port almost blocks all spring salmon. Next, [ the
addition] woutd wipe out Canoe Pass altogether. N0 tide
here. ”

5100. The absence of tide would be associated with a loss of salmon runs
into the Pass. He observed the connection between ﬁsh habitat and the run of

' water, noting that the runoff:

“...pushes water on us, keeps it clean. Stop that and sandpiles
up and there is noﬁshing. ”

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

3

7. Squamish has three reserves located in and at the entrance to Burrard Inlet: Seymour
Creek Reserve No. 2 (ch’l'ch’elxwi7kw) on the north shore close to the Westridge Marine
Terminal, Mission Reserve No. 1 (eslha7an), and Capilano Reserve No. 5 (xwmelchstn).
These reserves could be directly impacted by any accidents or malfunctions associated
with the Westridge Delivery Line Project.

8. However, not all Squamish villages in the Westridge Delivery Line Project area were
designated as reserves. For example, Squamish village sites in what is now Stanley Park
were never granted reserve status. Further, Squamish people were removed from certain
sites as the City of Vancouver expanded. In 1913, the Squamish inhabitants of our
reserve at senakw (Kitsilano IR No. 6) were removed from the site and relocated to the
villages of xwmelchstn (Capilano) and eslha7an (Mission) on the north shore of Burrard
Inlet. In 1946 our ancestors were compelled to surrender most of that 80-acre IR No. 6
but we have maintained a 10-acre portion of it. A map of Squamish reserves and Village
sites in proximity to the Westridge Delivery Line Project is attached as Appendix B to
this evidence.

9. There are former Squamish Villages adjacent to the location of the Westridge Delivery
Line Project, including T emtemz'xwtn (Belcarra) and T itemtsen (Port Moody).

Squamish Seasonal Round

10. Squamish has extensive traditional use and occupancy sites in Burrard Inlet and Indian
Arm. These sites illustrate the extensive and intensive nature of Squamish use and
occupation of these areas, and the dependency of Squamish culture and identity on the
marine and aquatic environment.

IL The geographic location of Squamish village sites and harvesting areas reﬂects the
Squamish seasonal round, which was used to efﬁciently access the resources in Squamish
Territory throughout the year. While most Villages remained at least partly occupied
throughout the year, and there are numerous permanent village sites, many people moved
between winter villages on the Squamish and Cheakamus Rivers to summer village sites

2

48
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5101. Mr. Harris is the last surviving leitsum member who ﬁshed and
hunted Canoe Pass, the Gulf Islands and the region before the ferry and port were
created. That's why his oral history is so important.

5102. He is able to recount the ﬁshing, clamrning and oyster picking
conditions during this period and before the loss of water into Canoe Pass and
before the ﬁsh migration routes were disrupted. He recalled the sloughs and
passages where sturgeon, eulachon and other species were once taken. In this
earlier life, he was able to ﬁsh and hunt for eight months on Canoe Pass and
vicinity and then four months on the Gulf Islands taking other species. This was a
period before it was illegal to clam hunt, oyster and -- take oysters so on.

5103. Mr. Harris' account of his own life clearly outlines the strong links
between the various leitsum families, both on Canoe Pass and the Islands.
These links were reinforced by mutual ﬁshing, hunting and other resource
activities, but the families were also linked ceremonially in the First Salmon
ceremony, in their locations of residence, in their practices of mutual assistance,
and in their recreation. And perhaps most importantly, Mr. Harris shows the
connection to the land and water in the territory of the “Wild Wilsons”.

5104. Sorry, J anice.

5105. Now I want to talk a little bit more about J ody Wilson. J Ody Wilson is
a leitsurn member who was born in 1958, and he is an artist and cultural leader.

5106. Mr. Wilson’s house in Ladner right near leitsum is his workshop
and showcase for his impressive Coast Salish artwork in carved wood, in large
totem poles, in two-dimensional silk screens, and in gold and silver jewellery. He
said that he has been drawn -- he has drawn since he was ﬁve years old. He
depicts animals associated with his own Coast Salish and leitsum territory in
their natural background which, he says, gives meaning to his work.

5107. He grew up across the street from Chief Wilson in what was known as
“Wilsonville” on Canoe Pass. He says living on the river on Wilson traditional
land he felt at home ﬂying around in boats on the river.

5108. He described going to his Uncle Joe’s place on Reid Island, a small
island in the Gulf Islands, and he did that as a really young lad dropped off there.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

49
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5109. By ﬁve, he was on the deck of ﬁshing boats and, as a boy, spent time
with his grandfather Ivan, who, he said “made me work for it” on the water. His
closeness to the Canoe Pass is evident.

5110. He described playing on boats as a child and carving gillnetters out of
driftwood at Brunswick Point. In particular, he liked to play and hunt in the
slough between his house and the road.

5111. Now, this is -- just as the notion of a catcher's mitt that Lindsay Wilson
had is important, this is another important conceptual point.

5112. Of particular signiﬁcance to showing Jody’s connection to the whole
of leitsum territory is his artwork. I've shown you already one piece. One large
painting on the wall of his home is “Black Fish”, otherwise known as orca. In this
painting, one can see from Canoe Pass to Porlier Pass.

5113. Jody noted that the painting show the closeness of the islands to the
Pass, 12 miles, saying, quote:

”It ’5 like a step across. ”

5114. This theme is repeated in much of his work. Eagle’s Moon, for
example, shows an eagle departing Canoe Pass towards Reid Island and
Cowichan Gap. And when I went to talk to him about all this in his home, I was

just struck by the fact that his artwork was already showing these connections.
It's really fundamentally what he has depicted in several decades as an artist.
J ody noted that:
“Most of my art is related to Canoe Pass and Reid Island
unless it ’s commissioned. ”

5115. Jody Wilson, as did all of the other Wilsons of his generation and the
one before, had a connection to Granny Cook on Salt Spring Island near Reid
Island. Granny Cook "always had a big pot ofseafood. ”

5116. Jody observed that, as a young man, he went to Reid Island, which he
called Fantasy Island, meaning he enjoyed it so much despite the weather, even,
he said, a Nor'wester.

5117. Another piece of art, “Legends”, depicts animals including bear and

I Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

50
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
eagle, with the salmon in the middle because salmon is central to the ecosystem
and to the leitsum way of life and survival as a people, he says.

5118. This piece, and others, reﬂects Jody Wilson’s view that one must be
strong spiritually and physically to hold their place in ﬁshing. Chief Wilson
mentioned that the:

.. old guys said that when the sockeye die oﬁf we die off ”

5119. The "Legends" picture captures this idea directly, and there it is.

5120. This is at the centre of all the species. And they are people of the
salmon and it's core to the ecosystem, he was saying, and he had depicted this in
this very lovely piece of art.

5121. J ust as another side note, the Wilsons and the leitsum people are a
very vigorous -- physically vigorous group. They are well known for ﬁshing in
the area.

5122. And when I interviewed J ody Wilson for the ﬁrst time a number of
years ago and he stood up, I looked at him. He was so massively strong, and he's

I a -- but a profound artist. And I said, "My God, what is our background?"

5123. And he said he was runner-up in the National Power Lifting
Championship.

5124. Many of the Wilsons are boxers, wrestlers and athletes, and I think it's
run down over the centuries because they're vigorous people maintaining a hold
on their way of life.

5125. J ody Wilson reveals the close relationship between leitsum art, their
culture and their territory. It's depicted. And he is bound, too, in a tight social
network of community members, and he commemorates and passes on these ideas
via art so other leitsum members visually get the idea, you know, that he's
portraying for them visually.

5126. His art vividly depicts the geographic and conceptual closeness of
Canoe Pass and Gulf Island, which are simply -- now here's the phrase -- a step
across.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

51
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5127. J ody Wilson captures visually what he and other leitsum people
have said in interviews about their attachment to territory, to salmon, and to each
other. It's all closely bound up.

5128. An analysis of the data produced from the study indicates that current
oil tanker trafﬁc is adversely affecting the harvest of at least 11 species named
there. Of course, should there be expansion, there would be additional adverse
impact due to increased tanker trafﬁc.

I 5129. I just wanted to show you the site of Tl'uqtinus village, one of the
leitsum areas, and you can see what's happened to it now, just to give a sense of
the impact on their traditional lands and waterways from commercial and other
activities.

5130. The leitsum people also fear that there will inevitably be an oil spill
and that current oil spill response system will not be able to protect their
harvesting, cultural and spiritual locations.

5131. I want to amplify that the problem here is that if there is an oil spill
and it goes into the Gulf Islands, it will disrupt -- this is one of my key points

I here. It will disrupt their ability to harvest the shellﬁsh and anadromous ﬁsh and
other species which they use in their spiritual life. It has to be part of ceremonies,
burnings, cultural burnings, which connect them to their ancestors, which bid their
ancestors come. They also fear that neither B.C. or Canada or Kinder Morgan has
a plan in place for remediation of sensitive habitat.

5132. There's Mary Wilson, the late Mary Wilson -- can we go back to her
for a moment -- with one of the young folks. This was at a leitsum tribal
gathering on Galiano Island and a large picnic, and the interesting thing was what
they ate. I guess I'll -- my slides aren't in the order that I'd hoped.

5133. I mentioned about ritual life. This was an event that I participated in
on behalf of the Museum of Vancouver, where I am a member of the Board of
Directors and Chair of the Collections Committee. And we repatriated a ancestor
back to the leitsum and to their relatives, Penelekut. And this is the ritual that
took place then.

5134. Now, the pictures I show you can't depict the main event, but the
major thing was the ritual burning in which ancestral spirits attend to their
occasion. And they are, as I was mentioning before, come because the burning is

' Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

52
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
the burning of foods, of the shellﬁsh and other of their traditional foods that are
essential to this ceremony. I'm sorry I can't depict the rest of it for you, but their
protocol doesn't allow it.

5135. Harvesting activities in the youth of the current Elders took place in
the context of a depression, or the Depression, ﬁ'om our viewpoint. Even those in
their ﬁﬁies report growing up in a household with little available money. For this
reason, ﬁshing, hunting and gathering of a great variety of species was essential to
survival.

5136. Yet another reason for the cultural attachment to these extraction
activities is the great cultural signiﬁcance, their connection with a way of life and
to the spiritual importance of these animals to leitsum understandings of life.

5137. A11 17 who gave oral histories learned how to carry out ﬁshing,
hunting and gathering by direct observation of the activities of their Elders. They
embraced these activities, with many reporting that they began ﬁshing and
hunting before teenage years, even as young as seven, often with other young
people.

5138. Two middle—aged leitsum men recall being taken to Reid Island as
teenagers to hunt and trap, remaining for two weeks until their uncle returned
from Canoe Pass to bring them home.

5139. J im Hombrook noted that, in his youth and young adult life, trips from
Canoe Pass to Reid Island in the Gulf Island chain were ﬁ'equent, sometimes
weekly. He noted that he and the others always took their guns on these trips so
that they could ﬁsh, hunt, gather and trap.

5140. The region around Canoe Pass, the homeland of the leitsum, is key
to these resource activities. Community members have continually occupied
several permanent homes in the region since the turn of the 20th century, and
much, much longer seasonally, as I've pointed out.

5141. Many of the present generation and their ancestors of the last several
generations were born, raised and lived their lives at Canoe Pass. The leitsum
report they occupied the location solely on their own without the presence of
other Aboriginal people as permanent residents. They report other non-leitsum
Coast Salish people visiting, however.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

53
leitsum First Nation — Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5142. From these homes, they harvested in the rich waters of Canoe Pass and
also hunted and gathered. Canoe Pass was then, and continues to be, the location
for community—wide activities, including processing, distribution of ﬁsh and other
species to community members. The evidence shows their Lamalchi ancestors
used Canoe Pass for the summer ﬁsheries, but also year round for resource
harvesting.

5143. Commercial activities have declined -- there's that horrible hand there
again. Thank you. Hands have special meaning in the Coast Salish world. We
have to be a little cautious.

5144. Commercial activities have declined in recent years as the stocks have
declined and ﬁshing openings limited. All of the leitsum lament this
development and feel that it has deprived them of their ability to live as their
ancestors have.

5145. Several adult leitsum express concern that the current generation of -
children is not able to ﬁsh and, as a consequence, is deprived of the ability to
learn practices and locations central to the deve10pmer1t of a group and of a
personal identity as leitsum. They will be deprived of a livelihood and an
ancestral way of life. Part of this is a massive decline of the marshlands around
Canoe Pass.

5146. leitsum remains a key area for them. It is a primary residence, their
favoured ﬁsh location, a work site and the site for important links which -- events
which link them together and to their past and to their ancestors and, in turn, to
the waters and marine life of leitsum.

5147. They retain a sense of identiﬁcation with the ﬁsh, crabs, birds and
waters.

5148. THE CHAIRMAN: If you're -— I don't know how -- your
presentation, Dr. Miller. If you would like a brief break, we're happy to
accommodate that now if that would be helpful to you.

5149. DR. MILLER: No, I've got some more water.

5150. THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, continue.

5151. DR. MILLER: Thank you.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

54
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5152. When they ﬁsh, the leitsum are near their ancestral burial site and
the village sites of their ancestors. Each ﬁsher relies on the wisdom of his
ancestors to harvest. Simply put, the leitsum are the people of Canoe Pass.

5153. The reliance on local food procured within their historic territories was
evident. The food at a leitsum gathering on Galiano Island, which I mentioned
before, at the home of Richard Wilson, for example, was harvested by community
members and included crab, ﬁsh and clam. The reliance was itself built on a
thorough knowledge of the region and of techniques of gathering, hunting and
ﬁshing.

5154. Here's a picture from the -- Richard Wilson —— the gathering at Richard
Wilson's house on Galiano Island. These are locally harvested species.

5155. Here's another picture. There's Richard and other leitsum Band
members eating chowder and ﬁsh and so forth.

5156. The leitsum‘s food, social and ceremonial ﬁshery is vital to the
maintenance and well-being of their society. The harvesting of salmon is spiritual
and cultural. The sharing of salmon is consistent with Coast Salish traditional
values and provides a vital resource to elderly and low-income leitsum
households.

5157. They've made it clear that if their traditional foods, ﬁshed and
gathered, became unavailable following a spill, they would be unable to carry out
the spiritual activities which deﬁne them as a group and bind them together the
Coast Salish people. The inter—generational sharing of knowledge would be
disrupted, and it would be hard to raise their children as leitsum.

5158. Now, I've got several maps here. Did you wish a break from all this,
or shall I continue?

5159. THE CHAIRMAN: I think we will take a break because we have
seen the number of maps that you've ﬁled as well.

5160. So I think we'll just —— I think it probably a good time to take a break.
So we'll take 15 minutes and come back at about 10:25. Thank you.

—-- Upon recessing at 10:11 a.rn./L'audience est suspendue a 10h11

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001—2014

55
HwIitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

-—— Upon resumin g at 10:29 a.m./L'audience est reprise a10h29

JANICE CASEY PATRICIA WILSON: Resumed

BRUCE GRANVILLE MILLER: Resumed

5161. THE CHAIRMAN: I am here and ready.

5162. MR. RATH: And just as we reconvene, I'd like to advise the panel
that we shouldn't have any difﬁculty at all being done prior to 12 o'clock today for
purposes.

5163. THE CHAIRMAN: I appreciate that, Mr. Rath. Thank you.

5164. Dr. Miller.

--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRESENTATION PAR DR. BRUCE

MILLER: (Continued/Suite)

5165. DR. MILLER: Thank you.

I 5166. I have several maps here that we've produced from the oral histories
and from the site visits that my colleague, Professor Bill Angelbeck, and I have
prepared and I actually don't have the entirety of them. We had a little difﬁculty
loading them. But I've got a number of them here, and I'm not going to dwell on
these. But I just'want to allow them to do two things. One is show the range of
species that are historically harvested and also the extent of the region.

5167. And I realize these are really hard to read. The resolution, it's just kind
of a little bit of pale here.

5168. This is a map of sockeye harvest. You can see the region here. So it's
shaded like that. Here is the original homeland village. Here is the winter village
and homeland. So here is HwIitsum and here is Lamalchi.

5169. Can you go -- that's the sockeye one I just showed. Can you go down
again? Here's coho. You can see the extent here and here. Pink. And then it also
shows these other locations. The chum. Spring. This was an important species in
the sense that people could move from here to here.

5170. An interesting historic fact was that in 1891 or '92, government policy

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

i

56
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
didn't permit the so-called Cowichan peoples to go and ﬁsh in the Fraser. But the
leitsum, who were living over here, could ﬁsh the Fraser and come back to their
traditional homelands in this area. Thank you.

5171. The next -- here's herring. You can see in dark its locations all through
the islands. Dogﬁsh, eulachon is right in the Canoe Pass.

5172. Just to make this more obvious, there used to be a great many sloughs
through the region by Canoe Pass, many of which are gone now. There are still
several, but many have disappeared.

5173. So here is -- what is -- halibut, and what is the other? I can't even read
my own thing here. Hang on one second.

--- (A short pause/Courte pause)

5174. DR. MILLER: Here's halibut and sturgeon, and you can see these
locations on the river by the village. And here red snapper, crab. You can see all
the harvesting right out of Canoe Pass on Roberts Bank and so forth. Prawn and
shrimp, large areas.

5175. This is clams, cockles. It's hard to map that because they were taken
in so many locations. But here -- these are just some of them that people
mentioned to us. There would be many others if we could get an exhaustive
listing of them.

5176. Urchin. Squid and octopus.

5177. Now, this is a traditional use area map that's showing in more detail
Canoe Pass. Here's Westharn Island. Here's the pass. All through here have been
the sloughs we're talking about. And here is, again, the catcher's mitt notion
going here, following the tides in and the tides out and harvesting all through the
islands, hunting, harvesting and gathering.

5178. Gathering areas are also difﬁcult to depict visually because they're so
extensive. You can see. And also gathering includes things like cedar. Cedar is a
form of gathering. Here is gathering areas. Did we just have that? Okay.

5179. And ﬁnally, these are places of spiritual signiﬁcance that emerged in
the oral histories. And I won't go through all of these, but -- and they are hard to

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

57
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
see. But you can see there's a number of spiritual sites in the Gulf Islands on the
river itself. One, for example, is a rock that was heaved by a spirit being into a
location that's associated with particular stories and so forth.

5180. And is that the last one?

5181. And here are some of the non—archaeology sites in the region. So the
point here is that all these locations have a great time depth of use. And also, we
have to point out that archaeology has done only really a minimal amount of
work, really, considering the massive use of this region over thousands of years.
They haven't had a chance to do all that might be done.

5182. MR. RATH: In this regard, Mr. Chairman, this is a question I had for
the witness earlier today, you'll note -- and I had asked the witness to indicate it
earlier -- in behind -- can I have the laser pointer for a second, please? In behind
this area, that is actually Kuper Island. The little indentation on the back of it is,
in fact, Lamalchi and Lamalchi Bay.

5183. And with regard to the additional evidence that I'd spoken to this
morning that we'll tender attached as sworn afﬁdavits, recent archaeological

I evidence that was not available when this work was done will be tendered to the

' Panel at a later time indicating the extremely signiﬁcant archaeological sites of
both Lamalchi Bay, Montague Harbour, Galiano Island, et cetera as a result of
new work and archaeological surveys that were done last summer by Dr. Chris
Amett.

5184. Anyway, just wanted to pass that on.

5185. THE CHAIRMAN: But not giving oral traditional evidence, are you,
Mr. Rath?

5186. MR. RATH: I'm not at all. I'm just advising the Board, ﬁ'om a
procedural perspective, of additional evidence that we'll be tendering on the basis
of this evidence being time dated to a period prior to additional new evidence
being available that we'll be tendering at a later point in time.

5187. THE CHAIRMAN: Dr. Miller.

5188. DR. MILLER: There we go. Is that the last one?

. Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014
|

4
on Burrard Inlet, Howe Sound, and the Fraser River to continue harvesting local
resources through the spring, summer, and fall.

12. Squamish members continue to practice a seasonal round today travelling throughout our
Territory to access a wide variety of resources, and engage in cultural and spiritual
activities. Squamish people continue to use our Territory for ﬁshing, hunting, and
gathering traditional foods for sustenance, social and ceremonial purposes. However, it is
becoming more difﬁcult for our people to access resources as the quality, purity and
abundance of resources has been adversely impacted by industrial development.

Squamish N ation Aboriginal rights and interests

13. Squamish’s distinct system of governance, traditional and cultural practices, spirituality,
and harvesting activities are inextricably linked to the lands, waters and resources of our
Territory. Squamish continue to use and rely on the resources available in our Territory,
in a respectful and sustainable manner.

14. Stewardship and respect for these resources is essential for the survival of Squamish and

I our distinctive culture. Squamish has a wide set of title, rights and interests that are
potentially impacted by the Westridge Delivery Line Project. Squamish take our role and
responsibility as stewards of our Territory seriously, and wish to protect our lands and
waters for future generations.

15. Chief Ian Campbell, Xwelxwelacha Siyam (Chief Ricth Williams) and Paitsmauk
(David Jacobs) provided oral evidence to the Board in Chilliwack B.C. for the hearing for
the Trans Mountain Expansion Project describing the importance of our lands, water and
resources to Squamish culture and identity. The oral evidence of Paitsmauk (David
J acobs) included the following [at paras. 543 9- 5440 of the oral evidence transcript -

- NEB Filing No. A4F2C8]:

All we see outside from our windows looking down the beach are freighters,
ships, in and out. That’s why I’m afraid today what the damage that if anything
happened, it would destroy our home because that harbour, that bay there that’s
the home of the Squamish people. It’s always been a home, our home.

3

58
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5189. So all these maps, as I mentioned, were simply to show the extent over
time and over space of the leitsum activities. And you can also see the
closeness of the region.

5190. If this map enabled me, we could look down the coast just a little bit.
Well, actually, it's in outline down past Boundary Bay down into Lummi territory.

5191. Here, these were the Lummi people who I think have appeared before
you, are closely related to the leitsum and also are immediately in the line of
movement. Just add that additional fact that many of the leitsum talked about
their connections across the border to the -- 01' before the border was in existence
with the Lummi tribe.

5192. Thank you. I'm done.

5193. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Dr. Miller.

5194. Are there any other comments ﬁom Councillor Wilson, or...?

5 195 . Okay.

5196. MR. RATH: Mr. Chairman, just as a quick point of order. I'm just
asking ﬁ'om a procedural perspective whether it would be permissible for me to
ask a few direct questions of Dr. Miller that he could answer under oath to
emphasize or highlight some aspects of his testimony that I would like to have
highlighted to the Panel.

--- (A short pause/Courte pause)

5197. THE CHAIRMAN: We’re cautious of that, but it would —- I suppose
I would need to be guided by the questions. We’ve had some experience of that
from other First Nations who have appeared where their counsel has assisted them
with asking them to comment but not actually to pose a question to them to
comment on, so 1 might -- the Panel may have a bit of a difﬁculty, but perhaps
maybe we’ll wait and see.

5198. And perhaps -— maybe it would be appropriate for the Panel to note
that Dr. Miller has been giving evidence on behalf of the leitsum to the extent
be is relaying that oral traditional evidence. The Panel accepts that the leitsum
are best placed to determine who speaks for them, especially in this case where

Transcript Hearing Order OH-OOl-2014

59
leitsum First N ation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
some Elders are unavailable.

5199. However, the Panel is not here to hear expert evidence. While Dr.
Miller may have expert knowledge, he may submit his part of the written
evidence of the leitsurn Nation. So any opinion evidence given today will be
given no weight by the Panel.

5200. With that, we will allow you to pose your questions and we’ll see how
far we can go.

5201. Thank you, Mr. Rath.

5202. MR. RATH: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the Panel. I appreciate
that. In the spirit of the questions I’m going to ask, I’m going to simply try as
much as possible to ask the questions broadly and generally, and then I’ll just let
Dr. Miller ﬁll in as best he can from his understanding and knowledge of the oral
history of the leitsum people.

5203. MR. RATH: And I guess, in that regard, the question I would pose to
Dr. Miller is, in speaking earlier, you were referencing leitsum F irst Nation
traditional occupation of lands in Stanley Park.

5204. Could you please, for the record, from your knowledge passed on to
you by members of leitsum, expand on that evidence for the Panel including the
lands in and around English Bay, Stanley Park, Burrard Inlet, Coal Harbour, et
cetera?

5205. Thank you.

5206. DR. MILLER: Well, Chief Wilson, Lindsey Wilson and other
members of the community I’ve mentioned, Pauline, great—great-great-great-
grandmother of Rocky Wilson, who, in the middle of the 19th century, lived in
what is now Stanley Park at what is sometimes called Xwayxway, and her
descendants also lived there and used whatever resources -- resource stations
available in that location.

5207. And -- what’s the other part of your question for me?

5208. MR. RATH: And in that regard, could you advise the Panel of your
understanding of what would have been some of the Coast Salish uses of lands

Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014

60
leitsum F irst Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller
and waters in and around that area?

5209. DR. MILLER: So this meant that people were going up around
Pointe Grey into the waters around Stanley Park, into -- Stanley Park is a bit
transformed and the whole region is a bit transformed since the 19th century. And
so the region around where the boat club is now was once a rich resource area that
was used by the leitsum ancestors.

5210. And there is a number of other processing and access sites in and
around there that Lindsey Wilson has had a chance to point out to me. And also, I
think I was mentioning before there was interaction down to Lummi, into that
region, and one of the Wilson ancestors lived at Lummi.

5211. Historically, when the Lamalchi people were bombed in 1863, they
went to visit -- they went to get out of harm’s way with their relatives at Lummi
for a while and then returned a few years later to their locations.

5212. So they used the resources through the areas I’ve shown you and then
through English Bay and into the area around Xwayxway Village, which I think I
pointed out to you with the -- it"s the location that’s now known as Lumberman’s
Arch, is the location of the Salish Village where this ancestress lived and where
her children lived. And they were married also into other local First Nations in
that region.

5213. MR. RATH: And again, just for the sake of the record, the village
site that we’re speaking of and the areas that we’re speaking of were directly in
Burrard Inlet. Is that correct?

5214. DR. MILLER: Yeah. .

5215. MR. RATH: Those are all my questions, Mr. Chairman and the
Panel. Thank you very much for your time.

5216. We’ll look forward to answering any questions that my friends may
have for us in writing. I just take it from the presentation today there won’t be
any questions about how much ﬁsh our clients eat, so thank you.

5217. THE CHAIRMAN: I’ll offer any questions for —- to Ms. Oleniuk on
behalf of Trans Mountain.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

61
leitsum First Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Dr. Miller

5218. MS. OLENIUK: Thank you, sir. And thank you to leitsum First
Nation for your presentation today.

5219. As my friend indicated, I understand that there is the possibility to
provide questions in writing and that, in fact, is their preference. So I wouldn’t
pre-determine that we don’t have any questions. We may, in fact, have some, but
not at this moment in time.

5220. Thank you.

5221. THE CHAIRMAN: Mr. Rath?

5222. MR. RATH: That would conclude our submission for now, subject
to what I’d indicated may be additional afﬁdavit evidence and material that we’ll
be tendering for the Board to consider both of historical and oral history nature
that I think you’ll ﬁnd quite interesting and illuminating.

5223. And with that, thank you again, everyone, for their kind attention
today. It was an honour and a privilege to be here today. Thank you.

5224. THE CHAIRMAN: On behalf of the Panel, I would hope you would
pass on the Board’s good wishes and good recovery to Chief Wilson and our
regret that he couldn’t be here in person to share his knowledge. But we wish him
well in his recovery.

5225. And I acknowledge your attendance today and appreciate that you
have been here today to present this to us. And as I travel back to Vancouver
Island tonight at the end of this hearing, I’ll have a different sense of the catcher’s
mitt that I never had before. So as I’m sailing through it -- it will be dark,
unfortunately, so I won’t get to see the beauty of that as I normally do.

5226. So with that, the Panel, we will reconvene at 1:30 this aﬁemoon.

--- Upon recessing at 10:47 a.m./L’audience est suspendue a 10h47

--- Upon resuming at 1:37 p.m./L'audience est reprise a 13h37

5227. (Opening native song)

5228. THE CHAIRMAN : Good afternoon, and I would like to welcome

Tianscript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

62
Opening remarks
Chairman
you and thank you for your prayer and song, and also I'd like to acknowledge that
we are on the traditional territory of the Stézlo.

5229. Again, I'd like to welcome you to the oral traditional evidence phase of
the National Energy Board's hearing regarding the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project.

5230. My name is David Hamilton, and I'm the Chair of the Panel; and with
me on my left is Alison Scott, and on my right, Phil Davies.

5231. We welcome everyone who is here today, both in the hearing room
and who is listening to us through our webcast.

5232. J ust before -- I think it's important before we get started in case there's
a need to evacuate the room, the emergency exits are behind you, and exits out
into the parking lots are left and right as you go out the door.

5233. In addition to the Panel, there are a number -- we have a number of
staff that are here today and they are pleased to answer any process-related
questions you may have, and they're recognized by their brass nameplates.

5234. We'll sit until 4:30 today, but if you feel that if that is not enough time
and at the end of the session, please feel free to make a request to ﬁle additional
oral traditional evidence by electronic means, such as a video or some other
method of your choosing.

5235. Before we get underway, I would just like to remind the Panel of the
Panel's guidance in the Hearing Order and Procedural Direction No. l in regards
to oral traditional evidence. The Board understands that the Squamish Nation
have an oral tradition for sharing knowledge from generation to generation, and
this information cannot be -- always adequately shared in writing.

5236. The Board recommends those providing oral traditional evidence focus
on the community's interests and rights. These hearings are not to hear evidence
that will be ﬁled subsequently in writing, including technical and scientiﬁc
information, opinions or views, advice to the Board on whether to recommend
approval of the project or the terms and conditions that should be imposed, or
questions to the Board or other participants.

5237. Sharing your traditional knowledge and stories about the use of your

Transcript Hearing Order 011-001-2014

63
Opening remarks
Chairman
traditional territory is of value to us. If you wish to share any concerns about the
impacts the proposed tariff project may have on you and your community and
how any impact could be eliminated or reduced, that would be also helpful to us.

5238. This is the type of information we’re here to listen to and we will use
the information we gather today, along with all the other available information in
considering the possible effects of the proposed project.

5239. We appreciate that you have chosen to be here today, and before
providing your oral traditional evidence, presenters will be asked to swear or
afﬁrm that the information they are presenting is accurate and truthﬁll to the best
of your knowledge and belief.

5240. Before we begin the oral traditional evidence from the Squamish
Nation I’d like to ask the representatives of the Proponent TransMountain, to
introduce themselves for the record, please.

5241. Ms. Oleniuk, please?

5242. MS. OLENIUK: Good afternoon to the Board and good afternoon to

l the representatives of Squamish Nation. My name is Terri-Lee Oleniuk and I
represent TransMountain along with my colleague to my right, Heather Weberg;
to my left is Annie Korver, and she’s a member of TransMountain’s Aboriginal
Engagement Team.

5243. THE CHAIRMAN: And perhaps in the beginning you could indicate
if you will be prepared to respond to any questions orally, in writing, or both
throughout this aﬁernoon, and so on with that.

5244. With that perhaps I think, Mr. Bruce, if you would introduce the panel
and we can have them afﬁrmed or if you can proceed. Thank you.

5245. MR. BRUCE: (Speaking in native language.)

5246. Good aﬁemoon to you, Chairman and the Panel, also to the
representatives of TransMountain. I’d also like to acknowledge all the Squamish
members and councillors and Chiefs that have shown up today for this very
important event, making the long journey up to St6:16 territory.

' Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

|

64
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Introduction by Mr. Bruce

5247. I’d also like to acknowledge the Sté:16 people for hosting this event,
and allowing this event to happen on their territory.

5248. The Squamish Nation has three witnesses that will be giving evidence
today and it will be in the following order: Xélek’lSekyu Siyam, Chief Ian
Campbell; beside him is Paitsmauk, David J acobs; and beside him is
Xwelxwelacha Siyam, Chief Dick Williams.

5249. I shared my Squamish language and Squamish name to start this for
two reasons. One, I’m very proud to be a Squamish member, and also honoured
to represent my nation in this hearing. The second reason is to respect my dear
family here that will be giving evidence today, who will be using their ancestral
names and making the connections between those names in the territory and with
our families.

5250. In terms of process today, we will be in the form of kind of a relaxed
direct examination. I’ll be asking a number of questions to help guide our
witnesses through their presentations. But for the most part I think they will be
giving you the information in a conversational type way. The witnesses will
answer questions to clarify the evidence that they are giving, but we would prefer
that all substantive questions will be in writing through the information request
process.

5251. Squamish Nation intervenes in this process as they have serious
concerns about the impacts of the projects on their rights, interests, and way of
life. Squamish welcomes the opportunity to give evidence today, but before we
begin Squamish has asked me to make the following comments about the process.

5252. The ﬁrst point is that the Crown has indicated to the extent that it can,
it will attempt to discharge the duty to consult through this process, yet the Crown
has not consulted with Squamish about the process, or engaged with Squamish
whatsoever. Squamish is very disappointed about the lack of Crown engagement
in the process to date.

5253. Squamish feels that it is inappropriate to rely on this process to
discharge that duty, given that it is a quasi-judicial process with strict timelines of
three hours to share its interest and impacts. More than three hours is deﬁnitely
needed for Squamish to share its interests and impacts of the project. Squamish
does not accept the Crown can discharge the duty to consult in such a process.

Transcript Heating Order OH-001-2014

65
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Introduction by Mr. Bruce

5254. Second, Squamish has yet to receive a funding decision from the
National Energy Board Participant Funding Program. As a result Squamish has
not had the resources to properly review the lengthy and complex application,
which is about 15,000 pages long, and to properly prepare for their evidence
today.

5255. Meaningful participation in this quasi-judicial process requires a
substantial amount of funding for legal counsel and for technical experts and
advisors. Squamish feels that it’s inappropriate that the NEB process is
continuing without ensuring that all First Nations have the resources to
participate.

5256. Lastly, Squamish is concerned about the timing of oral evidence. The
oral evidence is proceeding without TransMountain having ﬁles all of its evidence
and without intervenors having an opportunity to ﬁle evidence. The Squamish
needs this information to be able to fully articulate how the project will impact on
Squamish’s interests and rights. Having the evidence heard at this time is
prejudicial to Squamish in that respect.

5257. However, having made these points, Squamish is here today to give
evidence that they are able to within these constraints. So on that I would like to
introduce our ﬁrst presenter, Chief Ian Campbell, Xélek’fSekyu Siyam.

5258. CHIEF CAMPBELL: Do I need to swear or something?

5259. MR. BRUCE: Oh Yeah. Also all three witnesses will be afﬁrming
today as well.

5260. THE CHAIRMAN: Then we’ll proceed with that now then. Thank
you.

IAN CAMPBELL: Afﬁrmed

DAVID JACOBS: Afﬁrmed

RICHARD WAYNE WILLIAMS: Afﬁrmed

5261. THE CHAIRMAN: By all means, Chief Campbell.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

66
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
--- ORAL REPRESENTATION BY/REPRESENTATION ORALE PAR CHIEF
IAN CAMPBELL:
5262. CHIEF CAMPBELL: (Speaking in native language). Thank you
very much for the opportunity to present here today.
5263. (Speaking in native language). My ﬁrst ancestral name is Xélek’ and
Xélek’ was the third son of Xatslanexw, also known in English as Kitsilano, in the
Vancouver area. (Speaking in native language). My Chief name is Sega and
I’m a Hereditary Chief from the village of I_(’il_<’eb_<en, which is known as Port
I Mellon in the west side of Howe Sound, in Wﬂll' ﬂitsem.
5264. I’m serving my third term as an elected councillor for the Squamish;
they are four year terms. And I’m also appointed by Council as one of two
political spokespersons to represent the political positions of the Squamish
Nation. I’m employed by the Intergovernmental Relations Department of the
Squamish, as one of our lead negotiators in Aboriginal rights and title, along -- as
well as being the cultural ambassador for the Intergovernmental Relations
Department. So these many roles certainly keep me busy and a lot of fun with
modern developments.
5265. My family tree is put up on the screen before you and this is part of my
mother’s side of the family. My Mom’s name is P’elalgwiya, in English, Susie
I Gmbel-lﬁﬂgﬂr; and my late grandfather is Chief Lawrence Baker, Kalekt
t/SelgyLi-t. And these are the ancestral names that I inherited directly from my
grandfather, and I’ll be speaking to that in more detail.
5266. But if I look at my grandfather’s lineage, his mother was P’elal_(wiya
I and came from the village of WFMQEIIWIEW, known as Seymour,
down in North Vancouver. And my grandfather’s father, my great grandfather, is
Eetgimtn, Willy Baker a signaling lo [[313 Amalgamation. And we come ﬁ'om, as I
I mentioned the line from Wmﬂmslanesw is one of our patriarchs that goes
back, and Anglicized that’s known ast Kitsilano.
5267. So as I mentioned, Xélek’ was the third son of Xatslanexw; he had two
I older brothers, K—WHﬁyﬂIH and W3, and Xélek’s son, Tenés Jim, was
the father of my MHHtHHsdﬁTmek, of my grandmother P’elalgwiya. And “matte": under'ine
then on Willy Baker’s side our matriarch is Tsiyaliya. She’s one of the main
matriarchs, where many of our family lineages; many of the family we see here
from the Squamish Nation descend from Tsiyaliya and J ohn Baker, that marriage.
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

67
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
And you go beyond Tsiyaliya, her parents were Xéyaxilx and Xwetkamten, and
| their -- on the mother’s side their parents were Ka-wahawiutKawchawlut and
Formatted: Underline
5268. So I won’t quiz you later but, trust me, this is part of our in-depth
family lineage, and certainly there’s a lot more details that can go along with this
but just to illustrate a bit of our family lineage connected to the Squamish
territories.
5269. So I’ve been very fortunate to be raised by my grandparents. And my
late grandfather, Chief Lawrence Baker, raised me from a young age, immersed
me in a lot of the teachings of our connection and our relationship to our
territories through our languages which you’ve heard earlier, little pieces of our
Slgwxwfﬂmesh Snichim, our Squamish language.
5270. And my grandfather was an orator in our longhouses. He would often
travel with him throughout Coast Salish Territory to the various longhouses,
including through the Fraser Valley here, in Washington State, Vancouver Island,
to attend functions and gatherings of our Coast Salish people where we witnessed
a lot of the rights and the rituals and the protocols of our people and ceremony.
And that’s where we heard a lot of the echo and the resonance of our teachings
passed down from generation to generation in those longhouses. As the orators
would get up, they would share the teachings and the stories and the connections
that we have are family ties.
5271. Further to that, we spent a lot of time going out on the land in the --
throughout Squamish territory. And from a young age I would often go up to the
Squamish valleys, up to the Elahoe, where it’s just a beautiﬁil part of the coast
here with vast WWIQ' r:-_:Init'.i, vast ice ﬁelds and glaciations up there with
some beautiful animals, the Wall ' Ihtil um . the grizzly bears; the “mama“: Under'ine
WHWE, the mountain goats. We’ve re-introduced ki—ath
{-ph-iiKaﬂi'ch and I’ll talk to that later, the elk, deer hunting and ﬁshing and berry
picking, cedar stripping; many activities that we did as children, ﬁshing on the
river, catching trout and whatnot.
5272. And during those times on the land we would oﬁen be taught the old
place names of where the villages were, who some of the connections, such as
these trees, who some of the ancestral names are that connect to those places, as
well as the mythology for everywhere you go in our territory is laden with
mythology. Every mountain and point of land and bay has a vast wealth of stories
Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014

5
We look at the maps. We show the territories of the Squamish. I don’t like to use
the word “territory”. I say, “That is our home. That is our home”. That land will
never go away. Our Squamish people will never go away, so we got to be careﬁal
what we do today.
The transcript of the oral evidence of Squamish members for the Trans Mountain
Expansion Proj ect is attached as Appendix C to this evidence (with tracked changes
submitted by the Squamish Nation).

Squamish self-govemment rights

16. An important aspect of Squamish rights and title to our Territory is our ability to govern
and act as stewards of the lands, waters and resources within our Territory. Squamish
have governed, protected and defended our Territory since time immemorial.

17. Squamish was traditionally governed by our hereditary Chiefs. Chieftainships were
associated with discrete areas within the larger Territory. Pre—contact, a complex set of
rules and practices, called chiyax and snewayelh, applied within the Chieftainship areas —
these rules and practices are inseparable from the lands and waters, and inform Squamish
governance of our Territory today.

18. Since 1981, Squamish has governed itself by way of a custom election system. Currently,
sixteen Councilors are elected by eligible members 18 years and older and serve four year
terms. Each of these 16 Councillor positions is directly related to the 16 hereditary Chiefs
that amalgamated on July 23, 1923 to form Squamish’s traditional government.

19. Squamish continues to exercise governance over our Territory in a variety of ways,
including by: managing development in our Territory to ensure an abundance of safe
traditional resources and foods; undertaking rehabilitation of areas within our Territory
that have been contaminated by development; partnering with neighbouring First Nations
and the Coast Salish community to jointly share and manage resources; and transmitting
the principles of stewardship and resource conservation to the next generation.

20. Squamish has further partnered with government, and proponents, to ensure responsible
development within our Territory. An example of this is the 2007 Land Use Agreement —

4

68
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
associated with our language and place names.
5273. So these were things that I grew up learning, and me and my sister and
my cousins were very fortunate to have that continuity of tradition considering
that our grandfather had attended residential schools in Sechelt, where it was
strictly forbidden for him to speak his language. And the forced assimilative
tactics of the Canadian government to assimilate F irst Nations people, he was a
survivor of that through tenacity and resilience.
5274. He managed to retain our distinct identity through our languages and
our teachings. And he learned his teachings directly from his grandmother,
Tsiyaliya, who you’ll see on the right branch there. And Tsiyaliya was a
I hWaﬁsKu-tsi‘ﬂs, a ritualist who knew the ceremonial language which is a
slight higher level rather than common speech. You have to be very formal when
you speak our language to use those types of terminology. So those teachings that
I were passed down From my WﬂtH-P-thkWigﬁkW. from my great-ggﬂ:
grandmother came down to us directly through my grandfather as that conduit.
5275. And as I grew up I assumed that everyone was being taught this, that
this was common knowledge. And I realized, you know, as we travelled around
I we were able to connect with other Coast Salish people, other young people that _
I were being immersed in these teachings, this anﬁwnéwexé'ih, I Formatted: Underline ]
these words of advice from our elders.
5276. So I felt very fortunate as I went to school. Our languages are taught
in the public schools where they’re taught about, you know, a few hours a week,
' which isn’t going to teach fluency or proﬁciency, but it was an opportunity to
learn to read and write the language.
5277. So my late grandfather, Lawrence, was one of those teachers in the
high school at Carson Graham Secondary, and that’s really what kept me in
school, was having the inﬂuence of my grandfather there; otherwise, I wasn’t too
interested in the continuity of assimilation, as I’d seen it, in what they were
teaching us in the public school system. And the curriculum didn’t reﬂect any of
our history or the richness of our contributions to Canada and the mythology and
who and what we are as a diverse First Nations people.
5278+ So I managed to graduate from high school and I would’ve went into
trades. I got offered, you know, the opportunity to get into heavy—duty mechanics
and whatnot but I also was invited to Chile to go on a youth exchange. So I
' Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

69
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
thought I could go back to school or I can go on an all-expense trip to South
America and I decided to spend a couple months in Chile with the Mapuches, and
this was in ’92 shortly after the Pinochet dictatorship where it was still very much
militarized and it was a real profound eye-opener for me as a young indigenous
man to travel down there in my regalia with my drum and interfacing with the
Mapuches people, we seen that oppression takes many forms of colonization.
5279. I then travelled to numerous -- dozens of other countries to interface
I with other indigenous people such as the WMat-iri‘s where delegations of
our leadership signed MOU’s, indigenous to indigenous, with the WM
people. With the Tibetans, we’vejoumeyed up to Tibet and we’re seeing a lot of
similarities in this post-colonial era as we move forward and have recognition of
our Aboriginal rights and title and the continuity of our traditions in a modern
context. It was the early foundations that my grandfather instilled in us that really
enabled me to then go out and seek other mentors.
5280. So my grandfather comes from a generation that we had many -- he
had many ﬁrst cousins, who in our language is our brothers and sisters. It’s the
I same term. Wﬂwtuiils could be an older sibling or an older ﬁrst
cousin.
5281. So, many of his relatives are grannies who have since passed on,
became our teachers and I certainly want to recognize our Auntie Lena; Lena
Jacobs was one of my teachers and Chief Gibby Jacob, that’s his late mother, and
other Elders such as Sgenenalh-t, you know, Auntie Yvonne was there to
encourage us, Yvonne J oseph, in our languages, in our teachings, Auntie Doris.
You know, many of these grannies continued to teach us our languages and
immerse us and encourage us as young people to become ﬂuent and to practice
our language and use it and be out on the land to exercise our traditions. And they
really encouraged us to keep these songs alive as the song we sang to begin with,
is one of our Chiefs welcome songs; it’s an old song that comes from a
matriarch, we then use it as a chief's welcome song. And it’s those types of
handng down of knowledge through the oral traditions that I was very fortunate
to be immersed in.
5282. To become a hereditary Chief, I guess, you know there’s a lot of
thought processes that we can engage in here, but we have many of our hereditary
Chiefs with us, Xwélxwelacha here is one of our respected hereditary Chiefs,
I Chief Dick Williams. We have EﬁiﬁaﬁJH-H'f'elg' lscmﬂinfSiyam, Chief Bill
Williams is a hereditary chief; KaKeltn siyém, Chief Gibby J acob. We have
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

70
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
many of our chiefs, our Siyam Ts’élkwilem, our Siyaln Paitsmauk; these are all
respected Siyams, as well as our matriarchs Slawiya and others that also could
easily get up here and share, you know, many of these teachings.

5283. But to give you a little bit of an idea of the responsibilities that are
bestowed on us, it’s important to look at the context of our family ties and our
lineages and how that relates to management of our resources throughout our
territories.

5284. So before I get into that, I think it’s important to note that the
Squamish are one group of Coast Salish; who you probably heard throughout the
last number of days, these intricate connections of Coast Salish. And Coast Salish
territories expand, basically, through the Fraser Valley here down into
Washington State, all of Puget Sound out to the coast of Washington State up into
Vancouver Island around Sooke, what is now Victoria, all the way up to around

I Comox back to the mainland of Bute Inlet and all of the lﬁHl-l—n inlets that ﬂow
into the Salish Sea back down here to the lower mainland.

5285. This geographic region is considered the Coast Salish language family,
and we've been dissected in half by the Canada/U.S. border by this imposition of
these two countries that have claimed our lands and territories. Without our
consent or without any compensation, they've assumed jurisdiction.

5286. And the Coast Salish have always been a strong unit who have very
intricate family ties that span many thousands of years of trade and commerce and
of coalitions, of very strong social and ceremonial practices that are still very,
very much alive and well today, as well as a lot of the trade that continues from
systems such as this St6:16, the beautiful Fraser River, where we would gather
along these rivers in multitudes of Coast Salish people. During the summer
months, we would all gather along here and take advantage of the bounty of the
salmon, at that time, used to be plentiful before the commercial ﬁsheries wreaked
havoc.

5287. And the Coast Salish would have many potlatches where there'd be
intermarriages amongst the tribes, and a lot of gambling would go on and
exchanging of wealth and goods, namings and memorials.

5288. Many of the potlatches that you hear of took place during these times
of gathering and then, in the winter months, we would gather for our winter
ceremonies where we would again continue to connect with each other and

Transcript Hearing Order 0H—001—2014

71
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
reafﬁrm our ties.
I 5289. In the Squamish territory, we are one dialectr—T-the Slgwxwﬁ 7mesh is
one dialect amongst the Coast Salish language family. So the Squamish territory
within this geographic region, basically, is a large part of the lower mainland out
to Ell_( sn, which is Point Gray where the UBC is situated today, along the Haida
heigil n!“ land through Vancouver, out to Burnaby, including all of the lakes, out
towards WTilumism, which is known as Port Moody today, up into Indian ' '
Arm, Tsleil-Waututh, which our family is here, some of our Tsleil-Waututh
family.
5290. Here we go.
5291. This is a map of the Squamish territory. So I'm at the bottom right
corner right now, where -- I'll see if this -- just down in this area is -- around
I where Kinder Morgan is an area known as Hidelhﬂkwa-ymlJlel-ilh'ﬂkwaﬂn. And
I'll ask my Kinder Morgan family, friends here to take that into your heart and
mind as the real place names of these areas because we've been invisible in our
own land for a very long time. And in this day and age, it's important for you to
' know where you're at in our territory.
I I 5292. So we have illiteHH-Heﬁ'l'itemtg :1, which is this village right over here
in what is now Port Moody. We have W'l'emtemixwu] is a very large
I village that was once inhabited in Belcarra all the way up Indian Ann. We go
| I along the Haiﬂa-hcight at” land, everything that ﬂows into Burrard Inlet and Howe
I Sound is considered Squamish territory, including the Whistler area.
I 5293. And the Haida-heiaht ut‘land up through the Squamish valleys up here
I to the northwest part of our territory is just gorgeous country up here known as
I Whﬂh and kwekwayé; kwelhaynexw is our way of explaining our
connection to these areas, these wild spirit places.
5294. You follow the Haiéa-imjght Dr land, anything that ﬂows to the west .
here would be the Wﬁﬁhcli territory. Anything that ﬂows to the north is
the 'Iéillﬁ-Eetl II I'u'al, our neighbours, all the way down through Howe Sound,
anything that flows into Wnll‘ﬂimmi anti W'l'egunéwcts into I Formatted: Underline l
these water bodies here are considered Squamish territories, all the way to the
I Sunshine Coast, an area known as Wiiﬁtﬁﬁtelﬂéga which today is Robert's I “matted: Under'ine I
| Creek. Our place of origin is -- one of our stories talks about our ﬁrst ancestors
I right here in Chl_<welhp and 1W35chmlﬁ where we appeared in this
|
I Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

72
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
physical realm and established ourselves.

5295. So this territory certainly has sustained us for innumerable generations,

- for many thousands of years, and we have many stories of change and
transformation. In our experience as Squamish people, we don't have a land
bridge story that we came across ﬁ'om some place called Mongolia. That's a
foreign word in our language. Our creation stories talk about our connections
right here in this territory and our connections to the other Coast Salish groups.

5296. So just to add to the context, my ahieﬁHm-tshha-Chiel’tainship comes
from this village right here known as Ghieehlilq-HHCIIKweHu}. So this is part of our 1 Formatbed= Underline _1
traditional territory, and the management of this territory was very complex in the
lineages that were responsible for what we call ta swa7s ts'its'ap. These are
professionals that were pre—contact with European cultures.

5297. The ﬁrst ships we discovered in our waters were in 1791 when the
Spaniards came in, and then subsequently the British came in in 1792, so that's
very recent history for our people. Before that, we practised a very strong
economy of resource gathering and management of each of these families that
inhabited many of these villages. And it's very hard to see on these maps, but ---

5298. THE CHAIRMAN: Would the bigger one help if you -- feel free if
you want to stand up and point it.

5299. CHIEF CAMPBELL: Sure.

5300. Thank you. I thought I was going to have to use my longhouse voice
and enunciate for you, but you'll see that many of the areas in the map here are in
yellow. These would be former or contemporary village sites of our people all the
way through our territories.

5301. The other areas in white writing, I won't ask you to read it or
understand it, but to indicate these are a lot of the place names and the areas in our
language. And this certainly isn't comprehensive. This was just put together to
illustrate some of the traditional and contemporary uses that our people enjoy.

5302. You'll notice the tanned areas. These are what we'd call kwekwayé;
kwelhaynexw, which are known -— very difﬁcult to say in English -- but we said
wild spirit places, which are some of the last non-industrial areas, non-roaded
valleys in our territory that, in our land use planning, we set aside not only for the

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

73
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
beneﬁt of Squamish, but for all of our future generations to enjoy these places that
hum and resonate with beauty, that have some of the last old grth forest up
here of the 1,200 year old Douglas ﬁrs and cedar trees that are absolutely
phenomenal places to visit.
5303. So just in describing the territory, we had families that were highly
specialized in professions such as tl'elhnayern, which would be the mountain goat
hunters or the high alpine specialists. These types of specialists knew how to
navigate the high alpine realms and do the peaks and gather the resources, the
obsidians, the goats, the wool. The ladies would be up there picking berries and
doing things as well as clay and different quarries of stone up there.
5304. And they would live up there for, you know, many weeks at a time
where they would gather these goods and bring them down and trade them, not
only amongst other Squamish families, but to other areas throughout Coast Salish
where they may not have access to mountain goats, so our people would trade
with Vancouver Island to the Coast Salish families over there in exchange for
other goods.
5305. And this was a practice where many of our tools, actually, in fact,
came from very good sources of obsidians that were -- that have a ﬁngerprint.
And they're traced all over well into Montana and many places where you can
today do science on this and source the origins of these products, many of which
came from Squamish core territories.
5306. We have a few very signiﬁcant mountains to our people. Over here
we have Nch’Kay, which is Mount Garibaldi. This was one our places of safe
haven during the great ﬂood post-glaciation when all the waters -- the ice melted.
The waters rose drastically. A universal story, where our people went to these
areas for their safe havens.
I 5307. We went to Wkﬁﬁﬁﬂllﬁkﬂ' '3’, this Ice Cap Peak up here, which
was another one of those mountains that was a safe haven for our people. And the “matted: under‘ine
I third mountain is down here in Washington State known as _}_{wsa7k, which
coincidentally is right beside us here, Mount Baker.
5308. So this triangle represented the safe haven of Squamish territory where
we would go to during the great ﬂood. And when the waters receded, the people
found themselves again traumatized and having to adapt post—ﬂood, and that's
where we developed many of these professions over the last many thousands of
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

74
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
years aﬁer the great Ice Ages.
5309. So some of the saltwater hunters, known as W
Waleswechatwilh would be the canoe carvers. We had seven makes and
models of canoes that we used from we call hot rods to limousines. These were
all different styles and shapes of canoes adapted to the inlets and the rivers and
the trade, crossing the Salish Sea and beyond that.
5310. Those people managed stands of timber such as down here in the
bottom part in what is now Kitsilano and J ericho. These were big stands of cedars
that were suitable for the big canoes, the 60-foot dugout canoes, for the post and
beam longhouses that our Coast Salish people used, as well as these stands over
I here known as Wﬁgpﬁjgygyr These were large stands of cedar that —
made a lot of settlers rich.
5311. When they ﬁrst came to our territories, they started a lot of these mills
and whatnot where our people at one time participated and then got marginalized
in those industries but other professions of our people would continue on with
each of the families and their lineages. They were expected to pass these
knowledges down. So you’d have the'laui—ﬁunem—Eplﬂueaws genem the plants
and medicines. You’d have the WﬁﬁtvlsiTts, the ritualists, llte mm
Wﬂttmmn, the medicine peoples.
I 5312. You would have HHﬁH-Hﬁta—fphﬁ . jestihént the weavers, you know, the
swéwkw'elh, those that wove the mountain goat wool blankets. Many of the
families had these responsibilities that collectively created a strong economy
amongst our people.
5313. So the Siyams, those that were groomed ﬁ'om young ages to be like
relay runners, they accepted those -- the stewardship bestowed on them. They
were expected to continue that strong management of our territories and pass it
down to the next generation.
5314. And those ones that rised (sic) and who were groomed were
considered Siyam, what we call today Chiefs. So those were like hereditary
Chiefs. They were the ones that were responsible -- the masters that were
responsible for continuing to organize and mobilize the people to continue to go
out into those territories.
5315. So today, we have many of the hereditary Chiefs that still remember
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

75
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
those teachings of their families of where their lineages connect them from and
what their family’s forte or their professions were that were practised for many,
many generations.
5316 So that’s a little bit of an explanation of the type of hereditary Chiefs
and how we’re groomed in these ancient knowledges and how that connects to the
future descendants and how we apply that in a modern context.
5317. So part of that transfer of knowledge continues today in many different
I forms. We have Latash MM is one of our youth workers here that
brings the kids out onto the land. We just went on a canoe j ourney this summer
where we continue to paddle throughout our waters here in what is now Burrard
Inlet and up into Indian Arm.
I 5318. We take kids and paddle throughout W'Fegtwnéwets [ Formatted: Under'ine ]
throughout Howe Sound here. And since 1993, we started these big tribal
journeys where we paddle to one another’s territories of our neighbourin g tribes.
So this summer, we went to Waglisla, known as Bella Bella, on the central coast
of BC. where we took about 43 of our youth to connect them not only to Coast
Salish, but to the other tribes along the coast here so that they can recognize their
connection as Indigenous people and as First Nations to the neighbouring tribes.
5319. And as we collectively have this resurgence of knowledge of the
canoeing and of the songs and the regalia and the language that go along with
those protocols, so when we go into each other’s territories, if we’re going to
| canoe across From WSwg 353i, from Amhieside over to W
anﬁune; w, Nanaimo or somewhere, part of the protocol is that we don’t
just enter those territories. We sing our songs and we ask permission from those
hereditary Chiefs and matriarchs to ask permission to come into their lands and
their territories. And there’s a reciprocation that takes place that the youth are
witness to and they engage and participate in to see that continuity of grooming
them in their responsibilities.
5320. And that’s something, as we did here today, and thank you for also
recognizing the unceded territories of the St6:16 where we are convening these
meetings. So that’s part of that protocol that we are trained in, that transfer of
knowledge.
5321. So I’ll talk a little bit about —- a little bit more about the governance.
And the Squamish Nation traditionally governed itself, as I mentioned, with the
Transcript Heating Order 0H-001-2014

76
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
hereditary Chiefs. Those hereditary Chiefs amalgamated in 1923 to collectively
form the Squamish Nation and this was in response to, as I mentioned, 1791, the
ﬁrst European contact.
5322. Eighteen twenty-seven (1827), we have F ort Langley here on the
F raser River which, you know, the F ort Langley journals recite 200 canoes at a
time of Squamish travelling up and down the river participating in the economy
and the bounty of the salmon and the eulachon ﬁsheries and the other resources
that were gathered and that were once plentiﬁll.
5323. We then experienced the gold rush mentality and the successions of
gold rush mentality with European arrivals that wiped out the fur trade by the
18405 on this part of the coast. We seen the gold rush that happened where
people —- we had a big inﬂux into the territories that moved, you know, north and
then down into California.
5324. But those people came in. You know, it was tenuous because they
were staking claims to Aboriginal lands at that time and our people experienced
mass depopulation in the 1800s with epidemics.
5325. So many of the families were hit hard when many of these villages,
I such as W'Titcm‘lﬂdown here, were hit pretty hard by the epidemics that
were introduced by Europeans, foreign diseases that we weren’t accustomed to.
5326. So those people had to then move and gather in the bigger villages of
WTamlemia wtu and Wigwam, Wlﬂahela Eikw, I Formatte‘i: UHder'ine l
Ealhulaﬁl'islhaTan. ﬁwmelchaln and all oftheaa villages that are still presently [ Formatted: Underline l
located in Burrard Inlet here, where our people continue to reside with the Tsleil-
Waututh and tha mstaﬁwu‘llnuah as wall as aur Hmdaqueam
Wﬁwmg‘thlﬂﬂyam the Musqueam families over here along the mouth of the
Fraser. Formatted: Underline
5327. So when they were experiencing mass depopulation, we -- it was also
compounded and exacerbated with the introduction of The Indian Act. And I
believe that was 1870s or something like this where the federal government then
imposed legislative oppression that corralled native people, forcibly removed us
from areas like in Stanley —- what is now Stanley Park. Many of our villages in
these areas, the people were removed off of those lands and forced to reserves.
5328. So there was expropriation or conﬁscation of our -- of our lands and
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

77
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
our villages to make way for settlers, without compensation to our people. And
the Squamish were never idle in that process. We continued to challenge the
Crown.

5329. And in 1906, as we mentioned, we travelled to England to implore the
Crown of that day to seek honour in their dealings with our people. That fell on
deaf ears at that time.

5330. Nineteen thirteen (1913) we were forcibly removed from the Senakw,
one of the big villages here in F alse Creek. And the Chiefs responded and the
communities responded over the next decades to establish the amalgamation in
1923, which then seen our hereditary Chiefs come together to collectively form
the Squamish Nation on July 23rd, 1923.

5331. So those Chiefs continued on, you know, imploring the Crown. We
weren’t recognized as citizens in our own land until amendments to The
Citizenship Act in the ﬁfties, mid-ﬁﬁies, ﬁnally implemented in the early sixties
where we had the right to vote.

5332. And prior to that, we had no -- no legal recourse to challenge the
Crown in their attitude that these were all free and vacant lands free for the taking,
that it was this continuation of this notion of doctrine of discovery and term
nullius that these are all just free and vacant lands, justifying the acceptance of
B.C. into the Confederation of Canada and moving along those types of colonial
attitudes and practices.

5333. So we followed our hereditary system up until 1981 where we then
had a referendum to switch over to a custom election, a four—year term, where
anyone of age of majority of 18 or over could be nominated and elected to -- as a
Councillor. So we currently have 16 elected Councillors.

5334. We don’t elect our Chiefs. We’re hereditary Chiefs. But we have the
Chair and Co-Chair, and we have our Co-Chair, Ts’élkwilem, Byron J oseph is
here. He served as Co-Chair for -- since the last -- I won’t -- since the last Ice
Age, I was going to say, but --—

—-- (Laughter/Rires)

5335. CHIEF CAMPBELL: Probably the last 30 or so years, 35 years he’s

I served as one of our leaders along with ilaiallshtuﬂeeHe-Teiﬂisemhin Siyam. I “matted: Underline I
' Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014
|

6
a government to government agreement between Squamish and the Province of British
Columbia that incorporates portions of Squamish’s Xay T emixw Land Use Plan into the
provincial Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP). Under the LRMP, Squamish
and the Province have agreed to implement protective measures to safeguard over 50,000
hectares of Squamish’s Territory and processes to make collaborative land use decisions.

21. Squamish has been an active member in the Coast Salish Gathering. This gathering is a
trans-boundary collective of approximately 60 First Nations/tribes engaged in revitalizing
the health and long—term sustainability of the Salish Sea by using marine use planning
based on scientiﬁc and traditional ecological knowledge. The protection of the Salish Sea
extends to the protection of the marine fish and marine mammals within the Salish Sea.

22. Squamish is taking an active role in efforts to reinvigorate and enhance the sustainability
of the aquatic ecosystem, including in Burrard Inlet, to combat the effects of
industrialization, partnering with various jurisdictions and organizations to implement
initiatives that protect our Territory. Recent examples include:

(a) Fisheries enhancement, through installation of a rearings pond, on McDonald
Creek (ch’tlaam), with the West Vancouver Streamkeepers;

(b) Foreshore and estuary restoration on Mackay Creek (tl’alhema7elks), with the
City and District of North Vancouver and Seaspan;

(c) Estuary restoration and installation of a rearing pond on Mosquito Creek
(Eslha'7an);

(d) Stream rehabilitation in New Brighton Park (Kanamut) area on the south shore of
Burrard Inlet, just west of the Westridge Marine Terminal; and

(e) Removal of ﬁsh barriers on Seymour Creek, with the Seymour Creek Salmonid
Society.

23. Squamish has established a ﬁsheries department, and enacted a ﬁshing by-law to ensure
sustainable ﬁshery resources in our Territory for generations to come. The by—law
regulates ﬁshing through Fisheries Guardians who oversee the use of the ﬁshing
resources in particular areas within the Territory and educate Squamish youth with regard
to ﬁshing practices. Squamish has also engaged in hatchery proj ects to aid in the
rehabilitation of ﬁsh stocks. These efforts are a small part of the active role Squamish

5

78
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
Chief Bill Williams served as a Co-Chair for many decades where they seen and
witnessed ﬁrsthand the changes along with Chief Gibby J acob, who was in there.

5 336. And our two Siyams here have been elected and recognized leaders in
our community since 1981. They directly witnessed these changes as we moved
from a hereditary Chief as our ofﬁcial government to an elected system that is still
the practice today.

5337. So many of us as hereditary Chiefs continue to sit on elected positions
as we’re nominated, and it’s a democratic process of election by our members to
vote every four years on who they want to see. But the 16 elected positions are
directly related to the 16 hereditary Chiefs that came together in ’23 to form our
government -- our traditional government.

5338. So today, we have a population of approximately 4,000 people in the
Squamish Nation where the majority is youth under about -- I believe the last stats
were around 60 percent or so were under the age of 30. We should get that
veriﬁed but to indicate that we’re largely a youn g population. The majority, I
believe, are on reserve. Probably half of our people are on reserve. The other
half live throughout our territory and abroad, such as Vancouver Island and
Washington State, with their connections to other Coast Salish.

5339. I talked about our connection to other Coast Salish is notable because
you’ve heard from Tulalip and Swinomish and Lummi and others that have been
before you in the last few days.

5340. It’s important to know that, over the many thousands of years of our
connection with the Coast Salish, I talked about the trade and commerce, the very
strong economy that went beyond Coast Salish borders. But also, during times of
warfare, it was important that the Coast Salish regularly created coalitions to
stand together in unity and strength to repel invaders as they came into our lands
to try to usurp our territories and our jurisdiction and our authority.

5341. The Coast Salish would often come together and create, during times
of warfare, coalitions that would often ensue battles on the Salish Sea, repelling
enemies and protecting our resources. And those coalitions, we still reafﬁrm
those ties today as Coast Salish people when we go on those tribal journeys, as I
mentioned, with our youth.

5342. It’s important that we recite those stories so that they know that, at

Transcript Hearing Order OH—001-2014

79
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
times of conﬂict, we also pulled together and came together under the nationhood
of Coast Salish.

5343. We have always used our resources. As mentioned, ours is a very
bountiful territory with many resources that have sustained us and continue to
sustain us. Down here, in Lheklhukwaytn, which is Burnaby Mountain, and this
area, it comes from the term Wihukwav which is the Arbutus trees.

And nggis to peel, to peel off something.

5344. ' It was very, very rich in sea urchins. This was one of the best areas for
harvesting sea urchins, which happens to be one of my favourite foods, which I
can no longer harvest in this particular area. The cumulative impact.

5345. But we have raﬁs of ducks. At one time, the migratory ducks used to
just be thick in these secluded inlets that provided safe havens for the migratory
fowl.

5346. We have a very important story here. If you go from Titemtsen to

I hhaﬁﬂﬂﬂavaﬁ-althuljlhﬂkwaﬂn. you have RaHHmHa-{phhﬂanamut which is one
of another story of origin around the New Brighton Park area. There’s a creek
there where the PNE is today.

5347. That area talks about the origins of some of our people that emerged
there, and they had established themselves there and lived and had some relation
that connected us as, again, in the families there. But they then were wiped out
during the diseases.

5348. So you have Wﬁépﬁgﬂrﬂg, which is East Van, and a very
important area here called l-‘rwa-Elhﬁyﬁsk wachy' s, which connects to this water body
over here, just off of W'Lemtamixwtn.

5349. We believe that the water is sacred, that it is life giving, that it has a
spirit, and that is a water realm. And in our story, these areas connect through

I these ground fed water, WMQ chaﬁ.

5350. You can go into those marshes and sloughs, and the underwater
aquifers will connect you to other sources of lakes such as Deer Lake and
Burnaby Lake and this area out here, just off of -- the lakes over by Buntzen and
whatnot. These are all connected by groundwater, groundwater fed. And those
are sacred areas of ours that represent doorways into the spirit realm.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

80
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell

I 5351. So when you go into your mailaHHt-{ﬁllhmiyelrtsmul into your trance,

and you go through these places and you’re Visioning, you can reappear in some
of these realms where you learned very important sacred information ﬁ'om those
spirits, be it the spirit of the sturgeon or of the seal people or what it might be.
And when you come to again, back into this physical realm, you then have a lot
more of the responsibility and keys of knowledge that are important to managing
these areas.

5352. We have many place names throughout Burrard Inlet and many
villages. There are some big burial grounds here, I’ll call Smemchus, where
many people reside today in their condos. They’re built right atop of many of our
graveyards.

I 5353. You have HiawaskﬁahﬁiﬂaywaTﬁks is a village here which was one of ,. E Formatted: Underline ;
the best elk hunting areas in our territory. The elk were the ﬁrst species to be ' “matted: under'ine _
extirpated with the settlers, the ﬁrst settlers that came into this area.

5354. Some of the best sturgeon hunting grounds were in this area around
False Creek and Burrard Inlet where they’d use long poles and they’d feel around
for the ﬁsh. And they would be able to gaff the sturgeons as well as
Wteﬂauﬂs‘ the octopus hunting that was really rich off of
WPQ’ iyck, known as the Brockton Point.

5355. And you have the big village of wgtvﬁm way, the —
Lumhennan‘s Arch, and Wlhilhxihlsh is Slwaﬁhﬁiwagll Rock off of
Stanley Park is one of our ancestors who was transformed into a stone. He was .
immortalized to demonstrate to each generation the importance of preparing _—
ourselves for parenthood. And those -- parents know that it’s important that we
prepare ourselves for that responsibility. So the story of Slwash—Siwash Rock,

Wﬁhmilhgi'fﬂsh, demonstrates the values of family and of parenthood and
how that man was praying and meditating and bathing himself.

5356. When the transformers came along, they told him, " WM?

:Itexw ka”, they said, “Get out of the way.” And he wouldn’t break his
concentration, so they immortalised him. They turned him into stone to remind us
all of those duties and responsibilities.

5357. So a lot of our stories are written throughout the lands in these place
names.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-OOl-2014

81
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
I 5358. You have these important areas. Skewl-twtantsﬂahislltewekw is a place '
of clay that was used to manufacture mountain goat wool blankets. And then you
have Senakw, which was a very maj or metropolitan centre for Coast Salish in
proximity to all of the other Coast Salish tribes. They can come around the corner
here and visit amongst our Coast Salish people here in Senakw.
I 5359. l-yia-il-‘Wlﬂéﬂygﬂ is the big village over in J ericho. And then
you have all the pharmaceuticals that came out of these areas as well as on the
I north side of Burrard Inlet, you have matmmﬂh, which is the present village
of our Tsleil-Waututh family.
I 5360. WBI'Hsma, which were the ﬁshing grounds and ﬁshing weirs that
are just in those mud ﬂats. I don’t know what the mud ﬂats are called in English,
but just off of Maplewood ﬂats.
5361. So that’s a village site there aﬁllLSPitt-imaﬁl‘ilsma, and then you have
the big villages of Ch'ich'elgwﬁkw, which is recorded with -- the ﬁrst early
Europeans recorded 600-foot long houses in that area. That’s why we call them
“longhouses” because they would build -- butt it up against each other to be a
contiguous house. But in fact, they’re all compartmentalized, if you will, but it
made it look as a really long single-sloped roof houses our Coast Salish people
used. That was one of the large villages there with big longhouses.
I 5362. You have ?_(a7élcha, which is a creek that we swim in today known as
Lynn Creek. It’s a beautiful bathing creek. A few of us were there this morning
to purify ourselves at daybreak, preparing ourselves to have a strong mind, strong
I body, connect to nature and to the W-nauﬁeyﬁnek Siyarn, Creator ,and give
thanks.
Formatted: Underline
I 5363. Then you have WEEK; gem, which is_ the Place of Snakes here.
It’s where the gardener snakes like to ball up and reproduce.
5364. And then you have many villages along here, including W
EﬂhhéslhaTBH which is the village that I was born and raised on right here. We
have our businesses there, Mosquito Creek Marina. Many of our ofﬁces. You
have marinas down here in Lynnwood, our current Squamish operations.
I 5 365. You have W'l'l‘alhema’klks, which is Salty Tasting
Creek here. I don’t know what it’s called in English, but it’s
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

82
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
I Wellesl‘l'alhmﬂmlks, McKay Creek.

5366. And then you have ﬁwmelchstn, which is known as Capilano. And
Capilano is an English way of saying, Cayaplanoch (phkliiyapliinqw who was
one of our great war generals. A big Wlaugxw name j ust like Kitsilano and
Capilano are big umbrella names that connect us back many thousands of years.

I You go down into West Van, it’s Waystﬂaywi . And Ch'tl'am, which were
great deer hunting grounds here.

5367. You have WEE”, which is good rock ﬁshing areas. You have
Wﬁkiwitsut, Lighthouse Park, which means to knife your canoe 90 degrees
as you blade and go up Howe Sound.

5368. These were all good areas with different benches of urchins and
rockﬁsh and eelgrass and things out there that were very good productive grounds
for the herring and the different species that would come seasonally to these
waters.

5369. So the Elders would say when the tide goes out, the table was set
because it was such a bountiful area for our people to harvest.

|

5370. And I know that the two gentlemen here are anxious to share their
experience when they were young boys on oyster harvesting and duck hunting
and whatnot in these areas.

5371. But we can continue right along and just explain like the whole
territory if we had enough time. In fact, I would like to take you out there and

| show you would be even better to immerse you in those experiences ﬁrsthand,
you know, being your Indian guide to show you the territory and recite these
stories is pretty important.

5372. Bowen Island is HalﬂiahamKwilakem. We have a small little island
here called -- not 'Sm-Hﬂiide-hulemwh'mélhmﬂlhelch, it’s -- yeah, it’s a snake
island, I'm trying to think -- oh, it’s probably on this map here. I was right,

I Hmuthimhuleh—{hhirsmﬂmeihclnm So MMWmélhmcihulch is
actually a big serpent that’s coiled up and was transformed into this island, I don’t
. know what it’s called in English, but it’s just right offhere off of WhytecliffPark
and our people would go by there. We wouldn’t really necessarily go on that
island because it was considered a serpent power, only those that wanted to obtain
that type of training and power.
Transcript Hearing Order OH-OOl-2014

83
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
5373. There's other places on these islands, Lhaxwm, Anvil Island, which
was also a big serpent power up on top of that peak. You have the story of
Wﬁinulhkﬂ which is one of our big double-headed sea serpents
that climb the chief mountain, etched the black mark into it. mmhtal
{ﬁh-IlXWéchtggl who is not with us, but one of our ancestral name was the serpent
slayer who pursued the Emmanulhkav, and eventually slayed _it up here -
in the northern part of our territories.
5374. So everywhere you go, you know, you have the Twin Sisters here,
they’re known as Ch'ich‘iyﬁy Elxwikn, The Lions in English. So they’ll talk
I ahnut the Wmmlﬂtains on the north shore, these arc two 5%
tﬁhhrichelhlléuh known as two princesses, chief’s daughters who were
immortalized and transformed into these mountains during one of these times of
warfare when there was battles amongst the northern tribes and our Coast Salish
people. They just continued to kill each other and these daughters implored for
I peace, they asked for peace and they created peace and Xeaeéelsm transformed I Formatted: Underline I
them and immortalized them into those twin sisters. Again, to remind us each
generation to live together in peace and more amicably with each other.
I 5375. So there’s many, many stories that we can recite throughout the
territories. I'm going to continue on because I could spend all day telling you
about the place names and the mythology, but -- so I talked about the protection
of our -- of our lands. There's many battles that took place just off of Skiwitsut
out here, when the northerners would come down. We would have scouts in these
areas that would protect these doorways. We had battle stations over here in
I WM this point of land out in Point Grey that would observe the
canoes as they came and went.
I 5376. They would have Wﬁyﬁﬂh, the sleek fast canoes that were
sprinters, that would paddle out and intercept anyone coming into our waters.
And those sprinters would then report back to other villages, and if it was
I imminent danger, they would muster the people and they would send out the big
I witex, the big war canoes that would be loaded with slings and rocks, bows and
I I arrows, wattleemllml '5, and all the various tools that they would then engage in
battle to protect our waters and territories.
|
I 5377. They could call upon the families from Tsleil-Waututh, from
| Hul'q'umi'num, from all of these villages throughout these areas to come in and
| repel people during times of warfare. And there was many battles that took place
|
I Transcript Hearing Order 0H-001-2014
I
|

84
Squamish N ation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
| up here in Howe Sound in aHFa-t‘aud around our islands called Kwam
Kwumliwém Ewem and Wi-Ninech Mm-Hwém WM. known as
Defence Islands; still many loved ones buried in these areas and there's burial
grounds throughout our territories.

5378. Part of the challenge, not only with these types of NEB processes, but
other governmental processes, is that we’re not afforded any protection of our
graveyards that they're under the grave —- under the archaeological branch where
other Canadians would expect their loved ones to be protected under the
Graveyard and Cemetery Act.

5379. There's these dynamics that we’re continuing to deal with that
continue to marginalize F irst Nations’ people and alienate us and make us
invisible from sharing these beautiﬁll stories. So I'm going to continue on with
more of our contemporary processes, because I’ve shared a lot about the historic
context of our lineages and our connections.

5380. But I’d like you to now turn your attention how the Squamish has
undertaken processes intergovernmental or otherwise, to protect and enhance our
aboriginal rights and title. I’m sure you're all familiar with the Chilcotin case, the
Tsilhqot’in, as of recent. This is something that’s certainly been in the hearts of
many F irst Nations people in -- for many generations of effort to get to where we
are today.

5381. And as I mentioned before, we were not recognized as citizens in our
lands, so we had no legal recourse under Canadian legislation to protect our
territories from the inﬂux of settlers, who then claimed -- claimed our lands and
became very afﬂuent at our expense.

5 382. But in order to counter that, the Squamish developed our own Xay

I llanarH-aemixw, known as the Land Use Plan, which was conducted -- it started in
’99, went through the early 2000, was ﬁnalized, I believe, in 2003, where we then

I merged it with the provincial WM Process, Land and Resource
Management Planning Process. That’s where our community identiﬁed these
wild spirit places which comprise about 50,000 hectares; they represent about 8
percent of Squamish territory. We -- our territory is 6,732 square kilometres.

5383. And we didn’t ask anyone’s permission, we said “These are important
places to us.” And they're -- it’s really hard to describe the importance of them in
a Western sort of methodology, because Western methodology does not have

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

85
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
spirituality in their vocabulary when it comes to management of these types of
places.

5384. So it was very challenging, but what we settled on was conservancies;
that there would be co-management of conservancies to demonstrate the ability
for us to move forward and work together on planning processes that would still
recognize Aboriginal uses of rights and title of hunting. And we opened up the
other areas where we acquired TF L 38, Tree Farm Licence 38 ﬁ'om Interfor,
where we control about -- just over 200,000 hectares under the Forest Licence.

53 85. We’ve engaged in a number of IPPs, Independent Power Projects,
where we have six of them up and running in our territories to look at more
renewable energy, and green sources of energy, and sustainable uses of our
territory that would not adversely impact the environment, or have minimal
impact. There were very important values that had been instilled in us from our
hereditary systems, from our teachings. And it's something that our community
still said is important to us today in how we engage in business.

5386. So with that land use planning, we also developed a lot of youth
programs where we said, “Why; why have these areas up here ifthere's not a
youth connection?” So we wanted to ensure that our young people were afforded
the opportunity to go here and be immersed for weeks at a time in our traditional
training techniques of bathing, of swimming in the waters, of carrying rocks under
the lakes, of really pushing them to do fasting and solos and whatnot, and
teaching them a lot of the techniques of our traditional training.

5387. So these continue. to be training grounds where we bring up youth. As
I mentioned, my friend over here is bringing youth up there next week. We’ve
been bringing youth up there up into these areas for a few years now,
reconnecting them, for a number of years in fact.

5388. With that we then built the youth programs to became ambassadors for

I our cultural centre up here in Squeek—kaikw in Whistler. You know, if you ever
have a chance, please come up to Whistler and visit the Squamish Lil’wat
Cultural Centre where you’ll see our young people being the ambassadors,
directly interfacing with the general public, welcoming them to a living museum,
to an area where they're able to showcase the continuity of our tradition through a
venue such as the Cultural Centre.

I 5389. Along the highway here we created the namingjﬂtl recognition, the

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

86
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
Sea to Sky Highway, Highway Number 99, where you’ll see a lot of the signage
l in our language. It’s not in French and English, it’s in WMM'xwu-T'mesh, E Formatted: Underline :
and people don’t know how to read it or understand what it means, but it
immediately conveys a message that we’re still here, that you know, it’s important
to recognize the Squamish’s history.
5390. We are also engaged, as I mentioned, in the context of the Coast Salish
of all the other tribes. We're also engaged with the Coast Salish gathering, which
is approximately 60 or so Coast Salish tribes that have come together, both trans-
boundary and the Canada—U.S. side to start looking at the health of the Salish Sea.
And working with what is our vision for marine use planning, building on land
use planning, how do we then look at marine use planning and look at what world
class safety really, really looks like and what has been the cumulative impact that
we’ve had, and where is the decision—making that indigenous people bring to the
table, as opposed to being treated as stakeholders in our land where we’re going
right back to the sixties, where we might as well not even be citizens in our own
lands the way that these regulatory processes have continued to marginalize First
Nations people.
5391. That’s been something that all Coast Salish has stood together to say,
“This is unacceptable, we must come together and look at what is our truth and
how do we look to the long—term sustainability and protection of the Salish sea.
5392. So the Coast Salish gathering has been one of those opportunities to
get together and strategize on those types of issues and look at the science as well
as the traditional ecological knowledge in bringing those two disciplines together
and saying, "How does that help us to do Visioning and planning and expand on
the coalitions to protect the sacred -- the water and all of the species that live
there”.
5393. We’ve seen a revitalization of Howe Sound in the last number of years
and that’s, again, because of the work of many of the individuals here and others
that have held these companies accountable and the pulp mills in the -- one of the
worst single source polluters was coming out of Britannia Mines where we had
huge dead zones here in Howe Sound where we couldn’t eat the sustenance -- the
food from these areas, the prawns, the bottom ﬁsh.
5394. We’re now seeing a revitalization of herring biomass comin g in here
I and spawning along WM and other areas in our territory.
Transcript Heating Order OH-001-2014

87
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
5395. We’re seeing the orcas coming in and hundreds of porpoises coming in
I and the lewauusewh-hliwenis the big grey whales and whatnot, are all coming
back to these areas where we’re seein g a revitalisation. So in our Visioning and
our planning, it’s taken a very monumental effort to get to that place.
I 5 396. And this Wimminent risk that is being posed by this Trans
Mountain pipeline with increased shipping and whatnot, we ask ourselves, you
know, how does that meet the metrics of the Squamish Nation in our timeline, in
our studies, in” everything we’ve built since amalgamation in ‘23 to get to where
I we are in our relations with the Crown.
5397. We’re saying how does this bring beneﬁt to us, how is it of interest to
the Squamish Nation and who, ultimately, is the one beneﬁting or the afﬂuence
that is being generated and who is ultimately bearing risk.
5398. So it necessitates that we engage in planning processes and as my good
I friend here, Wkigcm said, we haven’t been afforded those
resources to adequately look at those potential risks and impacts.
5399. So there’s many things the Nation is doing to continue exercising our
I authority and our connection to our territories. We are not assimilated people.
We simply adapt to our ever-changing environment.
5400. So I’m going to -- I’m going to leave it at that. I’m going to turn it
[ over to Whumﬁﬂw once again to introduce our next speaker. _
5401. And thank you for your patience in allowing me to very quickly
highlight some of the thousands of years of history of our Squamish people and
our relation, the continuity of that tradition. So I’m very pleased to share that
with you this afternoon.
5402. THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Chief Campbell.
5403. And Mr. Bruce, feel whenever you think is appropriate for a short
break, we’re happy to oblige. We’ll leave that up to you because you’re the one --
we don't want to break the trend of your evidence.
5404. Thank you.
5405. MR. BRUCE: I think right now would be a good time to take a short
Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

7
plays as a steward of our waters and ﬁsheries resources.

Squamish harvesting rights in and around Burnaby Mountain

24. Squamish continues to depend on the resources within our Ten'itory that would
potentially be impacted by the Westridge Delivery Line Project to exercise our aboriginal
rights and maintain our way of life. Squamish people enjoy a variety of beneﬁts from our
Territory, including economic beneﬁts, and manage our Territory to ensure the continued
availability of these beneﬁts.

25. Squamish members continue to use our Territory to ﬁsh, hunt and gather resources for
sustenance, and to fulﬁll our social and ceremonial needs. This harvesting is an essential
part of Squamish identity and heritage, and is fundamentally dependent on strong
governance and stewardship of our Territory. Conservation is a foundation of Squamish
culture that has ensured access to resources in our Territory up until today. It is
Squamish’s intention to ensure that this continues to be the case.

26. The area of Burnaby Mountain is known in the Squamish community as
Lheljw ’lhzi'kw ’aytn, which when translated refers to the peeling bark of the local arbutus
trees. Lhekw ’lhti'kw ’aym is an area of cultural importance to the Squamish people and an
area that has been important source of resources for the practice of Squamish rights.

27. Lhelcw ’lhti'kw ’aym (Burnaby Mountain) was known for bear, deer, elk, migrating ducks
that inhabited our coves and inlets, particularly rich and abundant in sea urchins that
covered its foreshore, and orcas that used the surrounding waters as a calving ground.
The availability of many of these resources has been impacted by the surrounding
development. However, the area continues to have signiﬁcance to Squamish and is one of
the remaining areas within the Territory that remains protected and has not been directly
disturbed by industrial development.

28. Squamish continue to rely on our Territory to exercise our aboriginal harvesting rights to
ﬁsh, hunt and gather marine, aquatic and terrestrial resources. For example, we exercise
our rights in and around our Territory to harvest:

6

88
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Chief Ian Campbell
break. And I also wanted to let the Panel know that Sekyu Siyém will be
providing some concluding remarks at the end of our presentation.
5406. Thank you.
5407. THE CHAIRMAN: And the Panel will probably keep any questions
we may have or Trans Mountain have until the end as well.
5408. MR. BRUCE: Thank you.
5409. THE CHAIRMAN: And we’ll take a 15-minute -- 3 o’clock, if that’s
ﬁne with everybody?
Transcript Hearing Order OH-OO 1-2014

89
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David Jacobs

--- Upon recessing at 2:42 p.m./L’audience est suspendue a 14h42

--- Upon resuming at 2:54 p.m./L'audience est reprise a 14h54

IAN CAMPBELL: Resumed

RICHARD WILLIAMS: Resumed

DAVID JACOBS: Resumed

5410. THE CHAIRMAN: So understand, Mr. Bruce, it's -- Mr. J acob is
next. Am I correct?

5411. MR. BRUCE: Yes, you are correct.

5412. So I'd like to introduce Paitsmauk, David J acobs, respected Elder of
the Squamish Nation.

5413. And maybe, Paitsmauk, you could tell us what it means to be an Elder
and what the role of an Elder is in the Squamish community.

--- ORAL PRESENTATION BY/REPRESENTATION ORALE PAR MR. DAVID

J ACOBS:

5414. MR. JACOBS: First of all, I want to thank you for giving this
opportunity to listen to our people, our Squamish people, and the concerns we
have. I thank you for that.

5415. As an Elder of the nation is something that our people cherish Elders
of our nation because of the wisdom. And the wisdom that they gathered is from
their parents and their parents.

5416. What we teach in the communities today, which I teach in the
communities today, is something that we don't write down. My grandfather told
me you start writing things down, you'll forget. So when I talk to you, you will
listen and you'll start to understand more of what I'm saying.

5417. So I followed that to this day as an Elder of the nation of teaching my
children, my grandchildren and my great-grandchildren, teaching them to honour
and respect the Elders of our nation that one day, when you get old like me --
because I consider myself old now in a sense that I used to look up to and I talked
about and I called them "old people” because I don't like really using the term
"ancestors" because I didn't talk to my ancestors, but I talked to my grandfathers.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

90
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs
That was my teachings.

5418. What we say in our language snewayelh is the teachings that you get
as a child, your way of life. So as an Elder today, I follow those teachings,
snewayelh. It's important for us.

5419. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk.

5420. Can you describe your Squamish lineage for us, please?

5421. MR. JACOBS: Up on the chart there, up on the wall, you see on the
right side is my father's side of the family, which I have come, Lakiya.

5422. My father was born and raised in our village, meelch'stn. My
grandfather, Tsenawton. My great-grandfather, they call him Squamish J acob,
Katxmeltxw. Khayhilton, Paitsmauk, Sklapchen, these names in my family are so
important because every name there is connected to a village, to a river, to the
ocean, to water. It is so important that those names be remembered.

5423. When we pass on those names to our children and grandchildren and
great-grandchildren, when -- that's when we tell them the history, the story of
those names.

5424. On the right -- the left side, my mother’s side, she was from
Snuneymuxw, Nanaimo. Very, very strong family ﬁ'om Snuneymuxw. That was
my ﬁrst language when my mother opened my eyes, spoke to me, Snuneymuxw,
my father, Squamish.

5425 . So those names you see there, the families, is very, very dear to me.
Those names are carried by my family. I could get into it more, but that really
opens the eyes a little bit to where I’m from, my lineage, Squamish,
Snuneymuxw. We talk a thousand years, those names come from there.

5426. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk. Can you tell me where the
generations of your family lived in Squamish territory?

5427. MR. JACOBS: Well, my father was born in Vancouver. My
grandfather, as well, born in Vancouver. Great grandfather, Tsitsusem, today it’s
called Potlatch Creek, but that’s where he was -- he come from that village,
Tsitsusem. Paitsmauk, the name I carry, Tsitsusem. Skeloptchin (ph) Tsitsusem,

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

91
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs
that was the village of my family.

5428. MR. BRUCE: And did your grandfather live on one of the Reserves
in the Vancouver area?

5429. MR. JACOBS: My grandfather lived in, they call it, or it’s known
today as Capilano. You can see on the map at the -- in that area there, that’s
where he lived. Our family lived there from my grandfather and my great
grandfather. That was the village that we -- they lived at and I lived at.

5430. MR. BRUCE: And your children and grandchildren live on the
Capilano Reserves?

5431. MR. JACOBS: I have ﬁve children, 13 grandchildren, I think at last
count about 20 great grandchildren, I think at the last count. I haven’t talked to
my grandchildren lately, so I’ll do that when I get home, and maybe I’ll have to
ﬁx that number.

--- (Laughter/Rires)

5432. MR. J ACOBS: But we all live on the Capilano Reserve, in that
village. I’m very fortunate that I see my grandchildren, great grandchildren every
day. But the good thing about it is when it gets dark, they can go home. I don’t
have to put up with them.

5433. MR. BRUCE: Can you tell us about your upbringing on the Burrard
Inlet and Capilano Indian Reserve, please?

5434. MR. J ACOBS: Well, I was raised there and I lived not far from the
other families that --if look back at it on that village there, when I was -- before I
went to residential school there was nine houses and the Lions Gate Bridge on
that Reserve. That was it. So I’ve seen everything from building levenon (ph)
everything that’s put on that village I’ve seen built. Many, many changes. So I
was -- seen all of that, the changes.

5435. MR. BRUCE: Did you do any activities such as collecting shellﬁsh
or anything like that when you were younger?

5436. MR. J ACOBS: Before residential school we used to go down the
beach. Well, we lived on that village there, meelchstn, Capilano. Our homes

I Transcript Hearing Order OH-001—2014
I

92
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs

were on the waterfront. We used to go down -- my father brought us down to the
beach, digging clams, getting oysters, crab, codﬁsh, seaweed. So basically when
the tide went out, our table was set. It was abundance of seafood for us. We
never had to worry about that, that food. It was always there. We used to -- we
learned from my grandfather and my granduncle that -- how to preserve that -- the
clams and the oysters. We would preserve them for the winter use. During
residential school, at times when we would get -- allowed to get home, we would
still go down and dig clams and oysters.

5437. Then in the mid—ﬁﬁies, the industrial age began in the harbour. The
dredges came in and destroyed those beds, clam beds. They destroyed them
forever. We cannot go down the beach anymore, get clams, or anything in front
ofour village. It’s gone. We -- I go over to Snuneymuxw to my cousins, my
family over there, and I get some from them. They give me buckets of clams, and
oysters, and it’s the only way I can enjoy that food anymore.

5438. In my wildest dreams I would never have thought they would destroy
that, take our food away from our mouths. But that happened. It’s -- I can’t tell --
I can’t teach my grandchildren, my great grandchildren how to di g clams, get
crab, cook the crab, dry the seaweed. I can’t do that. It’s gone. I don’t know
how to explain that to my grandchildren.

5439. All we see outside ﬁ'om our windows looking down the beach are
freighters, ships, in and out. That’s why I’m afraid today what the damage that if
anything happened, it would destroy our home because that harbour, that bay
there that’s the home of the Squamish people. It’s always been a home, our
home.

5440. We look at the maps. We show the territories of the Squamish. I
don’t like to use the word ‘territory”. I say, “That is our home. That is our
home”. That land will never go away. Our Squamish people will never go away,
so we got to be careful what we do today.

5441. MR. BRUCE: Paitsmauk, can you maybe paint a picture for us of
what the area looked like when you were a young boy in the early ﬁﬁies?

5442. MR. J ACOBS: Well as I said earlier there was nine houses, the
landscape bridge. Strangely enough, there was one car —— one truck on that whole
reserve, one old truck. It used to belong to Old Mathias.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

93
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs

5443+ There were no roads, there were little trails. And the Water Board had
a road coming down our village.

5444. I’ll tell you a little thing happened here. I was involved in a trial in
Vancouver sitting in the courtroom one time and then I explained that there was
no water —- running water or electricity in our house. This is the mid—ﬁﬁies. They
looked across there and they said, “I can’t believe this. Of the third-largest city in
this country on the Indian Reserve, there’s no running water.”

5445. So I’ve seen the changes. But the days -- those days of our -- the food
was a—plenty for us. The deer would come down the rivers and they would lick
the salt off the rocks. There was a lot of deer. We didn’t have to go to the
mountains; the deer came to us.

5446. It was -- unless you’ve -- can vision of something that you go on an
island and there’s nothing but you and plenty food and peaceful, that’s what it
was like in those days. Things have changed.

5447. MR. BRUCE: Thank you, Paitsmauk.

5448. Can you tell us the importance of the longhouse to the Squamish
people?

5449. MR. JACOBS: I belong to the longhouse. I’m Chairman of the
committee that runs the present—day longhouse.

5450. My grandfather was longhouse CO, and he wore the paint. My mother
as well wore the paint. Our family wore the paint. That’s the ones that the
traditional dances in the longhouse.

5451+ The longhouse for our people celebrates from birth to death, our whole
lives, things of origin from the longhouse where we blessed children with one of
the most sacred -- the most sacred things that our Squamish people we own, the
sxwayxway mask. That is the importance of our people that -— this sxwayxway
mask.

5452. We bless babies, puberty rights, namings that match the names that we
hand down family to family, all with the sxwayxway mask.

5453. And after life, we celebrate when we have -- we show the picture we

Transcript Hearing Order OH—OO 1-2014

94
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs
call memorials. We gather the people and celebrate an individual’s four years
after the passing, a big celebration. And in the longhouse, there’s so much talk
about unity, respect, togetherness because our people invited to other longhouses,
we bring something, a gift to help the family who are celebrating, sharing.

5454. When we go to the longhouse the families that are celebrating, they
look at us, acknowledge us. That’s a sign of respect. The old people used to say,
“You have respect for yourself, other people will have respect for you”.

5455 . You always hear those words in the longhouse, respect one another,
especial 1y honour your Elders. That is so important. That’s the importance of
learning, as I said earlier, snewayelh. That’s what you learn, you teach.

5456. I today, I emphasize with my children about a longhouse. It’s been
here for 1,000 years, 1,000 years.

5457. I sit there some nights watching the work go on and sit there until
2:00, 3:00, 4:00 in the morning and I think our people have done this for
thousands of years. What’s happening outside those doors doesn’t matter; we’re
still here.

5458. Our traditions and values that we’ve been taught are with us, they’re
still with us today. Our families and others, we always talk about, you know,
well, they say, “Well, gee, that’s nice of you to bring one or two sacks of clams to
help them for the work, some salmon, some ducks, deer meat”.

' 5459. But they always talk about, is there still a lot of deer left, is there a lot
of ﬁsh left, the clams. Make sure you leave enough for the next peoples to come
along. Don’t take it all.

5460. So we just said, “Ah” —- to the people, we shake our head, “Ah, we’re
listening; we’re listening”. But then when they destroyed the clam beds in front

I of our village, no one was listening.

5461. It’s saddening, especially when I think back and I reﬂect on the old
people on our village. They didn’t speak too much English. They couldn’t read

' the newspapers. It was hard for them to understand what was going on in the
world. No one would tell us, tell the old people.

5462. So today you are telling us something; I appreciate that. I’m not a

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

|

|

|

95
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs
learned man. I just went to residential school.

5463. When I got out of residential school, I still wasn’t allowed to go to
high school. That was the law. It’s hard to reﬂect because it hurts. It hurts.

5464. MR. BRUCE: Paitsmauk, in the longhouse, is there spiritual
practices?

5465. MR. J ACOBS: That has been going on ever since I opened my eyes
because my mother was Seyowen (ph), my grandfather. There today, yes, they
are going on.

5466. Times when my grandfather moved from the waterfront where we
lived, he moved up to in Park Royal area. He built a house. He built a little --
they called it a Shaker Church, another little building on the back, and on the end
on the gabled roof he put a cross. But our people used to gather there, they used
to sing, dance because, as you know, our traditions -- the longhouse tradition was
outlawed, was banned; we could not practice that.

5467. So my grandfather thought about it a bit, so he put a cross up on the
top of the roof and the policemen drove by and they look at, “Oh, it’s just a
church. That’s okay. We don’t have to bother them.” He kind of fooled them a
little bit, but we still practised our -- the longhouse traditions, and it goes today.

5468. It’s kind of difﬁcult because our longhouse is in the middle of the
third-largest city in this country and it’s -- we have difﬁculty with it because our
longhouse practice is so private that who knows? Who knows what’s to come?

5469. MR. BRUCE: Can you tell us where the longhouses are located in
the Burrard Inlet area?

5470. MR. JACOBS: There’s two of them, one at meelchstn and one at
Chichelxwikw, Seymour on the -- one little one there. That’s the two that I’m
aware of that are used today in practice in those two.

5471. But there were many at one time. Every little village they had homes,

. houses, longhouses. On the north side of the inlet where our villages were, there
was a longhouse. 0n the south shore where our people lived, there was a
longhouse.

Transcript Heating Order OH-OOl-2014

|

|

96
Squamish Nation - Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs

5472. You could always tell. You’d see the smoke. My grandfather told me,
he said, “When you see that smoke when the ﬁre is built, that’s the time to go
because there’s no calendar. There’s no watch. There’s no time. When them
ﬁre’s are lit, you go. You go and help.”

5473. MR. BRUCE: Is there any connection between the longhouse and
the rivers, creeks, and ocean?

5474. MR. JACOBS: Sorry?

5475. MR. BRUCE: Is there any connection between the longhouse and the
rivers, creeks, and ocean?

5476. MR. J ACOBS: Because of all of the -- the travelling, the movement
of -- our people would move from different villages by canoe to go to longhouses
bringing food, blankets, baskets. So there was movement to the longhouse
always.

5477. It was -- the Squamish people were very well known as basket makers.
And that was a trade that they had -- our people had, these baskets. And it was
great because, you know, you could transport your clam, your oysters, your
salmon in the big -- in the canoes. I’ve seen that. I’ve seen that, put them in the
baskets.

5478+ My mother told me her granny, Halanamit, from Senamuk (ph) and
family, they used to paddle across the Salish Sea in their big canoe. We’re going
over there, Skwxwﬁ'lmesh. They’re having a potlatch. We’re invited. We’re
invited.

5479. They’d put their families in the canoes and they would paddle across,
middle of winter. But they had to be there because they were invited. You never
disappointed a family when you were invited. You never make an excuse because
you don’t want to shame your family.

5480. That’s important. That’s still today, that’s important for our people,
never to shame. Never shame one another. That’s what we’ve been taught;
taught as children.

5481. MR. BRUCE: Are any resources from Squamish waters used in the
longhouse ceremonies or for regalia?

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

97
Squamish Nation — Oral presentation
Presentation by Mr. David J acobs

5482. MR. JACOBS: Part of the ceremonies. When we -- the new ones,
the new dancers, gekselkwelh dancers. Xekselkwelh, we call them. They’re new.

5483. When we bring them around the house for the ﬁrst time, we spread
feathers, duck feathers all on the floor because it’s new. They’re new. They’re
babies. They’re new. They cannot touch the dirt at that time, so they put them on
the feathers to walk. It”s because their dance, their light. We get the ducks and
cover the ﬂoor.

5484. We get all the foods for the longhouse ceremonies, and across the
meelchstn Xwayxway is where I mentioned the mask, the cedar masks. They
come from there. Long story there, but it was important for us to know and
always mention that our families here owned, belonged to that. Those ceremonies
for our people here in the valley, we go to their ceremonies with respect.

5485. MR. BRUCE: Sekyﬁ Siyém mentioned in his presentation getting
prepared for this day, taking a bath. Is that related to the longhouse culture?

5486. MR. JACOBS: You're taught that as part of initiation to cleanse

| yourself because your new baby -- what you do with your new babies, you bath
them, cleanse them. And that continues through your life, to cleanse yourself, to
wash, go in the river.

5487. It sounds crazy for some people who don't understand it. In the middle
of winter -- you're going down to have a bath in the river in the middle of winter,
and they say, "Oh, you're a little bit crazy". I don't know.

5488. But when you begin that as a young age, it's just another thing that you
do. It's part of who we are. It's part of what we do. That is important.

5489. MR. BRUCE: Do any Squamish people do this bathing practice in
the Burrard Inlet area?

5490. MR. J ACOBS: Yes, we do. Sometimes at some point because the
accessibility at times for the rivers and streams in this area, developments are
going -- are covering every stream and river there is. It's difﬁcult for us to have
privacy. We do use the rivers and the bays, the salt water at times, but yes, we've
always used that.

Transcript Hearing Order OH-001-2014

RATCLI FF 8i COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r s
W; -*‘* wﬂt nlrﬁgﬂ '73-!“
J uly 26, 2018
File No. 13-0010-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710th Ave SW
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “Project”)
File No. 0F—Fac-Oil—T260-2017—10 01 — Hearing Order MH-048-2018
City of Burnaby Written Evidence
We are legal counsel for the City of Burnaby (“Burnaby”) in respect of their intervention in the
National Energy Board (the “NEB” or the “Board”) hearing for the Project.
Please be advised that Burnaby will not be submitting written evidence for the above hearing.
Yours truly,
RATCLIF F & COMPANY LLP
MICHEL . BRADLEY
cc. List of Participants
Phone: 604-988-5201 . Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators. 221 West Esplanade. North Vancouver, BC V7M 3J3
01540575

RATCLIFF & COM PANY LLP
L a w y e r s
Wﬂjﬁmsprﬁqﬁﬂ’a
September 5, 2018
File No. 12-0005-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710th Ave sw
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
File No. 0F—Fac-Oil—T260—2017-10 01 — Hearing Order MH—O48—2018
Federal Court of Appeal Decision for Trans Mountain Expansion Project
We are legal counsel for the Squamish Nation in respect of their intervention in the National
Energy Board (the “Board”) hearing for the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation. We write with
respect to the decision of the F ederal Court of Appeal (the “FCA”) that quashed the Order in
Council approving the Trans Mountain Expansion Project and declared the Certiﬁcate of Public
Convenience and Necessity a nullity, and the ramiﬁcations of that decision for the hearing for the
Westridge Delivery Line Relocation.1
On August 31, 2018, as a result of the FCA decision, the Board announced on its website that
“[o]ng0ing processes directly related to the Trans Mountain Expansion project, including
consideratien of condition compliance ﬁlings, Right nf Entry applications and detailed route
hearing precesses, will cease.”2 Hewever, the annnuneement does not explicitly state whether the
hearing to relocate the Westridge Delivery Line is included in the processes that will cease.
' Trans Mountain Pipeline ULC’s application to relocate the Westridge Delivery Line to the
. Burnaby Mountain tunnel is premised on Trans Mountain having approval to build the tunnel
- under Burnaby Mountain. After the decision of the FCA, that is no longer the case.
Trans Mountain’s application to relocate the Westridge Delivery Line expressly acknowledges
that “[t]he construction of the tunnel and the installation of the two (2) new 762 mm (NPS 30)
outside diameter delivery lines are authorized by Certiﬁcate OC-064”, and that this application
I ——_
1 T sIez'l— Waututh Nation v. Attorney Genera! ﬂfﬂnnada, 2013 FCA 153, para. 3'63
2 NEB update to Federal Court decision — h1[135:Nwww.neb-ﬂnegexafhlsmwsfwhlnwﬂﬂlEEZOlE-UB-E‘r l-eng.hlmi
Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators, 221 West Esplanade, North Vancouver, BC V7M 3J3

_ 2 _

only seeks authorization to add a third pipeline to the tunnel.3 The Board cannot consider the
addition of a third pipeline to a tunnel that is no longer approved, and that Trans Mountain does
not seek approval of in the application for the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line.
We respectfully request clariﬁcation as soon as possible on whether the Board’s August 31St
announcement applies to this hearing, given the impending deadline for Squamish to ﬁle written
argument in this hearing on September 14, 2018. If it does not, we request on behalf of Squamish
that this hearing cease or be put on hold in the same manner that the Board has ceased other
processes related to the Trans Mountain Expansion Project.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP

7% -
MICH EfﬂEfL. BRADLEY
cc. List of Participants
3 Trans Mountain’s Application for the Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (A5Y6R8), pp. 2—3

RATCLI FF & COM PANY w
L a w y e r s

September 17, 2018

File No. 13-0010-008

Reply to: Gregory J . McDade

Email: gmcdade@ratcliff.com

BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710th Ave sw
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation (the “WDLR”)

File No. 0F—Fac—Oil—T260-2017—10 01 — Hearing Order MH-048-2018
Comment Process Following Federal Court of Appeal Decision
We are legal counsel for the City of Burnaby (“Burnaby”) in respect of their intervention in the
National Energy Board (the “NEB” or the “‘Board”) hearing for the WDLR. We write with
respect to the Board’s call for comments on the impact of the Federal Court of Appeal’s (FCA)
decision that quashed Order in Council P.C. 2016-1069 for the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project (TMEP) 0n the WDLR hearing and the Board’s consideration of the WDLR application.
Burnaby supports adjourning the WDLR hearing and the Board’s consideration of the WDLR
application. The WDLR application is dependent on Trans Mountain having an approved Tunnel
through Burnaby Mountain subject to the terms and conditions of Order in Council RC. 2016-
1069. The path forward advocated by Trans Mountain at this time is fraught with practical
difﬁculties and more fundamentally it asks the Board to proceed as if the Burnaby Mountain
Tunnel were still approved on the same terms and conditions that the FCA just quashed.
The FCA found that the NEB report was “so deﬁcient that it could not qualify as a “report”
within the meaning 0f the iegislatiun and it was unreasonable for the Guvemur in Cuuncil to rely
upon it.”1 It fnllnwed that “Order in Council P.C. 2016-1069 should be quashed, rendering the
certiﬁcate of public convenience and necessity approving the construction and operation of the
Project a nullity” and “the issue of Project approval should be remitted to the Governor in
l Tsleil- Waututh v. Attorney General ofCanada, 2018 FCA 153, para. 470
Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 604-988-1452 - Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators. 221 West Esplanade. North Vancouver, BC VTM 3J3

- 2 ..
Council for prompt redeten'nination.”2 The FCA made clear that “[i]n that redetermination the
Governor in Council must refer the Board’s recommendations and its terms and conditions back
to the Board, or its successor, for reconsideration”3 (emphasis added).
Bumaby agrees with the Squamish Nation that if the Board was to make the assumptions urged
by Trans Mountain it would risk undermining the reconsideration and redetermination of the
TMEP.
The real practical difﬁculties that will result in proceeding with the WDLR hearing at this time
and the real prejudice to Burnaby and other intervenors in having to respond to the WDLR
application at this time are evident in looking at Trans Mountain’s argument in this hearing that
it proceeded to ﬁle despite Squamish’s request that the hearing be put on hold. For example:

II N eed for Three Pipelines — Trans Mountain argues that the “need for three (3) delivery
lines, two (2) of which would be new, and one (1) of which is original to the Trans
Mountain system, was demonstrated in the OH-001-2014 proceeding, and is outside of
the scope of this proceeding” and that the justiﬁcation for the three lines is that they “are
required to permit for the Simultaneous leading of three (3) vessels at the Westﬁdge
Marine Terminal".4 Given that the NEB repert resulting from OH—00] -2014 proceeding
was found to be so deﬁcient it did not constitute a report and that the FCA ordered that
the reconsideration speciﬁcally address the environmental effects of Project-related
marine shipping, Trans Mountain’s claim to still be able to rely on those prior
proceedings to justify the need for three pipelines is without foundation.

F urther, a possible outcome of the reconsideration is that the marine shipping aspect of
the TMEP may be modiﬁed and having three vessels loading simultaneously may be
found to be unsustainable.5 That being said, it is premature to speculate on the results of
the reconsideration and redetermination. Burnaby’s point is that it would be prejudiced in
having to respond to arguments on the “need” for three pipelines being outside the scope
of this hearing, or the need being established in the TMEP proceeding, when it does not
yet know the results of the reconsideration and redetermination.

I Conditions for the Tunnel and WDL — Trans Mountain argues that the relocated WDL
“will be subject to the same pre-construction conditions as the Tunnel and associated
delivery lines, as applicable, which are designed to ensure safety and to protect the
environment and traditional land uses and rights”.6 However, as set out above, we do not
yet know what conditions the Tunnel and associated delivery lines would be subject to if
the GIC reapproves the TMEP. It is not possible for Burnaby to comment on whether the
conditions are sufﬁcient for the WDLR application and the addition of a third delivery
line in the Tunnel when it does not yet know what those conditions would be.

2 Tsleil- Waututh v. Attorney General ofCanada, 2018 FCA 153, para. 768
3 TsleiZ- Waututh v. Attorney General ofCanada, 2018 FCA 153, para. 769
4 Trans Mountain Argument (A6H3W4), p. 11

5 T Sleil- Waututh v. Attorney General ofCanada, 2018 FCA 153, para. 770
6 Trans Mountain Argument (A6H3W4), p. 3

_ 3 _
Trans Mountain asserts that the conditions for the Tunnel that were quashed with the
TMEP approval are somehow now incorporated by reference into the WDLR application.
However, the WDLR application does not apply for a Tunnel through Burnaby Mountain
or the two associated delivery lines, so it is unclear to Burnaby on what basis the NEB
would have the jurisdiction to consider or impose those conditions in this hearing.
F urther, contrary to the argument of Trans Mountain, Burnaby did not have the
opportunity to put forward evidence in this hearing on the Tunnel as it was not part of the
scope of the WDLR application and WDLR hearing.

0 Relocation Driven by Community Feedback — Trans Mountain relies on the NEB
report for the TMEP for justifying the relocation of the WDL stating that “[a]s noted in
the views of the Board in the Recommendation Report (A77045, PDF p.81) the
installation of the two (2) delivery lines Via the Burnaby Mountain Tunnel as opposed to
the streets option would take considerably longer to construct, and at a considerably
greater cost, however, this would minimize risk during operations, and would have lower
hazards than trenching twice through the streets of Burnaby.”7 Trans Mountain does not
cite to any other evidence on this point. Again the FCA, found that it was
“unreasonable”8 for the GIC to rely on the TMEP NEB report, yet Trans Mountain
encourages the Board to do so in this hearing.

0 Upsizing the Relocated Delivery Linc — Trans Mountain states that a justiﬁcation for
the upsizing of the WDL is the “simultaneous delivery of heavy oil to three vessels”?
However, as set out above, Trans Mountain relies on the TMEP NEB report to establish
the need for simultaneous loading of three vessels — a report that has been found to have
improperly excluded Project-related marine shipping from the environmental assessment.

I Matters Outside the Scope of this Hearing — Trans Mountain lists a number of matters
that it considers outside the scope of this hearing, including the “environmental impact
assessment for the loading of three vessels simultaneously at the Westridge Marine
Tenninal”m, on the basis that they were “considered in the OH-001-2014 proceeding”“.
The FCA found that the “Board unjustiﬁably excluded Project-related shipping from the
Project’s deﬁnition”12 and did not assess the effects of Project-related marine shipping.
Trans Mountain can no longer rely on the OH-001-2014 proceeding as having assessed
those effects, given the F CA ruling. Burnaby would be prejudiced in responding to any
assertion that matters were, or will be, considered in the TMEP review without knowing
the scope and results of the reconsideration and redetermination.

The assumptions that Trans Mountain asks the Board to make in order to proceed with the
WDLR hearing are unsupported. It is not in the public interest to waste time and resources on the
WDLR application at this time until more is known about the future of the TMEP. As such,

7 Trans Mountain Argument (A6H3W4), p. 12

8 Tsleil— Waututh v. Attorney General ofCanada, 2018 FCA 153, para. 470

9 Trans Mountain Argument (A6H3W4), p. 12

10 Trans Mountain Argument (A6H3W4), p. 13

11 Trans Mountain Argument (A6H3W4), p. 13

12 T sIeil- Waututh v. Attorney General ofCanada, 2018 FCA 153, paras. 764 and 470

_ 4 -
Burnaby supports the relief sought by the Squamish Nation of adjourning this hearing until the
reconsideration and redetermination of the TMEP is complete and the scope of the WDLR
hearing can be considered in light of the GIC decision on the TMEP.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF AND COMPANY LLP
fag: GREGORY J . MCDADE, Q.C.
Barrister and Solicitor
GJM:mt
*Gregory J. McDade Law Corporation
cc. List of Participants

L a w y e r s
ﬁﬁﬁ’émgwrﬁii Iylﬂijlj
September 7, 2018
File No. 12-0005-008
Reply to: Michelle Bradley
Email: mbradley@ratcliff.com
BY ELECTRONIC FILING
National Energy Board
51710th Ave sw
Calgary, AB T2R 0A8
Attention: Sheri Young, Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Young:
Re: Westridge Delivery Line Relocation
File No. OF—Fac-Oil—T260-2017-10 01 — Hearing Order MH-048-2018
Federal Court of Appeal Decision for Trans Mountain Expansion Project
We write on behalf of the Squamish Nation in reply to the response of Trans Mountain Pipeline
1 ULC to our letter requesting that the hearing for the relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line
cease or be put on hold, pending the redetermination of whether the Trans Mountain Expansion
Project (“TMEP”) is in the public interest in accordance with the ruling of the Federal Court of
Appeal.
Trans Mountain asks the Board to proceed on the basis that it is reasonable for the Board “to
conclude that the TMEP — including the Tunnel — may proceed”. This conclusion is contrary to
the clear direction by the Federal Court of Appeal and the Board’s legal obligations. In essence,
Trans Mountain is asking the Board to predetermine the reconsideration ordered by the F ederal
Court of Appeal and assume the TMEP will proceed on the same terms and conditions that have
just been quashed by the Court.
It is a basic principle of administrative law that decision—makers cannot close their minds or
prejudge matters.’ The decision—maker must approach the issue submitted to him or her with an
open mind, not inﬂuenced by outside pressure. It is further a basic principle of consultation that
“[c]0nsu1tati0n that excludes from the outset any form of accommodation would be meaningless”
and that consultation should not be an “opportunity to blow off steam” before the decision-maker
- 1 Imperial Oil Ltd. v. Quebec (Minister of the Environment), 2003 SCC 58, para. 28
. Phone: 604-988-5201 - Fax: 504—933-1452 . Web: ratcliff.com
Suite 500, East Elevators. 221 West Esplanade. North Vancouver, BC V7M 3J3

_ 2 _
proceeds to do what she or he intended to do all along.2 Trans Mountain asks the Board to
assume too much with respect to the future of the TMEP in order to proceed with this hearing,
and risks undermining the redetermination.
Trans Mountain in its response further downplays the extent to which the application for the
relocation of the Westridge Delivery Line is dependent on Trans Mountain having approval for
the TMEP, and the conditions for approval of the TMEP, and the practical and evidentiary
problems that creates for this hearing. For example, in this application, Trans Mountain relies on
the environmental assessment for the TMEP — that assessment has been found not to comply
with the statutory obligations of the Board. Trans Mountain further relies on the terms and
conditions for approval for the TMEP that will be sent to the Board for reconsideration.3 In
responding to this application, Squamish would not be in a position to know what evidence can
still be relied upon and what terms and conditions would still be in place for the tunnel, and
would be prejudiced in its response as a result.
It is further not the practice of the Board to waste resources on applications that are dependent on
future hypothetical events. Trans Mountain states that it would be “most efficient” and
“consistent with the public interest” to proceed with the current process. It is not in the public
interest to have the Board, Squamish and other intervenors waste time and resources on an
application that may be unnecessary in light of the redetermination or that may change in light of
the redeterrnination.
The F ederal Court of Appeal has quashed the TMEP approval. Trans Mountain cannot ignore
that new reality, and proceed with applications that are contingent on that approval.
The Board is the master of its own procedure.4 The proper and most efﬁcient path forward is to
put this hearing on hold until the reconsideration of the TMEP is complete. If the TMEP is once
again approved by the Governor in Council, the Board will then be in a position to efﬁciently
consider this application in light of any new terms and conditions imposed upon the TMEP
(while simultaneously dealing with issues of conditions compliance, routing etc.), thus,
minimizing any delay.
Yours truly,
RATCLIFF & COMPANY LLP
__..- ’ﬁc; -';:'_’_ﬂ.,..... .
_ . x ,3 .
x” 9’7”“
MICHELLE L. BRADLEY
00. List of Participants
2 Mikisew Cree F irst Nation v. Canada (Minister ofCanadian Heritage), 2005 SCC 69, para. 54
3 A88837-l3 s.58 Condition Maygping - A5Y6T0
4 Nationa! Energy Board Act, R.S.C., 1 5, c. N-7, s. 11

