0812612009     14:14 Janes Freedman Kyle Law                                           A)Q25U 381 8567     P.0021004
                                 JANES FREEDMAN KYLE
                                                                SuIte 340—1122 Mainland Street
                                                                Vancouver, BC V6B 5L1
                                                                Phone: 604.687.0549 Fax 604.667.2696
    Auaust  26 2009                                             Kosanne M Kyle
       0
                                                               Direct LIne; 604,637,0549, cxt, 107
                                                               E-mail: rkyletklaw.ca
    Delivered by Fax 403-292-5503
                                                               File No. 1003-040
   National Energy Board
    444—7th Avenue SW
    Calgary, Alberta T2P 0X8
    Attention:      Ms. Claudine Dutll-Berry, Secretary of                                               H
                    the Board                                                                        C)
                                                                                                     t’0
   Dear Ms. Dutil-Berry:
   Re:     Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
           Westeons: Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission (“Spectra”)
   Dane Tha’ First Nation (“Dene Tha”) is submitting this letter as notice to the National Energy Board
    (“NEB”) that consultation with the Dene Tha’ is grossly inadequate in relation to the above-mentioned
   project (the “Project”). The Project is located within Dane Tha’s Traditional Territory, in areas where
   Dane ma’ members historically and currently exercise Aboriginai and Treaty rights.
   Prior to our meeting with the NEB on August 18, 2009, we were not aware that Spectra had filed its
   application with the NEB in relation to the Project (the “Application”) or that the Application is
   available on-line. We were also unaware until that time that the Project scope had changed to include
   connection to the TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline project. We were also completely unaware of the
   Project scope, that the Project is a sour gas processing facility with proposed flaring, or that Spectra has
   indicated that Dene Tha’ has no concerns about the Project.
   Spectra sent a one-page “update letter” and map in relation to the Project to Dene Tha’ on April 30,
   2009. Dene Tha’ responded to the letter and indicated that it wanted to continue to receive information
   from Spectra on the proposed Project, but that Dene Tha’ had capacity challenges at that time. At no
   time did Dene Tha’ advise Spectra that it did not wish to be consulted or receive information on the
   Project, or that it had no concerns about potential impacts from the Project.
   In its April 30, 2009 letter, Spectra referred to the Project as the North Maxhamish Loop and Northern
   Complex Projects. This is not the current name used in the Application, which has created some
 0812612009      14:14 .Janes Freedman Kyle Law                                  ØM)25U 381 8567           P.0031004
     confusion for Dene Tha’. There was no mention made in the letter to the fact that the Project would be
     connected to the TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline Project. Spectra also did not indicate in its letter
     what the Project scope would be. Dene Tha’ is quite concerned that the Project will have residual
     cumulative effects together with the TCPL Horn River Mainline project and the Encana Cabin Gas Plant
     project. Based on our preliminary review of the Spectra Application, it appears to be extremely likely
    that these three projects will have combined effects on wildlife, vegetation, sound said wetlands that will
     require a comprehensive cumulative effects assessment on the impacts to Dene Tim’s Aboriginal and
     Treaty nghts.
    Dene Tha’ was not involved in the environmental review process for the Project. Dene Tha’ input is not
    reflected in any of the biophysical or socio-economic investigations that were done to support the
    Application to the NEB. Further, there appears to be no consideration or identification in the
    Application of the potential Project impacts to the exercise of Dene Tha’s Aboriginal and Treaty tights.
    Can the NEB advise as to what consultation has occurred with Dene Tha’ to date in relation to this
    proposed Project, including in relation to notification of the Application?
    We note that the Project is in close proximity to the EnCana Cabin Gas Plant and that Dene Tha’ is
    being consulted by the BC EAO and the proponent in relation to that project, with some funding being
    provided for Dene TM’ to undertake some Traditional Use Study and Environmental Assessment review
    work. In addition, the proposed Project is intera1ly connected to the TCPL pipeline project, another
    project on which Dent Tha’ is also being consulted. Clearly, regulators and other companies recognize
    that projects in this area of Dane Tha’s Traditional Territory have the potential to adversely impact Dene
    Tim’s rights and interests and are engaging in consultation processes to reflect that fact.
    To date, as noted above, there has been woefblly inadequate consultation with Dene Tha’ with respect to
   the Project. Dene Tin’ insists that a meaningful consultation process be undertaken before any further
    steps are taken in relation to the Application. Dene Th& requires early consultation, including in
   relation to scoping for the Project, EA triggers, and the level of environmental and other assessments
   that are required. We ask that the NEB advise as to which federal department or agency will be
   responsible for conducting Crown consultation in respect of the Project.
   Please also advise what federal and provincial regulatory authorizations Spectra is required to obtain in
   relation to the Project.
   We understand that Spectra has made the Application pursuant to s. 58 of the National Energy Board
   Act, In our view, no decision should be made in relation to whether the Project should be exempted
   from any of sections 29 to 33 or 47 of the National Energy Board until meaningful consultation has
   taken place with Dene Tha’, It may be that, in order to adequately assess impacts to Dene Th&s rights
   and interests and to determine appropriate accommodation measures in respect of the Project, a NEB
   hearing will be required.
   Pene Tha’ will be contacting Spectra for capacity funding to review the Application, Done Tha’ is also
   in the process of reviewing the Application in more detail and plans to submit preliminary comments on
  the Project Application to the NEB as soon as possible. We would appreciate if you could provide us
  with a complete copy of the Application at your earliest convenience.
  In the meantime, we ask that NEB confirm that no further steps will be taken by the NEB in respect of
  consideration of the Application until meaningful consultation has taken place with Dene Tha’.
    0812612009     14:14 Janes Freedman Kyle Law                             M)25O 381 8567 P.0041004
      We look forward to hearing from you on these matters.
      Yours truly,
      Janes F
      Per;
      Rosanne M. Kyle
 /\gMJ.cz/milc/nf
      cc:     Dene Tha’ Chief and Council by email 3ames.Ahnassavdenetha.ca
LI            Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group Tracv.Canwbe1l@Cal1iouGroun.com
              Paul Uarttheim, Spectra Energy ohartzhehn(ãsoectraenergv.com
              Shelly Cairns, TCPL IWO Shdlly cairns@franscanada.com
              Line Lacsse line lacassecftanscanada.com
 0812612009         14:13 .Janes rreedman Kyle Law                                                        M)25O 381 8567               P.0011004
                                        Js
                                                                       FREEDMAN KYLE
                                                                             Suite 340— 1122 Mainland Street
                                                                             Vancouver, BC V6J3 5L1
                                                                             ?honc: 604.587.0549 Fax: 604.687.2696
    Date: August26 2009
    File No: 1003-040
                                               FAX COVER SHEET
    TO:
    Fax 403-292-5503
    National Energy Board Ms. Claudinc Dutil-Berry, Secretary of the Board
                                      -
    flene ma’ Chief and Council by email Jamea.Ahnassaycôidenetha.ca
    Tracy CampbcU, CaIllou Group Tncy.CaznpbeIVliCallIouGronn.com
    Paul Ilartzheim, Spectra Energy pbartzheim(ësyecfraenery.com
    Sheuy Calms, TCPL JWG Shefly cairnscflranseanada.eom
    Unc Lacassc line Jacanc(franscanada.com
   Number of pages IncludIng this cover page
   Please see attached letter.
   Thank you                                                                                                       =
                                                                                                                   =
   Nicole (250-405-3460           —  nfobcftjfldaw.ca)
                                                                                                                   Ct
                                                                                                           m       CD
                                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                                           .       0
                                                                                                                   -o
                                                                                                                   LU
                                                                                                                   LU
   This communication is intended only for the use by the individual or entity to which It is addressed and may contain information that is
   privileged, confidential and protected from disclosure under law. If you ate not the Intended addressee, or a person authorized to deliver
   this document to the addressee, any review, disclosure, copying or other action based on the content of this communication is sftictly
   prohibited. if you receive this communication In error, please notlfr the sender immediately by telephone or email, Thank you.
09/21/2009 14:40 FAX 604 686 7294                ENVIRONMENT CANADA                                 001
                  EnvIronment    Environnement
        I+1       Canada         Canada
        Environmental Protection Operations
        Environmental Stewardship Branch
        Pacific and Yukon
        201 -401 Burrwd Street                                    : N—
        Vandouver, B.C. V6C 355
                                                                        ECPT: 09-0805
        Septerrber2l, 2009                                              CLAR: 09-01-49510
        Ma Zoe Pfeiffer
        National Energy Board
        444 Seventh Avenue SW
        Calgary. Alberta T2P OXS
        Dear Ms Pfeiffer
        Re: Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) Review
              Federal Coordination Regulations and Environment Canada Involvement
              Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
        lam writing in response to your referral letter dated August 13,2009, sent to Environment
        Canada in your capacity as the Responsible Authority (RA) under Section 5(1) of the
        Regulations Respecting the Coordination by Federal Authorities of Environmental Assessment
        Procedures and Requirements for the above-noted project.
        Based on the project information you have provided including the present scope of the project,
        Environment Canada has determined that it is not a Responsible Authority for this project under
        the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA).
        Environment Canada may be able to provide specialist or expert information or knowledge
        relevant to the project. We will make any appropriate information availab’e to your department
        once we have completed our review of the project.      -
        If you have any questions
                         1 please do not hesitate to contact me at (604) 666-7715.
        Yours sincerely,      -
        Kevin ltye
        Environmental Assessment Officer
         canad
ö912812009     15:56 Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corp                                                                  P.0011005
                               JANES FREEDMAN KYLE
                                            A                                                       .1. _.>
                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                              .L I
                                                               Suite 340— 1122 Mainland Street
                                                               Vncouver, 30 VSB SLI
                                                               Phone: 604.687.0549 Fax 604,687.2696
                                                               wwwjtklaw.ca
   September 28, 2009                                          aesanne M. Kyle
                                                               Direct Line; 604.6 7 0549, ext. 107
                                                               E-mail: rkyle®jtkkw.ca
                                                                                                          (0
   Spectra Energy                                              File No. 1003-041                            -
   P0 Box 906
   Chetwynd, BC VOC 130
  Attention:      Even Saugstad, Expansion Projects,
   Community    Coordinator
  Dear Sirs,Mesdames:
  Re:     Fort Nelson North Gas Processing Facifity
  Please accept this letter as our initial response to your correspondence addressed to the Dene Tha’ First
  Nation (DTFN) (0/0 Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group) dated September 22, 2009.
  To be clear, DTFN was not consulted nor involved in the conduct of your environmental assessment for
  the above mentioned project Because of this omission, DTFN will have to spend time and resources
  looking at the field studies that were done, the methodology employed and other related matters to
  detemaine the adequacy and credibility of those studies in particular, and your application more
  generally. As an example, by not including DTFN in the design and carrying out of the environmental
  studies, DTFN is concerned that key species/variables may have been missed DTFN is not in a position
  to know the conditions under which you conducted your field studies and whether the information
  obtained is credible.
  Moreover, the application submitted to the National Energy Board does not reflect or identify impacts to
  DTFN exercise of their Aboriginal and freaty rights potentially impacted by your proposed project. This
  is a gross deficiency of your application. DTFN’s ability to exercise their rights now and in the future in
  the vicinity of the project is a key concern, We find it surprising that your company would neglect to
  include such information, particularly when other companies in the area are working on the very same
  issues with DTFN.
  DThN requires adequate thne arid resources to review the completed application; conduct a credible and
  defensible Traditional Land Use Study to identify historical, current and intended uses of the area; have
 0912812009     1 5:56 .Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corp                                                      P.002/003
                                                         2
   discussions with Spectra to identify potential impacts of the proj act; and have discussions with the
   Crown to identify acceptable accommodation measures (including environmental mitigation options).
   Your offer reflected in the correspondence dated September 22, 2009 does not accomplish these goals.
       1. Costs associated with the conduct of a Traditional Land Use Study are not proportional to the
           amount of land “taken up” by the proposed project. The conduct of a standard TLUS is
           dependent upon how many Nation members are involved in the interview process.
           Currently, the only credible and defensible method Spectra Energy can use to identify DTFN
           historical, current and intended uses for the area potentially impacted by the proposed project is
           to conduct a proper Traditional Land Use Study.
           The population of the DTFN is approximately 2,600. A representative sample for a credible and
           defensible study is minimum 20 interview participants. Costs associated with the conduct of a
           Traditional Land Use Study interviewing 20 participants (without a site visit) is approximately
           $80,000. Spectra Energy is proposing to provide 50% of that amount. This is unacceptable.
      2. The objective of conducting a credible, defensible TLUS is to identify DTFN historical current
           and desired future use, as noted above, and to use that information, together with a credible
           environmental assessment, to identify potential direct, indirect and cumulative impacts and to
          identify mitigation and accommodation measures to address such impacts. Both your company,
          the Crown and DTFN need sufficient, credible infonnation to identify such impacts as things
                                                                                                 —
          stand, there is no such information to assess such impacts on DT.FN’ s section 35 rights.The
          timeframe to conduct a Traditional Land Use Study is approximately 3 to 4 months. Spectra
          Energy is asking for the conduct of a Traditional Land Use Study in 30 days. This is
          unacceptable. DTFN requires at minimum, 75 days (to December 15, 2009). With respect,
          Spectra Energy cannot use its failure to consult with DTFN against DTFN now, by trying to rush
          through the work that DTFN must undertake on your Company’s application.
      3. The public review period of a completed NEB application is normally 30 days. Spectra Energy
          is requesting the DTFN review to be completed in 14 days. This is unacceptable. DTFN
          requires at minimum, 30 days for review (October 30, 2009).
      4. A Traditional Land Use Study does not on its own identify impacts on Aboriginal and treaty
          rights. The purpose of the TLUS is to identify representative historical, current and intended
          uses of an area potentially impacted by a proposed project. A TLUS must be integrated into the
          broader environmental assessment for the identification of impacts. Unfortunately, as DTFN
          was not consulted in the design or execution of the assessment, DTFN is left with comparing
          uses identified in the TLUS with the findings in the completed application.
      5. It is not the sole responsibility of the DTEN to identify impacts to the exercise of treaty and
          Aboriginal rights by your proposed project, DTFN will provide information regarding use of the
          area to both Spectra Energy and the Crown. The environmental assessment process gathers
 0912812009        15:56 Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corp                             .hiC)                     P.0031003
                                                           3
             information about potential impacts from the conduct of biophysical and socio-economic studies
             (including ThUS), and it is the Crown’s responsibility to assess the impacts to the exercise of
            treaty and Aboriginal rights. Acceptable accommodation measures, including environmental
            mitigation to offset those impacts, are then identified.
        6. DTFN strongly objects to the concept of taking 4 DTFN members to “identi impacts” and
            “openly discuss mitigation options” during a “basic” one-day field visit (or what you are calling
            “Traditional Land Use Site Assessmene’). This is not only troubling, as it puts Spectra’s desire
            to rush through its application far ahead of DUN’s need to carry out proper studies and to make
            informed decisions, but shows a profound lack of understanding of, and sensitivity to, the
            purpose of a TLUS field visit. Mitigation options are outlined only after DUN ThU
            information is incorporated into the environmental assessment, and impacts are identified.
            Mitigation options should never be developed by individual DTFN members prior to that time.
            Without both the environmentai assessment and TLUS information, OTFN individuals cannot
            identi’ the concerns associated with rights held collectively by the entire Nation.
       7. DTFN does not object to Spectra’s insistence on the use of their consultant (Landsong Heritage
           Consulting Ltd.) to conduct a one-day AlA field visit to the project site. However, DUN
           strongly objects to the methodology described in the Spectra FNN application (Appendix 11)
           which concentrates solely on the identification of archaeological sites, then calls it a Traditional
           Land Use Study. This is unacceptable and is not in keeping with the approach that DTFN has
           employed with other companies operating within its Traditional Territory. Had Spectra engaged
           in early consultation with DTFN, it would have understood DTFN’s approach, which is to
           produce credible, defensible information,
       8. All capacity funding is to be provided to DTFN, not to Calliou Group.
  Again, DTFN is extremely disappointed with your approach. This approach fails to satis& even the
  minimum standards of consultation, even under a delegated model of consultation. DUN suggests a
  meeting to discuss the above points as goon as possible.
  Yours truly,
  Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
  Per:
                 /
  Rosanne       . K
  RMK/ejr
  Enclosure
  cc:      DTFN Chief and Council
           Valerie Bonnes
           Tracy Campbell
           Steve Ahnassay
           National Energy Board
10/29/2009   09:29 EU 604 666 7294                 ENVIRONMENT CANADA                                  J0U1
                   Environment Environriement
        I*1        Canada          Canada
        Environmental Protection Operations
        Environmental Stewardship Branch
        Pacific and Yukon                        SIIt LE
        201 -401 Burrard Street
        Vancouver, s.C. V6C 3S5                       OCT q    A   fl     CEAR: 09-01-49510
        October 29, 2009                                                  ECPT: 09-0805
        Ms. Zoe Pfeiffer
        National Energy Board
        444 Seventh Avenue SW
        Calgary, AD T2P 0X8
        Dear Ms. Pfeiffer
        Re; Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) Review
               Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
               Environment Canada Comments
        In Environment Canada’s FOR response dated September 21, 2009. we agreed to provide
        specialist or expert information or knowledge relevant to the Ixoject for purposes of the
        assessment process. Environment Canada (EC) has completed a review of issues relating to
        wildlife and wetlands, contaminated sites, accidents and malfunctions, and water quality with
        respect to the project. In our review, we considered the Environmental and Soda-Economic
        Assessment for the Proposed Westcoast Energy Inc. Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
        (hereafter referred to as The Assessment) dated August 2009.
        From the details related to environmental impacts that were included in the documentation
        provided to us, the following advice will likely adequately address Environment Canada’s
         interest in this project.
        Wildlife and Wetlands
        The potential effects of the project on boreal caribou and wetlands are a concern for the
         Canadian Wildlife Service. Boreal caribou are listed as threatened under Schedule 1 of the
         Species at Risk Act, and we note that the project is located within the Snake-Sahtarieh caribou
         range. The Canadian Wildlife SeMce is the lead for the National Recovery Strategy for
        Woodland Caribou; however, the province of BC is the lead for this species under the Canada-
         British Columbia Agreement on Species at Risk. We recommend that the National Energy
         Board consult with regienal BC Ministry of Environment Species at Risk Biologists regarding the
         prefect and its potential effects on boreal caribou and boreal caribou habitat.
        According to The Assessment, there is the potential for adverse residual effects on wetlands
         due to the construion and operation of The project. Wetlands serve many important ecological
         functions, and conservation of wetlands is a national priority. For further information with
         respect to wildlife and wetlands, please refer to the attached Envfronment Canada Wildlife
         Advice for EnvironmentalAssessments. This document provides guidance with respect to
         migratory birds. spec4es at risk, and weuarids. Please note the link to the Federal Policy on
         Wetland Conservation in the attached advice.
          Qmadä
 10/29/2009 09,29 FAX 801 666 7294                  ENVIRONMENT CANADA                                    OO2
        Contaminated Sites
        According to Table 5.1 of The Assessment, the project does not encounter any contaminated
        sites listed on The Federal Contaminated Sites Inventory (FC$I). The FCSI lists only
        contaminated sites on federal land. Section 1.0 on page 1-1 of The Assessment notes that
        Westcoast Fnergy Inc. has applied to the BC government to acquire approximately 78 hectares
        for the proposed facility under fee simple ownership. From this, we assume that the land is
        currently owned by the province, and as such, any contaminated sites associated with this land
        would not be listed on the FCSI. The province of BC operates a separate inventory of
        contaminated sites under provincial jurisdiction, and we recommend the proponent contact the
        BC government for more nforrnation on contaminated sites as they relate to the project.
        Accidents and Malfunctions
        Some potential residual effects that could occur as a result of accidental events during facility
        construction and operation are listed in Section 62.14 (Accidents and MalluncUons) of The
        Assessment. The Assessment should also conduct a risk assessment to prioritize the risks
        associated with the project, describe their probable and potential impacts on the environment
        and describe general mitigation strategies to assess the risk. We note that the proponent has
        committed to an Envirenmenta) Protection Plan that would address potential accidents arid
        ma’functions. The Environmental Protection Plan shouki include an Emergency Response Plan
        that would contain detailed response procedures for risks identified.
        The BC Guidelines for Industry Emergency Response Plans (available online at
        http:I!www.env.qovbc.caIeerno1resources/guidelinesIbc.htm are a good resource br
        developing response plans for projects of this size.
        Water Quality
        Environment Canada believes that the advice contained in the attached document, entitled
        Environment Canada interim Guidance for Addressing Water Quality for Work In and Around
         Water should adequately address water quality issues associated with the project.
         The proponent should be aware that Section 36(3) of the federal Fisheries Act, administered by
         Environment Canada, prohibits the discharge of deleterious substances to waters frequented by
         fish, or to a place where those substances might enteF such waters Therefore the proponent
         must ensure that, at all times during the project, deleterious substances are prevented from
         entering into fish-bearing waters or any tributaries. Due diligence is required at all times to
         prevent such discharges, and adherence to the proposed courses of action suggested in this
         letter does not relieve the proponent of the requirement to tornply with the Fisheries Act, The
         proponent ahouki also ensure that all work associated with the project also curnplies with the
         requirements of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act. 1999, the Migratory Birds
         Convention Act, the Species at F?iskAct and all other applicable laws, legislation, and best
         mana9ement practices.
         Please consider this as constituting fulfillment of Environment Canada’s obflgations under
         Section 12(3) of CEAA. In order for us to evaluate the effectiveness of our advice under CEAA,
         we would appreciate receiving a copy of your decision statement. If you have any questions,
         please do riot hesitate to contact me at (604) 666-7715.
          Canad’ä
 10/29/2009 09:30_FAX 604 6887294          ENVIRONMENT CANADA 0O3
        Yours sincerely,
        Kevin FgØys
        Frwjror,mental Assessment Officer
        AU. (2)
         Canad
 10/29/2009 09:30 FAX 604 666 7294            -                          CANADA                                              0O4
                                                   ENVIRONMENT CANADA
                              WILDLIFE ADViCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS
           Introduction
           Provided herein is general advice on wildlife that fall under Environment Canadas (EC) mandate in
           order to assist proponents involved in protect eiivironrrental assessment& Migratory bird
           environmentai assessment guidelines are available on Environment Canadas Canadian WiIlife
           Service website: v cws-scf.ec.gc.ca/publicationslevallindex eclm
           Migratory Birds and Incidental Take
            Incidental take refers to the killing of migratory birds, and/or the disturbance or destruction of their
           nests or eggs resulting directly or indimotly from human actvities, where the primary objective of the
           activity is not the killing of migratory birds and/or the disturbance or destruction of their nests or eggs.
           EC expects due diligence be exercised to avoid harm to migratory birds.
           Under the current regulatory framework pursuant to the Migratoiy Birds Convention Act (MBCA), EC
           recommends that propønents avoid conducting project-related activities during times that have the
           potential to harm migratory birds or their active nests. nba migratory bird breeding season varies
           across British Columbia. The period of March lSth to August 15th will generally include breeding
           activity for most though not all avian species across the province of British Columbia. CC can advise
           or s,ecffic general breeding periods on a project-by-project basis Reion elevUon and diinate arc
            coy considerations in identifying to the project-level the appropriate general breeding period.
           In the event a proponent determines that i activities will unavoidably overlap with the breeding bird
           season. EC expects due diligence be exercised to avoid harm to migratory birds, and recommends
           that theproponent employ an Attive Migratory Bird Nest Survey (AMBNS) program to reduce the
           likelihood of disturbing or destzoying active nests. Doing so reduces the likelihood that the proponent
           will be in contravention of the MBCA. EC recommends that an AMBNS be employed if nbaily
            harmful activities are proposed tor a petiod irnniediat&y be’cce, during or immediately after the
           general breeding bird season- Environment Canada may provide advice to the proponent fri the
           development of an AMSNS if the proponent makes that request.
           Please contact Environment Canada for a list of technical reports, papers or other information relating
           to migratory birds and their habitats within British Columbia.
            Species at Risk
            The purpose of the Species at Risk Act (SARA) is to prevent or reduce the likelihood of wildlife species
            from becoming extinct or extirpated, to provide far the recovery of wildlife species that are extirpated,
            endangered or threatened as a result of human activity, and to manage species of special concern to
            prevent them from becoming endangered or threatened.
            SARA was prodaWned on June 5, 2003 and affocs protection to those wdlife species listed in
            Schedule I of the Act The pmhibffions under SARA came into force on June I, 2004. and apply to
            individuals of a species, their residences (dwelling plas, such as a aen or nest or other similar area
            that is occupied or habitually occupied by one or more indMdual during part or all of ts IFfe cycle), and
            critical habitat (areas used or formerly used by the species to carry out their life processes that are
            deemed essenlial f ssMval or recovery). Crilical habitat will be identified for each listed species in
            Revery Sb-ategies andlor Aeton Plans, avaable on Environrneiit Canada’s Species at Risk Act
            Public Regisljy: Sarareisb-ygc.ca
            December 5th, 2UC8                                    I              Ciwlronrnent Canada, Pacinc and Yukon RØOA
 10; 29/2009 09:30 FAX 604 666 7294                        ENVIROVMNT CANADA                                              005
            Section 79(1) of SARA requires every person who is required by a federal Act to ensure that a federal
            environmental assessment is conducted to notify the competent minister(s) without delay if the project
            is likely to affect a listed wildlife species r its critical habitat. S. 79(2).of SARA requires that, where a
            federal environmental assessment is being carried out on a project that may affect a listed wildlife
            species or its cilUcal habitat the person responsible for ensuring the assessment is conducted must
             dentify potiliai adverse effects on the Isted wldlife species and its ciibca habitat; and if the prqct is
            rrie out, ensure that nicasures are taken to avoid or lessen those advetse effects and to rnonitcr
            them, and ensure that such measures are constent with any appflcaile recovery strategy and action
            plans. S. 79(3) defines ‘person’ as including an association or organization, and a responsible
            authority as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Cariadiat? Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA).
            In managing a project in the context of Species at Risk (SAR), proponents are advised to identity and
            evaluate Likely species occurrences (including methods such as conducting baseline surveys), assess
            environmental impacts, develop mitigation strategies and follow-up monitoring plans. The guideline
             below is offered to assist in this process:
                  1.    Complete n n-depth literature review of relevant databases to determine whether any
                        speccs of concern are known or expected to use the site or adjacent lands t They are within
                       the zone of influen of the project This may include:
                             o The Ccnseivabon Ujata Cenfl (CDC) database (for any rare element occurrence
                                 records), including the ‘Species and Ecosystem Explorer search tool;
                             c Environment Canada’s Species at Risk Act Public Registy Sararsqistrv.ac (for
                                 Recovery Strategies, Action Plans, Species Accounts);
                             o The Sensitive Ecosystem Inventory (http:lM.env.gov.bc.ca/sei)
                             o Environment Canada’s Species at Risk search tool msØeciesatrisk.gc.ca to
                                 determine if the ranges of any COSEWIC listed Species at Risk overlap with the site;,
                                 and,
                             o ScientitTe journals (many available on-line).
                  2.    Consult with government and non-government agencies and organizations, such as:
                             c federal SAR Competent Minister departments. Fisheries and Oceans Canada,
                                 Parks Canada, and Environment Canada;
                             o Ministry of the Environment (MOE), municipalities and regional districts;
                             o Species at Risk Revery Teams: and
                             o Local naturalists groups and organations.
                  3.    Complete surveys, following accepted standards and methodologies, of the project area (and
                        adjacent areas as necessary). The appropriate government jurisdiction MoE or CC
                                                                                                     —             —
                        should be consulted for advice on survey design. Permits under the BC Wildlife Actor SARA
                        may be required in certain circumstances.
             To assist proponents in accounting arid managing for SAR, Environment Canada has developed an
             envi,pnmentai assessment guide titled, ‘En vimnmenta) Assessment Best P,aclica Guide fir Wildlife
             at F?tslc in Canada’. This document will be reviewed and updated on a reuIar basis; the most up-to-
             date version is available at the following website:
             wwwcws-scf.ec.cca/Dublicat1ons1evaI/index ecu.
             Federal Wetland Policy
              Refer to the Federal Pohcy on Wetland Conse,vation (av&Iable or, the internet at hffv:lldso
             .cornmunicaUon.pc.ca/CollecUon/CW66-1 16-1991 L,pdfl.
              DcctvL,er SW. 2000                                     2                trn*o.n Ca,afl P4at aid  tcc RBq Dr
 10/29/2009 09:30 FAX 603 666 7291                        ENVIRON3CNT CANADA                                              O06
                                   Environment Canada Pacific and Yukon
                                                                     -
                              Interim Guidance for Addressing Water Quality
                                           for Work in and around Water
           Introduction
           The foflowing guidelines have been prepared to provide general water quality advice for small
           projects involving cunstruct]on in and around marine and fresh water that may be frequented by fish,
           including, for example, docks, bridges, shoreline protection, pile driving, etc.
           These guidelines apply only to Environment Canada’s areas of concern, primarily for the protec&n of
           water quaTity. The proponent is advised to contact the mgional Fisheries and Oceans Canada office
           if the project may result in any potential harmful alteration, disruption or destruction of fish habitat.
           Guidelines
           t     The proponent shall ensure tflat all plans and specifications relating to this project have been duly
                 prepared and reviewed by appropriate professionals working on its behalf.
           2.    The proponent should be aware that Section 36(3) of the federal Fisheries Act, administered by
                 Environment Canada, prohibits the discharge of deleterious substances to waters frequented by
                 fish. Therefore, the proponent must ensure that deteterious substances from the project are
                 prevented from discharging into fish-bearing waters or any tributaries, Due diligence is required
                 at all times to prevent such dischar9es. Adherence to the advice of this document does not
                 relieve the proponent of its ongoing responsibilities in this regard.
           3.    All work associated with the project involving the use of concrete, cement, mortars and other
                 Portland cement or Iime-contaning construction materials shall be conducted so as to ensure that
                 sethn)ents, debñs, concrete, and concrete fines are not deposited, elmer diracuy or ndirecliy into
                 the aquaUc envwonment. Any water contacting uriaired or partly cured concrete or Portland
                 rnent or lime-containing conucn materials, such as the water that may be used for
                 exposed aggregate wash-off, wet curing, equipment and truck wastiing, etc. shall he prevented
                 from entering, directly or indirectly, the aquatic environment unless this water has been tested
                 and found to have a pH of between 6.5 and 9.0 and a turbidity of Tess than 25 NTU. Containment
                 facilties shajl be provided at the site for the wash-down water from concrete delivery trucks,
                 concrete pumping equipment and other tools and equipment as required
            4    The proponent shall ensure that sediment or sediment laden waters or other deleterious
                 substances are not allowed to enter the aquatic environment during the proposed work. Work
                 should be conducted in accordance with best management practices, for example the sediment
                 and erosbn provistons of the Land Development Guidelines hr the Protection of Aquatic Habitat
                 (Fisheries and Oceans Canada 1993, available at ht)Mww-heb.pac.dfo
                 moo.gcJpub1cabons/odf/165353.f).
            5.   An appropriate spill prevention, containment, and clean up contingency plan for hydrorbcn
                 nrnduct (e.g., fuel, oI, hydraulic fluki etc.), and other deleterious substances shall be put in
                 place prior to work commencing, and appropciate spill ccrntainment and c4eanup supplies shall be
                 kept availabe onsite whenever the works are occtrrtrig. Further, all personneT working on the
                 project should be familiar with implemenng the spill clean up plan and the deployment of spill
                 response materia’s.
            6.   Any fuel handling or storage associated with the project should comply with the Canadian Council
                 of Ministers of the Environment (CCME) Environmental COde of Pracuce (crAbovegmund and
                  Underground Storage Tank Systems Containing Petroleum Pmducs and Allied Petroleum
            Environment Canada                                            inierim Guidance (or AddrctsiIlg Water Quality
            Pacific ad Yukon                                                              for Work In and Around Water
            Lath Updated: FebrUary?, 200S                                                                        Pago I
 10,29/2009 09:30 FAX 604 666 7294                   -   ENVIRONMENT CANADA                                                ?007
                 Products (2003). Please be aware that nvirorrnent Canada curi-ently has proposed Storage Tank
                 Systems for Petroleum Products and Allied Petroleum Products Regulations under CEPA. 1999.
                 It anticipated these Regulations will be published and come into force during early 2008.
            7.   If land-based equipment or machineiy is used to cduct the proposed works, the
                 equiprnenUmectJnery should operate from the upland or opefate from the inte,hid foceshore wiNn
                 the otfrnt or the proposed works. Impacts to the intertidal foreshore outside the footprint & the
                 propos€d works must be prevented,
            8.   All machinery used on site should be in good repair and free of excess oil and grease. Any fuelling
                 or maintenance of such equipment should occur on the upland well away from the foreshore.
            9,   Any material, such as rip rap, gravel, etc., placed below the higher high water mark must be free of
                 silt overburden, debris or any other substances deleterious to aquatic life.
            10. A dac1c facility should be designed and located so as to preclude tidal grounding of any floating
                 component on the foreshore
            II. No unserviced float homes or live-aboard vessels should be rnQored at a dock facility. Sewage
                 discharges from ships must adhere to Subdivision 4—Sewage Discharges of the Canada Shipping
                 Act.
            12. Under the Fisheries Act, Management of Contaminated Fisheries Reulations the harvesting at
                  bqalve molluscs, (oysters, clams, mussels) is prohibited for any purpose within 125 metres of any
                 w1art dock, platform or other structure used for vessel macrage, or any permanently anchored
                 floatcng snicture, including float homes, barges, platforms and vessels. It is the proponents
                  responsthility to ensure commercial, recreation and First Nation shellfish haivestng opportunities are
                  riot hindered by placement of such sb,jctures.
            13, Any timber preservatives are to be applied in a manner consistent with current best management
                  practices such as Appendix 2, Requirements tar Using Treated Wood, in the guidebook
                  Environmentally Sustainable L09 Handling Facilities in British Columbia (flsheries and Oceans
                  Canada, April2003). Available at h:Ilt.dfo-mPO.c.caiLibrarvl274I24.pdf.
            14. General log har,dliny operations have the potential to cause serious impacts to the local
                  environment through the aquatic deposition at large amounts of secondary woodwaste (i.e. bark
                  zhips, etc.). To reduce the amounts of weedwaste introduced into the environnient through log
                  handling actjviies, please refer to DFO published guidebook, Environmentally SuslaJnable Log
                  Handling Facilities in BriUsh Columb available at httD:ltw.tw.dfo
                                                           .
                  ‘npo gc caILibraryl274l24.pdf. For information regarding the log bundling strand recyding
                  initiative see: htt,:Itwøyrecgc.ca’disposaI at seaibundlewire e.htm,
                             —
            15. If steel piles are to be used, they must be capped to prevent the entry of wIId.
             16. AJI demolition mateilals are to be disposed of upland in an authonzed manner. In this regard, it
                  should be noted that burning of preservatWe-tréated thnber is not permitted. Whenever possible,
                  recycling of materials is encouraged.
             17. Only    clean. rcontaminated material may be used as fill.
             Closing
            This advice does not constitute an approval. The proponent is respailsible foc ensuring that all work
            associated with the subject project complies with the requirements of the Fisheries Act, the Canadian
          - Environmental Protection Act 1999. the Miqrstoty Birds Convention Act, the Species at Risk Act and
            all other applicable laws, legislation, and best management practices.
             Environment Canada                                            Interim Guidance for Addressing Water Quality
             Pacific and Yukon                                                               for Work in and Around Water
             Latt Updated: Febnjary 7. 200U                                                -                       Page 2
                              JANES FREEDa4N KYLE
                                      1. :      /
                                                     - ( 3                                       1
                                                        Suite 340— 1122 Mainland Street
                                                        Vancouver, BC V68 5L1
                                                        Phone: 604.687.0549 Fax: 604,687.2696
                                                        www.jt1Jaw.ca
 October 28, 2009                                       Rosanne M. Kyle
                                                        Direct Line: 604.687.0549, ext. 107
                                                        E-mail: rkylejfklaw.ca
Delivered by: MAIL
National Energy Board                                   File No. 1003-041
444 Seventh Ave. SW
Calgary, AB 12P 0X8
                                                                                            Pt)    CZ,
Attention. Anne-Marie Erickson                                                                     -c
           Acting Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms. Erickson:                                                                              3,     . -.
                                                                                                C5
Re:     Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
        (“Westcoast”), section 58 application to the NEB for the Fort Nelson North       rocëiing
                                                                                         9
        Facifity (the “Project”)
We are writing on behalf of the Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN”) with respect to the above-noted
matter and, more specifically, to provide comments on the application filed by Westcoast in relation to
the Project (the “Application”).
Enclosed, please find a table containing specific comments in relation to the Environmental and Socio
Economic Assessment (“ESA”) included in the Application. We also wish to make additional
comments on the Application and the approval process for this Project, set out below.
In addition to our comments set out below and in the enclosure, we agree with the comments made in
the NEB’s Information Request dated October 13, 2009. DTFN looks forward to receipt of the
additional information requested.
Consultation Issues
It is incorrect for Westcoast to make the statement on page 9 of its Application that there are “no
outstanding concerns by Aboriginal Peoples” in relation to the Project. As indicated in our previous
correspondence, DTFN does have concerns in relation to the Project and was not adequately consulted
prior to Westcoast’s submission of the Application. DTFN is expressing a number of specific concerns
about the Project in this letter and enclosure.
                                                                                                             2
 As also noted in our earlier correspondence, DTFN was not adequately consulted by Westcoast prior to
 the filing of the Application. We note that the NEB’s Filing Manual provides the following guidance in
 relation to consultation requirements:
          When establishing principles and goals for a consultation program, consider that the Board
          expects a consultation program will, at a minimum:
               •  be initiated as soon as possible in the planning and design phase of a project;
               •  provide clear, relevant and timely information to potentially affected persons or groups;
               •  be accessible to and inclusive of all potentially affected persons or groups;
               •  be responsive to the needs, input and concerns of potentially affected persons or groups;
                  and
               •  continue throughout the regulatory process, as well as the construction and operation
                  phases of a project.
 Because Westcoast did not adequately consult with DTFN prior to submitting its Application, many of
 these expectations were not met. The lack of adequate consultation with DTFN is a major deficiency of
the Application which must be addressed before the NEB should consider the Application.
 With respect to Westcoast’s “Consultation Filing Requirements, DTFN disagrees that this document sets
out an adequate consultation process with DTFN. It does not comply with NEB’s Filing Manual’s
requirement that a project-specific consultation program be set out, and the consultation program was
not designed to address DTFN’s rights and interests in the area of the Project.
It is also unclear to us how the Federal Crown proposes to conduct consultation with DTFN in relation
to the Project. This question was posed in our letter of August 26, 2009, but remains unanswered. We
continue to look forward to NEB’s response on this issue. As set out expressly in the Supreme Court of
Canada’s decision in Haida Nation v. British Columbia (MinIster of Forests), it is government that has
the constitutional duty to consult, not project proponents.
We also pose the following questions in relation to consultation:
     •    Consultation and assessment should include the past impacts of any existing infrastructure, and
          must consider whether or not First N.ations were consulted in relation thereto what assurances
                                                                                            —
          can be given to DTFN that their concerns about past impacts of development within the vicinity
          of the Project will not be ignored?
     •    How will Traditional Use/Traditional Ecological Knowledge of DTFN be factored into
          consultation and into the EA and review process?
     •    What funding will be provided to DTFN to carry out consultation with the Federal Crown?
Impacts to Aboriginal and Treaty Rights
As noted in the enclosed table, the Application does not include any consideration of potential impacts
to DTFN’s constitutionally protected aboriginal and treaty rights. This is a major deficiency in the
Application, given that the issue will inform other aspects of the Application, such as what studies
                                                                                                              3
 and/or mitigation measures should be undertaken and the scoping of the EA. The courts have made it
 very clear that impacts to s. 35 rights must be considered:
     •   “When considering the direct and adverse environmental impacts of an application or project on
         the First Nation’s rights, the term “environment” must be construed broadly and includes the
         cumulative impacts of a project and other facilities to be developed in the future on those rights.”
         Dene Tha’First Nation v MOE. 2006 FC 1354 at para. 34
     •   The potential negative derivative impacts of a project must also be taken into account.
         Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia (ProjectAssessrnent Director), 2004 8CC 74
     •   The injurious affection that a project causes on the exercise of rights within the vicinity of a
        project must be taken into account.
        Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 388
 In many cases, the assessment of potential impacts on s. 35 rights may require considerations that are
different from a regular assessment, including in relation to scoping of the Project. The Application
should be revised to address these issues. It is imperative that impacts to DTFN’s rights and interests be
addressed before the NEll considers the Application.
Accordingly, we have the following questions in relation to the Application:
    •   How will the assessment of the Project take into consideration the constitutionally-protected s.
        35 rights of DTFN? What process will be utilized under s. 58 of the National Energy Board Act
        to accommodate this kind of assessment?
    •   Will part of the EA assess impacts on DTFN’s s. 35 rights and interests? If not, why not, and
        how will these impacts be assessed and considered?
    •   What additional information requirements will there be on Westcoast to assess potential impacts
        on DTFN’s s. 35 rights?
    •   What additional information requirements will there be on Westcoast to assess the availability of
        lands within DTFN’s Traditional Territory, or portions thereof for the future exercise of rights,
        and will DTFN be consulted in relation thereto? DTFN is concerned that as other parts of its
        Territory are taken up for industrial projects, there will ultimately be little or no lands available
        for the exercise of its rights. We are enclosing with this letter a map showing the existing and
        proposed disturbances in the area of the Project. As can be seen from the map, the level of
        disturbance is significant and DTFN is very concerned about the cumulative impacts from
        projects on wildlife and wildlife habitat, fish and fish habitat, air quality, water quality, health
        and its ability to exercise its s. 35 rights.
Attached as Appendix “A” to this letter, we have set out a number of factors that need to be considered
in assessing the potential adverse impacts to DTFN’s rights and interests from the Project.
                                                                                                              4
Environmental Assessment
     •  Has a decision been made whether the EA will be a screening or comprehensive study? DTFN
        expects to be consulted in relation to this issue.
     •  What is the baseline for the BA? Is it a pre-disturbance baseline?
     •  By what process will DTFN be consulted on the identification of value components to be
        assessed in the EA?
Scope of Project
The NEB Filing Manual states that an application must clearly identify, describe and justify what is
considered to be, among other things, “other activities and physical works that are inevitable and will
occur if the applied for project proceeds”.
In our view, the Application does not comply with this requirement in that it does not consider the
potential impacts of the pipeline component of the Project.
In its Application, at page 3, Wcstcoast states that the Project will tie into either TransCanada Pipelines’
proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline, if constructed, or Westcoast’s Helmet Pipelines, and that
approval for the tie-in will be applied for separately. No mention is made about the proposed tie-in
options in the Project Description in the Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment. DTFN is
concerned that this approach is essentially “project-splitting”. The Project cannot operate without some
kind of tie-in to a pipeline. As a result, it is inappropriate, and premature. to consider the Project in the
absence of consideration of the pipeline component. The pipeline component alternatives need to be
scoped into the Project description in the Application, and considered in the assessment components of
the Application.
Federal Authorizations Consultation Protocol
Please advise if, and how, the Federal Authorizations Consultation Protocol with DTFN (the “Protocol”)
will be utilized with respect to the Project and advise as to the following:
    •   What permits, decisions or authorizations are required which trigger operation of the Protocol
        and what are the processes and time lines for any such decisions?
    •   Will DTFN be consulted in respect of any decision by a federal department as to whether or not
        provisions of CEAA are triggered, pursuant to the definition of “Federal Authorization” in
        section 1.3 of the Protocol? If not, why not?
    •   Will DTFN be consulted in respect of the seoping of the Project for EA purposes pursuant to the
        definition of “Federal Authorization” in section 1.3 of the Protocol? If not, why not?
                                                                   5
We look forward to hearing from you on these matters.
Yours tnily,
Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
Per:
    IC
Ro anne
RMKJejr
Enclosure
cc:     DTFN Chief and Council
        Valerie Bonnes, DTFN Lands Department
        Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group
        Robert Freedman, Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
        Westcoast Energy Inc., Attn.: Peter Spicker (via courier)
                                            APPENDIX A
Potential Information Requirements to assess potential impacts of the Project on
                     DTFN’s Section 35 rights
Set out below are a number of questions which, in our view, would help guide any planning
process related to potential impacts of the Project on DTFN’s section 35 rights. DTFN’ would
be happy to engage in consultation on the questions and suggestions below.
Exercise of Rights      — Preliminary Questions
   1. Does the Federal Crown dispute whether or not DTFN has existing, constitutionally-
      protected rights within the vicinity of the Project?
          a) What lands, if any, does the Federal Crown say have been taken up under Treaty
              8? Within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.?
          b) For any lands taken up or occupied, is the Federal Crown aware of any
              consultation that was carried out by the Crown in respect of such taking up of
              lands? Please provide details.
   2. Has the Federal Crown conducted a preliminary assessment of the strength of claim
      and assessment of impacts
          a) Throughout the parts of DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C. where the Project is
              being proposed and where development, such as forestry and conventional and
              unconventional oil and gas, are being contemplated/have been applied for?
          b) What information, guidelines and/or policy has the Federal Crown looked at if
              such an assessment has been made?
   3. To what extent, if any, does the Federal Crown factor in potential impacts of the Project
      and subsequent development on DTFN’s ability to meaningfully exercise its rights?
      What information and factors go into such an assessment of impacts on section 35
      rights?
                                                                                                 2
Impacts of Industrial Activities on DTFN’s Traditional Territory
  4. What steps has the Federal Crown taken to determine the extent to which industrial
     development within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C., which has already been
     authorized by the Crown, has already deprived DTFN of a meaningful opportunity to
     exercise their rights?
         a) How does the Federal Crown define “meaningful opportunity” in terms of the
             exercise of DTFN’s rights?
         b) Has       the    Federal    Crown       consulted    with      DTFN      on     what
            ecosystem/environmental/socio-cultural conditions are required to sustain
             DTFN’s ability to exercise their rights now and into the future and to provide a
             meaningful opportunity to exercise their rights?
  5. What steps has the Federal Crown taken to determine the extent to which approval of
     any oil and gas and forestry that have already been approved and/or applied for within
     DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C., would deprive DTFN of a meaningful opportunity to
     exercise their rights?
  6. Is the Federal Crown of the view that there will be or already is increased human and
     financial hardship and expense to DTFN members to exercise their rights as a result of
     industrial development within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.?
  7. Has the Federal Crown assessed what lands and associated resources (wildlife, fish,
     water, air quality, access) DTFN requires to carry out its constitutionally-protected rights
     now and in the future? If so, what specific information was assessed?
  8. Has the Federal Crown identified any lands within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.
     that will permit DTFN to exercise their rights now and into the future, based on the
     answers to the previous questions above?
         a) If the answer is no, why not?
         b) If the answer is yes, what criteria did you use to make this determination and did
            you consider what use other First Nations, Métis and other persons are making of
            these areas and what their future needs are?
         c) Did you consider the direct and cumulative impact of other industrial activities
            within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C. or Alberta when making that
             assessment?
  9. What federal permits, licenses and approvals have already been granted for oil and gas
     related development within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C?
                                                                                                3
   10. What federal permits, licenses and approvals have been applied for in relation to oil and
       gas that have not yet been approved within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.?
Regional Benchmarks I Targets
  11.Are there any regional benchmarks or targets in place to assess the impacts of
       industrial activities on the rights of DTFN in the B.C. portion of their Traditional
       Territory?
          a) If so, then what are they?
           b) How are they aimed at assessing impacts on the rights of DTFN?
  12.ls the Federal Crown prepared to consult with DTFN on the following, prior to approving
       the Project:
          a) To identify the key resources (species, numbers, uses, air quality, water quality
              and quantity, etc.) and lands that DTFN requires to sustain the exercise of its
              rights, such as through the development of and funding for a Traditional Use
              Resource Plan?
          b) The development of appropriate baseline data, benchmarks or related measures
              for wildlife, fish, associated habitat, air, water quality and quantity and other
              resources on which DTFN rely to carry out their rights, to ensure that potential
              impacts on DTFN’s rights are properly and fully assessed and accommodated?
          c) To prepare a baseline inventory of all such key resources?
          d) To establish effects modeling and proper scientific rigour that can be used to test
              the conclusions reached in the EA for the Project?
          e) To implement regional targets/benchmarks/measures for DTFN’s key resources
              and habitat to preserve DTFN’s ability to exercise its rights in the face of the
              development of its Traditional Territory/to serve as an appropriate and
              meaningful measure against which to assess potential impacts of the Project,
              and industrial development, on those rights?
          f) To identify critical lands that should be protected from further development, to
              ensure that DTFN retains a meaningful opportunity to exercise its rights?
          g) To work with DTFN to identify and assess the cumulative impacts of all existing
              and reasonably foreseeable development on the rights of DTFN including, for
              example:
                  i. Projects which do not themselves trigger an assessment under BCEEA or
                      CEAA?
                                                                                                4
                  iL Projects beyond those that have been applied for or approved?
                 iii. The tenures that have already been granted, the potential development of
                      the same, and the potential impacts on DTFN’s rights?
          h) To implement rigorous monitoring and assessment programs, on a regional
             basis, to ensure that DTFN’s key resources and lands do not fall below the levels
             required to sustain those rights?
          i) To develop credible and detailed reclamation measures for land, water, air,
             wildlife, habitat, vegetation and other important matters on a local and regional
             basis?
         j)  To determine how the development in DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C. has
             adversely impacted or infringed DTFN’s rights and how further development can
             be done to avoid or minimize such impacts or infringements?
13.To the extent that the Federal Crown is prepared to engage in consultations on all or
    any of these items, could you please identify:
         a) The statutory and regulatory mechanism(s) by which the contents of any such
             consultations will be integrated into existing decision-making processes for
             regulatory approvals?
         b) The means by which the contents of such consultations will be integrated into an
             existing/on-going regulatory/approval processes for existing applications under
             review?
         c) How such consultations and any necessary follow-up will be carried out in
             sufficient time to be taken into account in all relevant statutory decision-making
             processes?
         d) The process and timelines by which consultations be carried out, including when
             and by whom?
14. If the Federal Crown is not prepared to do soon any or all of these items; please explain
    why not?
                                                                                                  5
Baseline Information to Inform the DTFN Aboriginal Impact Assessment
Proper baseline information needed to understand potential direct, indirect and cumulative
impacts on DTFN’s Treaty and Aboriginal Rights and interests has not generally been required
in the context of regulatory applications. In our view, he following information is required to
properly assess impacts and to ensure that for any further approvals, there is adequate and
meaningful information to assess impacts. We look forward to discussing these information
requirements, which could form part of the development of a Traditional Resource Use Plan or
some other Plan to protect DTFN’s rights in B.C.
15.        Quantitative Information on DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.:
    (a)      Traditional Territory location and size in miles
                                                        2 and hecatres
                                                                   2
                                                                   .
    (b)       Fixed Sites of Cabins, Camps, Communities, Historical Trails, Graves, Trap Lines,
              Spiritual sites (locations to be kept private unless authorized by the DTFN) within
              Traditional Territory.
    (c)       Current and past potable water sources and infrastructure.
    (d)      Amount of land within Traditional Territory taken up for development (energy,
             forestry, agriculture) and percentage of total Traditional Territory.
    (e)      Amount of land within Traditional Territory proposed to be taken up for development
             and percentage of total Traditional Territory.
    (f)      Amount of land within Traditional Territory potentially impacted by the proposed
              Project.
16. Quantitative and qualitative information on Current and Historical Traditional Uses (hunting,
    fishing, plants and medicines, spiritual use):
    (a)       Hunting
       (i)   Main species hunted for food and domestic purposes and the uses made of those
             species.
       (U)   Locations and access routes currently used for hunting main species.
       (Ui)  Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations and access routes used and
             costs associated with hunting main species based on such changes, both qualitative
             and quantitative.
      (iv)   Estimated amount of current consumption and percentage of total meat intake from
             hunted animals.
      (v)    Estimate of change in amount of hunted meat as a percentage of total meat
             consumed from 40, 20 and 10 years ago
                                                                                            6
 (b)     Fishing
    (i)  Main species fished for food and domestic purposes and uses made of those
         species.
    (ii) Locations currently used for fishing main species.
    (Hi) Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations used for fishing main species
         and costs associated with such changes, both qualitative and quantitative.
    (iv) Estimated amount of current consumption and percentage of total fish intake from
         fishing.
    (v)  Estimate of change in amount of fish as a percentage of total fish consumed from
         40, 20 and 10 years ago.
(c)      Gathering Plants and Medicines
   (i)   Main species gathered and uses made thereof.
   (H)   Locations currently used for gathering main species.
   (Hi)  Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations used for gathering main
         species and costs associated with those changes.
   (iv) Changes in frequency of gathering activities.
(d)      Spiritual and Cultural Use
   (i)   Locations currently used for spiritual and cultural practices (locations to remain
         undocumented unless disclosure is authorized by DTFN’).
   (H)     Changes in location from 40, 20 and 10 years ago and costs associated with those
           changes, both qualitative and quantitative.
(e)      Traditional Economic Pursuits
   (i)   Animals, plants, medicines used for barter or trade.
   (H)   Changes in bartering and trading from 40, 20 and 10 years ago and reasons for
         change.
   (Hi)  Estimated cost of purchasing goods previously traded or bartered.
(f)      Traditional Resource Pursuits
   (i)   Current forest and mineral resources gathered and used.
   (H)   Changes in forest and mineral resources gathered and used from 40, 20 and 10
         years ago.
                                                                                                    7
17.         Socio-Economic Information
     (a)       Community Demographics
        (I)    Current demographics     -  age, family units, education, sex,       private   sector
               employment, FN public sector employment, self-employment).
        (U)    Changes in demographics from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
        (Hi)   Predicted demographics in 10 years based on current trends.
     (b)       Income
        (i)    Amount and sources (trapping, wage employment, etc.) of income.
       (U)     Changes in amounts and sources of income from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
       (Hi)    Number and percentage of individuals and families receiving social assistance.
       (iv)    Changes in number and percent of social assistance recipients from 40, 20     and
               10 years ago.
    (c)        Expenditures
       (i)     Expenditures on food, housing, travel and recreation.
       (U)    Changes in expenditures from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
    (d)       Resource Sector Employment and Income (energy, forestry, agriculture, other)
       (i)    Current number of DTFN members employed in resource sector.
       (H)    Changes in number of people employed in resource sector from 40, 20 and        10
              years ago.
       (Hi)   Number of DTFN members currently employed by industry operating within        DTFN’s
              Traditional Territory.
       (iv)   Number and value of any contracts provided by industry operating within DTFN’s
              Traditional Territory.
18.        Health Information:
    (a)       DTFN health problems (including cancer and respiratory illnesses) by age and sex.
    (b)       Changes in health problems from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
    (c)       Deaths (ages, causes).
    (d)       Changes in causes of deaths from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
                                                                                                       8
     (e)       Health problems and causes of death compared to regional population.
Cumulative Impacts
19.        Cumulative Impacts on Dene Tha’s Traditional Territory and its Uses
    (a)      Amount (quantity and percentage) of potential forestry and oil and gas deposits within
             DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
    (b)      Amount of land (quantity and percentage) currently leased for forestry and oil and gas
             exploration and development within DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
    (c)      Percentage of tenures developed in DTFN’s Traditional Territory in past 10 years.
    (d)      Amount of land within DTFN’s Traditional Territory taken up for other developments
             (i.e. converted from natural vegetation).
    (e)      Amount of DTFN’s Traditional Territory lost to Traditional Uses because of direct and
             indirect impacts of existing, planned and reasonably foreseeable development.
20.        Current Projects and Activities
    (a)      Forestry
       (i)   Forest tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project.
       (H) Size of forest tenures in the vicinity of the Project.
       (Hi) Size of forest tenures in DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
       (iv)   Estimated size of area of direct and indirect disturbance to wildlife relied upon by the
              DTFN in the vicinity of the Project and within Traditional Territory.
    (b)      Linear Corridors
       (i)    Identification of all linear corridors (pipelines, transmission lines, roads, seismic
              lines) in vicinity of Project and Traditional Territory.
       (H)    Estimated size of area of direct and indirect disturbance to wildlife relied upon by the
              DTFN in vicinity of Project and in Traditional Territory.
                                                                                                    9
      (c) Other tenure holders
      (i)   Identification of all other tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project area including
            exploration leases.
      (U)   Size of area of held by other tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project and in
            DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
21.       Reasonably Foreseeable Future Developments
    (a)     The identification of all projects which have been applied for, or reasonably
            foreseeable, or which are likely to be induced by current and planned development,
            with DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
    (b)     The infrastructure required to serve the future developments.
    (c)     The number of access roads, and size of accessible area, for all future
            developments, including exploration, based upon current averages.
22.     Traditional Land Use by other First Nations in the area
    (a)    Assessment of the effects on DTFN of land use by other First Nations, Metis and
            non-aboriginal people in the vicinity of the Project.
                                                                                                                                               gc 1
               Westcoast Energy Inc.’s Application to NEB
               Re: Fort Nelson North Processing Facility Project
               DTFN Comments and Responses October 2009           —
  Executive Summary
               DTFN was not consulted during the development or execution of the assessment of Project effects on air quality. DTFN input and
               traditional knowledge is not reflected in the ESA.
               DTFN was not consulted during the development or execution of the assessment of Project effects on the acoustic environment.
               DTFN input and traditional knowledge is not reflected in the ESA.
               DTFN was not consulted during the development or execution of the wetlands survey. DTFN input and traditional knowledge is not
               reflected in the ESA.
               DTFN was not consulted during the development or execution of the rare plant survey. DTFN input and traditional knowledge is
I___________   not reflected in the ESA.
               DTFN was not consulted during the development or execution of the winter wildlife survey, DTFN input and traditional knowledge
               is not reflected in the ESA.
               DTFN was not consulted during the development or execution of the Archaeological Impact Assessment (AlA) or the Traditional
               Land Use (TLU) site assessment. DTFN input, traditional knowledge and traditional land use information is not reflected in the
               ESA.
               DTFN was not adequately consulted during the consultation program (either public or Aboriginal) and therefore DTFN issues were
               neither adequately recorded nor addressed.
               D1TN was not consulted in the development or execution of the ESA and therefore the potential environmental issues do not
               reflect DTFN input or traditional knowledge. Furthermore, due to the lack of consultation with DTFN and the conduct of TLU
               assessment with DTFN involvement, there is no assessment of Project impacts to the exercise of DTFN’s aboriginal and treaty
               rights.
               DTFN notes the inclusion of hunting and trapping, but the lack of input by DTFN in relation to species hunted and trapped in the
             ; area, and the exclusion of fishing and gathering in the ESA. DTFN requires all treaty rights to be given equal weight in their
               consideration and DTFN’s specific uses to be considered.
                                                                                                                                                  12
             DTFN was not consulted in the development of the Environmental Protection Plan and did not provide input or traditional
             knowledge to be applied with the development of mitigative measures.
             DTFN was not consulted in the development or mitigative measures or during the assessment of significance for residual impacts.
             Since DTFN TUS information was not incorporated into the application, appropriate mitigation measures cannot be determined at
             this stage.
             DTFN was not consulted during environmental protection planning, environmental inspection and was not offered post-
             construction monitoring. Due to this lack of involvement DTFN cannot be sure that these measures will avoid, eliminate and/or
             minimize potential Project related adverse effects to DTFNs satisfaction.
 1.0 Introduction
             DTFN was not consulted in the development or execution of any of the field studies listed in this section that were conducted to
             support the ESA. In addition, DTFN TUS information needs to be incorporated.
             DTFN was not adequately consulted during the consultation program (public or Aboriginal) and therefore DTFN issues were
             neither adequately recorded or addressed.
             DTFN was not adequately consulted during the development and execution of the ESA despite the project falling with DTFN
            claimed traditional territory, As claimed traditional territory is listed as an area of human occupancy and resource use, DTFN finds
            their exclusion to render the ESA deficient pursuant to Guide A.2.1 of the Filing Manual.
 2.0 Project Description
 Sec. 2.3
f!9c_4_.     DTFN requires monitoring during construction to ensure the protection of DTFN interests.
 Sec. 2.3
 Page 2-4    DTFN requires periodic monitoring during operations and maintenance to ensure the protection of DTFN interests.
 Sec. 2.3   DTFN requires consultation and inclusion in any future development of a decommission or abandonment plan and any miUgation
 Page 2-4   described therein.
 Sec. 2.3   DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure the CAC levels, noise levels and NORMs are in compliance with provincial
            requirements.
L92L
Table 2.1   DTFN requires consultation by the Province of British Columbia before Crown lands are alienated to a fee simple interest, a
 Page 2-6   licence is issued on the access roads and all other provincial regulatory permits and authorizations are issued.
3.0 Project Planning
                                                                                                                                                    3
   Sec. 3.2,
   Page 3-1   DTFN was not consulted during site selection; Westcoast did not take into consideration DTFN issues and concerns.
   Sec. 3.3   As DTFN was not consulted on facility location, DTFN finds the consideration by Westcoast that the location is environmentally
  wage 3-1    satisfactory, to be deficient.
   4.0_Consultation
   Sec. 4.0   DTFN was not adequately consulted throughout the execution of this ESA. DTFN input and traditional knowledge are not reflected
   Page 4-1   in the ESA.
              DTFN notes the lack of reference to Aboriginal consultation in this section. DTFN objects to being included in the overarching label
   Sec. 4.0   of “public stakeholder” as DTFN holds constitutionally protected treaty rights that must be assessed in a concurrent yet unique
   Page 4-1   process to those of public stakeholders,
              VVestcoast’s statement that “Consultation is addressed in the Application” is deemed deficient by DTFN as they were not
   Sec. 4.0   adequately consulted throughout the ESA process. NEB Filing Guidelines were not complied with, for the reasons set out in the
   Page 4-1   cover letter to this table.
              DTFN was not adequately consulted throughout the ESA process and therefore any concerns collected and addressed throughout
   Sec. 4.0   the program do not include those of DTFN. Any mitigation measures developed from these concerns do not include DTFN input or
   Page 4-1   traditional knowledge.
   5.0_Environment and Socio-Economic Selling
   Table 5.1
   Water
   Quality &  DTFN is concerned that the water wells being drilled onsite to supply the Project will exacerbate the declining groundwater quality
   Quantity   that is attributed to intensive local groundwater pumping for industry.
   Table 5-1  DTFN was not included in the design or execution of the vegetation assessment; DTFN traditional ecological knowledge and plant
   Vegetation utilization is not reflected in the ESA.
   Table 5-1  DTFN was not included in the aerial survey conducted by TERA in September 2008; DTFN traditional ecological knowledge and
   Vegetation plant utilization is not reflected in the ESA.
   Table 5-1  DTFN was not included in the ground-based rare plants survey conducted on July 12, 2009; DTFN traditional ecological
F  Vegetation knowledge and plant utilization is not reflected in the ESA.
   Table 5-1
   Wildlife &
   Wildlife   DTFN was not included in the design or execution of the Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat Assessment; DTFN traditional ecological
   Habitat    knowledge and wildlife utilization is not reflected in the ESA.
                                                                                                                                          ac    l
Table 5-1
Wildlife &
Wildlife   DTFN was not included in the aerial winter wildlife survey of the Project site on February 12, 2009 or the summer wildlife survey
Habitat    on July 12, 2009; DTFN traditional ecological knowledge and wildlife utilization is not reflected in the ESA.
Table 5-1
Human
Occupancy
and
Resource   DTFN rejects the use of the Fort Nelson Land and Resource Management Plan and its associated Resource Management Zones
Use        as DTFN was not consulted during the development of the LRMP,
Table 5-1
Human
Occupancy
and
Resource   DTFN does not adhere to hunting regulations under the Peace Region Management Unit (MU) and hunt year-round as is afforded
Use        by their constitutionally protected treaty rights. DTFN notes no mention of these rights in this summary of considerations.
Table 5-1
Human
Occupancy
and        DTFN rejects the context of hunting and fishing as ‘main recreational activities in the area’ as hunting and fishing are protected
Resource   treaty rights under the Canadian constitution. DTFN does not consider their treaty rights as ‘recreational’. DTFN notes the lack of
Use                Rights assessment in the ESA.
Table 5-1
H u man
Occupancy
and
Resource
Use        DTFN holds a constitutionally protected right to trap; DTFN notes no mention of these rights in this summary of considerations.
Table 5-1
Human
Occupancy
and        DTFN does not adhere to fishing regulations under the MU and fish seasonally based on need and availability as fishing is a
Resource   protected treaty right under the Canadian constitution. DTFN notes no mention of these rights in this summary of considerations.
                                                                                                                                             Fg€ 5
Use
Table 5-1
Human
Occupancy
and         DTFN notes that the summary states that the Project does not encounter any “ruraL.. Indian Reserves or Aboriginal
Resource    communities...” However in Section A.2.4 of the NEB Filing Manual areas of human occupation and resource use include
Use          ‘claimed traditional territory’. DTFN notes their omission and notes that the Project falls within DTFN traditional territory.
Table 5-1
Heritage    While DTFN Reserves are not within the Project boundary, it is overlapped by DTFN traditional territory. DTFN notes no mention
Resources   of traditional territories in this summary of considerations.
Table 5-1
Heritage    DTFN did not participate in the Archaeological Impacts Assessment conducted within the facility site boundary from July 10 to 13,
Resources   2009; The interpretation of the archaeological sites found lacks DTFN input and cultural context.
Table 5-1
Traditional
Land and
Resource    DTFN notes the lack of mention that the Project encounters DTFN traditional territory as it is a designated area of human
Use         occupancy and resource use outlined in the NEB Filing Guide.
Table 5-1
Traditional
Land and
Resource    No project specific DTFN Traditional Land Use Study was conducted and, as a result, the ESA lacks DTFN Traditional Land Use
Use         information.
Table 5-1
Traditional
Land and
Resource
Use         DTFN had no representatives present during a field assessment; ESA lacks DTFN input.
Table 5-1
Human       DTFN was not included in the development of Wesicoast’s Fort Nelson North Processing Facility ERP. DTFN expressed specific
Health      interest in this and was excluded from its development.
6.0 Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects Assessment
                                                                                                                                                  - I 6
 Sec. 6.1.2  DTFN was not included in the consultation process by which potenfial biophysical and socio-economic elements interacting with
 Page 6-4   the Project were identified. Both the biological and socio-economic elements lack DTFN input.
 Sec. 6.1.4  DTFN was not included in consultation on mitigative measures to minimize environmental and socio-economic effects. These
fgç4        mitigative measures lack DTFN input.
Sec. 6.1.4   In addition to a qualified Environmental Inspector for select construction activities, DTFN requires Aboriginal monitors to ensure
Page 6-5    DTFN interests are protected both during and after construction.
Table 6.1
Social and
Cultural
Well-being  DTFN was not included in the Consultation program and were not given the opportunity to outline any community concerns.
Sec. 6.1.5  The Application does not include any assessment or consideration of adverse impacts from the Project to DTFN’s aboriginal or
Page 6-5    treaty rights and is therefore grossly deficient.
Sec. 6.1.6  DTFN did not participate in developing the criteria for significance, including those used for Historical Resources and Traditional
            Land and Resource Use.
Sec. 6.2.1  DTFN does not agree with Westcoast’s assumption that the adverse residual effects to soil can be entirely technically and
Page 6-7    economically mitigated as the Project will be a permanent structure that alters the landscape for a prolonged period of time.
Sec. 6.2.2  DTFN does not agree with Westcoast’s assessment of the GHG emissions as reversible and low to medium in magnitude as the
Page 6-8    emissions will exceed the threshold of 100,000 tonnes that federal reporting will require.
            DTFN disagrees with the statement “There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or
            long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically mitigated.” This statement means any
            residual environmental effect can be offset with a non-measurable parameter such as economic benefit to a region that is both
Sec. 6.2,2  variable and dependent on economic conditions. DTFN disagrees with environmental issues being down played in exchange for
Page 6-8    intangible benefits.
            As Westcoast states previously, soil strippings will be salvaged and stockpiled in low profile berms (Sec. 2.3, Page 2-3) and that
            there are peatlands in the vicinity of the Project. As wetlands are easily disrupted by any berm-like structure and these berms will
Sec. 6.2.4  likely be in place for the duration of the project, DTFN disagrees with the assumption that the adverse residual effects associated
Page 6-9    with wetlands are reversible in the short to long-term and of low magnitude.
            DTFN questions the lack of mitigation proposed for western Jacob’s-ladder within the site as this is a rare (blue listed) plant
Sec. 6.2.5  species. DTFN finds the conclusion that it has been found in numerous locations in the area” to be an insufficient reason for lack
Page 6-10   of mitigative measures.
                                                                                                                                                Page l
Sec. 6.2.5   DTFN was not involved in the rare plant assessment or in the transplantation of populations’ offsite. The rare plants assessment
Page 6-10    lacks DTFN traditional knowledge and use information and is deficient.
Sec. 62.5    DTFN requires clarification on the parameters of “good success” for transplantation measures of both yellow and red collar moss.
Page 6-11    DTFN was not involved in developing this mitigative measure.
             DTFN does not agree with Westcoast’s assessment that the adverse residual effects associated with vegetation are of low
             magnitude as the predicted concentrations of NO and 502 were higher than guidelines. While the receptors where the averages
             exceeded guidelines did not appear to contain trees, the area is characterized by stands of stunted black spruce, balsam fir and
             shrubs. The area also contains white spruce, balsam fir and aspen mixwood forest on upland slopes. DTFN requires more
Sec. 6.2.5 information on whether these concentration levels can cause foliar damage to the types of vegetation present just beyond
Page 6-11 receptors.
Sec. 6.2.6 DTFN did not participate in the development or execution of the wildlife assessment for the ESA. This assessment lacks DTFN
Page 6-11 traditional knowledge and use information and is deficient.
Sec. 6.2,6 DTFN disagrees that the magnitude of the residual effects to wildlife are low as they have the potential to affect DTFN treaty rights
Page 6-12 in an irreversible and long-term manner.
Sec. 6.2.7 DTFN requires ongoing monitoring of Species at Risk in the Project area to ensure increased mortality rates from habitat
Page 6-12 conversion and improved access are adequately mitigated as per table 6.2. DTFN had no input into these miUgative measures.
             DTFN disagrees that caribou habitat effectiveness due to clearing for facility site and road access is medium in magnitude and the
             effects are not significant. DTFN believes that because this project is within the Snake Sahtaneh caribou range that there is a high
             degree of risk to habitat effectiveness and requires more information on habitat fragmentation in this caribou range. The Oil and
             Gas Commission’s “Interim Oil and Gas Industry Guidelines for Boreal Caribou Ranges in Northeastern British Columbia”
             concluded that the current demographics of the Snake-Sahtaneh caribou are “unsustainable over the long-term” and that the direct
             and indirect industrial footprint in occupied caribou habitat needed to be reduced. The Guidelines concluded that effective caribou
             conservation requires measures to retain habitat quality within ranges, both within and between core habitats, and to permit free
             movement between areas. Concluding that an incremental loss of caribou habitat and an increase in mortality rates are not
Sec. 6.2.7 significant is completely inconsistent with the findings and recommendations in the OGC Guidelines and disregards the fact that
Page 6-12 boreal caribou is listed federally as a threatened species.
Sec. 6.2.8 DTFN was not included in the development or execution of a Human Occupancy and Resource Use Assessment despite the
Page 6-13 Project falling within their claimed traditional territory.
           : DTFN believes that there will be a potential adverse residual effects both during and post construction to hunting and trapping
Sec. 6.2.8 activities. The project site will effectively be taken out of traditional production and effects will persist beyond construction and
Page 6-13 throughout the Project lifetime.
                                                                                                                                                  I 8
 Sec. 6.2.9   DTFN did not participate in the development or execution of the Heritage Resource assessment for the ESA. The assessment
 Page 6-13    lacks DTFN traditional knowledge and cultural context.
 Sec. 6.2.9   DTFN requires ongoing monitoring during construction to ensure that any previously unidentified archaeological or historical finds
 Page 6-14    discovered during construction are properly handled and given cultural context.
              In Table A-3 of the NEB Filing Manual, the circumstance of “the Project will be located on, or traverse, Crown land or the
              traditional territory, reserve land or settlement area of an Aboriginal group” [emphasis added] leads to the requirement of
 Sec.         additional socio-economic information being included in the application in the form of a traditional land and resource use study.
 6.2.10       Despite the Project being within DTFN’s traditional territory, no traditional land and resource use study was undertaken with DTFN
 Page 6-14    prior to submission of the application.
 Sec.
 6.2.10       Without conducting a DTFN specific traditional land use study the conclusions of effects and significance made in this section are
 Page 6-14    deficient.
 Sec.
 6.2.11       DTFN regards the operation of the plant as a long term change to their Aboriginal use of the land and therefore disagree with the
fql4_         conclusions of effects and significance.
 Sec.
6.2.11        DTFN was not included in a human health assessment for the ESA and therefore this section is deficient as DTFN are land users
 Page 6-14    in the vicinity of the Project.
 Sec.
6.2.12
 Page 6-15    DTFN was not involved in the infrastructure and services assessriient. The ESA does not reflect DTFN input.
Sec.
6.2.12        DTFN did not have input into the mitigation measures outlined for infrastructure and services and require ongoing monitoring to
f9L
1             ensure that the increases are properly managed and do not affect wildlife and vegetation.
 Sec.
 6,2.14
Page 6-16     DTFN was not involved in the accidents and malfunctions assessment. This section of the ESA does not reflect DTFN input.
Sec.
6.2.14      I DTFN did not have input into the mitigation measures outlined for accidents and malfunctions and require ongoing monitoring to
fg,çl6        ensure that the incidents are properly managed and do not affect wildlife and vegetation.
 Sec. 6.4
 Page 6-17    DTFN requires involvement in the development of a decommissioning and abandonment plan when required.
                                                                                                                                              PaRE?   19
Sec. 6.4    DTFN disagrees with resource use being restricted to hunting and trapping as DTFN uses the resources in this area for the
Page 6-18   exercise of all their Aboriginal and treaty rights.
Sec. 6.4    DTFN requires a project specific TLUS to be completed in order for the consideration of TLU information for a decommissioning
Page 6-18   and abandonment plan to be complete.
Table 6.2
Page ALL    DTFN was not consulted on or included in the development of all recommendations and mitigafive measures
Table 6.2
Page 6-19   DTFN requires input into seeding mixtures to be used on strippings storage berms.
Table 6,2   DTFN requires input into the vegetative cover to be used on disturbed non-gravelled areas to ensure appropriate traditional use
Page 6-20   plant inclusion.
Table 6.2
Page 6-20   DTFN requires additional input and mitigation (such as offsets) for the increase in CACs and GHGs.
Table 6,2   DTFN is concerned with the identified residual increases of CAC and GHG during construction and operation of the facility. DTFN
f!20        requires a cumulative effects study to measure these effects on the regional study area.
Table 6.2   DTFN is concerned with the identified residual increases in noise during construction and operation of the facility. DTFN requires a
Page 6-20   cumulative effects assessment to measure these effects on the regional study area.
Table 6.2   DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effect of alteration of peatland habitat and hydrological function following
Page 6-20 [ disturbance. DTFN requires a cumulative effects assessment to measure these effects on the regional study area.
            DTFN is especially concerned with the identified residual effect of alteration of peatland water quality following disturbance as
Table 6.2   DTFN members have expressed use of peatland water as a source of potable water. DTFN requires a cumulative effects
Page 6-20   assessment to measure these effects on the regional study area.
Table 6.2   DTFN is concerned with the lack of mitigation regarding the threatened (blue listed) Western Jacob’s-ladder. While this plant may
Page 6-21   be locally abundant, the population loss from the project site has the potential to negatively impact the population as a whole.
Table 6.2   DTFN is concerned about the identified residual effect of loss or alteration of some of the local rare plant population. DTFN
Page 6-21   requires a cumulative effects assessment to measure these effects on the regional study area and the local plant populations.
Table 6.2   DTFN is concerned with the possibility of Foliar injury from facility emissions as the site is previously identified as having potential
Page 6-22   to support rare tree species such as Jack pine trees.
Table 6.2   DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effect “Foliar injury” and requires a cumulative effects assessment to measure
Page 6-22   these effects on the regional study area and the local plant populations.
                                                                                                                                             :ge  lb
Table 6.2
Page 6-22  DTFN was not consulted and their input was not incorporated into the mitigation for wildlife and wildlife habitat.
Table 6.2  DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effect of forest cover loss and requires a cumulative effects assessment to measure
Page 6-22 this effect on the regional study area.
Table 6.2  DTFN requires ongoing monitoring of the Project site throughout construction and periodically through operations to ensure the
Page 6-22 mitigation commitments to prohibit personnel from harming, harassing or feeding the wildlife are upheld.
Table 6.2
Page 6-22 DTFN was not included or consulted during the noise assessment. Effects to DTFN by the Project are not reflected in the ESA.
Table 6.2 DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effects that will likely displace song birds in the long-term and requires a cumulative
Page 6-22 effects assessment to measure these effects on the regional study area and on the local song bird populations.
Table 6.2
Page6-22  DTFN requires involvement in the development of a wildlife encounter contingency plan.
          DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effect of an increase in wildlife mortality rates due to vehicle wildlife collisions on
Table 6.2 access roads and at the project site and requires a cumulative effects assessment to measure how this effects the regional study
Page 6-22 area.
Table 6.2 DTFN requires inclusion in developing a mitigation plan which will address any potential impacts on migratory birds or their active
Page 6-22 nests, should they be identified.
Table 6.2 DTFN finds the mitigation for disruption to hunting and trapping to be deficient as DTFN was not involved in the assessment or
Page 6-22 development of these mitigative measures.
          DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effect of reduced caribou habitat effectiveness due to clearing for facility site and
          access road as the facility will be within the Snake Sahtenah Caribou range. DTFN requires a cumulative effects assessment to
          measure the effect on the regional study area. Again, DTFN references the findings in the OGC’s Interim Oil and Gas Industry
Table 6.2 Guidelines for Boreal Caribou Ranges in Northeastern British Columbia. The Guidelines include a number of recommendations
fgç2 and best practices that need to be followed in respect of the Project, at a bare minimum.
          DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effect of a disruption to hunting and trapping activities during construction and
          requires a cumulative effects assessment to measure this effect in the regional study area. DTFN also finds the conclusion that
Table 6.2 this disruption will only occur dung construction to be deficient as the facility site will be fenced and cleared. This site will
Page 6-23 permanently, or for the project lifetime, be disrupted for hunting and trapping activities.
Table 6.2 DTFN was not consulted as part of the AlA that was completed from July 10 to July 13, 2009 and was not included in the
Page 6-23 development of mitigative measures for the sites that were found.
                                                                                                                                          P.&ze 11
Table 6.2
Paqe 6-23 DTFN is concerned that surface sites were disturbed durinq the AlA and DTFN was not involved
Table 6.2 DTFN was not consulted in the development of the Heritage Resource Discovery Contingency Plan and requires review of this
Page 6-23 plan.
Table 6.2
Page 6-23 DTFN was not consulted as an Aboriginal group with interest in the project; No mitigative measures for DTFN were discussed.
Table 6.2 DTFN was not notified of the proposed construction schedule and has had no time to allow DTFN members to modify their
Page 6-23 activities in the Project area.
          DTFN notes the lack of plant gathering, fishing, travel routes, sacred and ceremonial sites in the traditional land use study
Table 6.2 (focused only on hunting and trapping). Due to the lack of consideration of these treaty rights and DTFN involvement, this
Page 6-23 assessment is deficient.
Table 6.2 DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure the mitigation measures proposed for disruption to normal living activities are
Page 6-23 effective, specifically those relating to the disruption of DTFN treaty rights (specified as hunting and trapping in the ESA).
Table 6.2 DTFN finds the conclusion that there will be no residual effects to site specific traditional land use deficient as DTFN was not
Page 6-23 consulted during the assessment.
Table 6.2
Page 6-23 DTFN objects to the narrowing of the traditional land and resource use assessment to site specific TLUS,
Table 6.2 DTFN is concerned with the identified residual effect of disruption to the normal living of some land users. DTFN requires a
Page 6-23 cumulative effects assessment to measure this effect on the regional study area.
Table 6.2 DTFN requires a review of the ERP with the opportunity to comment on any components that may affect DTFN Harvesters
Page 6-24 exercising their rights in the project vicinity.
Table 6.2 DTFN requires ongoing monitoring of the project site to ensure that waste management during construction and operation is
Page 6-24 maintain according to Westcoast’s commitments.
Table 6.2 DTFN requires notification should there be a product release during operations as it is noted in residual effects that this product
Page 6-25 release may affect adjacent land users and wildlife.
Table 6.4 DTFN disagrees with Westcoast’s significance evaluafion of adverse residual effects of identified biophysical and socio-economic
Page 6-28 elements of construction and operation of the Fort Nelson North Complex.
to        DTFN feels that a number of the adverse residual effects are significant and have the potential to impact the region as a whole.
Page 6-30 DTFN requires a re-evaluation of the significance and cumulative effects assessments of those residual effects mentioned above.
                                                                                                                                                  I 12
Table 6.4
 Page 6-28
 to        DTFN rejects Westcoasts significance evaluation as effects to Aboriginal and treaty rights were not used to determine the
 Page 6-30 significance of effects.
 7.0 Cumulative Effects Assessment
Sec. 7.1.3 DTFN notes the lack of context in the Current and On-going Development section compared with that included in the Historic
 Page 7-3  Development section. DTFN requires an elaboration in this section.
Sec. 7.1.3
 Page 7-3  DTFN requires the bullet of hunting and trapping to be expanded to include all Aboriginal and treaty rights (fishing, gathering etc.)
Sec. 7.1.5 DTFN was not consulted during the development of the mitigative measures to ensure that potential cumulative environmental and
Page 7-5   socio-economic effects are minimized during Project construction and/or operation.
Sec. 7.1.5
Page 7-5   DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure any mitigative measures proposed are effective.
Sec. 7.1.6 DTFN objects to the same significance criteria being used for cumulative effects as was previously used as these criteria do not
Page 7-5   include effects to Aboriginal and treaty rights as a determining factor.
Sec. 7.1.7 DTFN questions the scoping in this section, which is limited to 2km beyond the LSA. DTFN believed the disturbance listed in
fg_        cumulative effects should be regional in scale and cope and calculated using regional disturbance information.
           DTFN disagrees with no additional soil mitigation being developed for cumulative effects other than those proposed in table S2.
Sec. 7.2.1 As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN requires mitigation measures to
Page 7-7   be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
Sec. 7.2.1
Page 7-7   DTFN disagrees with the exclusion of additional mitigation because the residual effect is deemed “low magnitude”
Sec. 7.2.1
Page 7-7   DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects soil section of the ESA.
Sec. 7.2.1
Page 7-7   DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that mitigation measures proposed in the ESA are successful.
Sec. 7.2.2
Page 7-7   DTFN disagrees with no additional air quality mitigation being developed for cumulative effects other than those proposed in
to         Appendix A. The previously applied mitigation measures resulted in the characterization of a residual effect. DTFN requires
Page 7-8   mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
                                                                                                                                                   13
 Sec. 7.2.2
 Page 7-7
 to
 Page 7-8   DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects air quality section of the ESA.
 Sec. 7.2.2
 Page 7-7
 to         DTFN disagrees with the exclusion of additional mitigation because the residual effect is deemed reversible in the medium to
fg78        long-term and of low magnitude” or reversible in the long-term and of low to medium magnitude”.
 Sec. 7.2.2
 Page 7-7
 to
,f!qç_7__.  DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that mitigation measures proposed in the ESA are successful.
            DTFN disagrees with no additional acousUc environment mitigation being developed for cumulative effects other than those
 Sec. 7,2.3 proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN requires
    gQ,, mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mifigated.
 Sec. 7.2.3
 Page 7-8   DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects acoustic environment section of the ESA.
            DTFN disagrees with no additional wetland mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other than those proposed
 Sec. 7.2.4 in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN requires mitigation
            measure to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
 Sec. 7.2.4
 Page 7-8   DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects wetland section of the ESA.
 Sec. 7.2.4
            DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that mitigation measures proposed in the ESA are successful.
            DTFN disagrees with no additional vegetation mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other than those
 Sec. 7.2.5 proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those miUgation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN requires
7f,,, mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
 Sec. 7.2.5
,g7f DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects vegetation section of the ESA.
 Sec. 7.2.5 DTFN notes the lack of assessment of cumulative effects to traditional plants used by DTFN. DTFN was not consulted on the
jg7f, plants they use nor included in the assessment of cumulative vegetation effects.
                                                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                                          2 e    114
Sec. 1.2.5
Page 1-9   DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that mitigation measures proposed in the ESA are successful.
           DTFN disagrees with no additional wildlife and wildlife habitat mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other
Sec. 7.2.6 than those proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects.
Page 7-10  DTFN requires mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
Sec. 7.2.6
Page 7-10  DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects wildlife and wildlife habitat section of the ESA.
Sec. 1.2.6 DTFN notes the lack of assessment of cumulative effects to traditionally hunted and trapped wildlife used by DTFN. DTFN was not
Page 7-10  consulted on the animals they use nor included in the assessment of cumulative wildlife and wildlife habitat effects.
           DTFN finds the statement “It is assumed that industry-accepted practices will also be implemented during Project
Sec. 1.2.6 constniction”to be vague. DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that these mitigation practices are implemented and
Page 7-10  successful.
           DTFN disagrees with no additional species at risk mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other than those
Sec. 7.2.7 proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN requires
Page 7-11  mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
Sec. 7.2.7 DIEN rejects Westcoast’s reliance on ‘other oil and gas companies” to follow general mitigative measures and requires ongoing
Page 7-1 1 monitoring to ensure that Westcoasts mitigation is successful.
Sec. 7.2.7
Page 7-11  DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects species at risk section of the ESA.
Sec. 7.2.8 DTFN finds this section to be deficient as trapping is referred to only in the context of the registered trapline holders. DTFN holds
Page 7-1 1 the treaty right to trap throughout treaty 8 and the effects to these rights must be considered.
           DTFN notes the lack of assessment of cumulative effects to traditional hunting, trapping and fishing; DTFN notes the exclusion of
Sec. 7.2.8 gathering (plants) as a resource use. DTFN was not consulted on the activities they engage in nor included in the assessment of
Page 7-11  cumulative wildlife and wildlife habitat.
           DTFN disagrees with no additional human occupancy and resource use mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative
           effects other than those proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual
           effects. DTEN requires mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
Sec. 7.2,8 DTFN references OGC’s Interim Oil and Gas Guidelines for Boreal Caribou Ranges in Northeastern British Columbia and the best
Page 7-11  practices and recommendations contained therein at a bare minimum, those need to be followed in respect of the Project.
                                                                 —
                                                                                                                                        Pag€    115
Sec. 7.2.8
 Page7-11  DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that mitigation measures proposed in the ESA are successful.
Sec. 7.2.9
 Page7-11
to         DTFN was not included in the cumulative heritage resources assessment nor in the development of a heritage resource discovery
 Page 7-12 contingency plan.
Sec. 7.2.9
 Page7-11
to         DTFN was not consulted on whether the permanent loss of in situ data will be balanced by the information gained through the
 Page 7-12 mitigation strategy, nor on the mitigation strategy itself.
Sec. 1.2.9
Pagel-11
to         DTFN Westcoast’s reliance on “other oil and gas activities” to be subject to archaeological and provincial review and requires
Page 7-12  ongoing monitoring to ensure that Westcoasts mitigation is successful.
Sec. 7.2.9
Page 7-1 1 DTFN disagrees with no additional heritage resources mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other than those
to         proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN requires
Page 7-12  mifigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
Sec.       DTFN was not consulted in the development or execution of the cumulative traditional land use section of the ESA. Furthermore,
7.2.10     the application contains no assessment of the adverse impacts from the Project on DTFN’s exercise of aboriginal and treaty rights,
Page 7-12  which is a major deficiency in the application.
Sec.       DTFN disagrees with no additional Traditional land use mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other th&i
7.2.10     those proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigaUon measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN
Page 7-12  requires mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
Sec.
7.2.10
f9j12      DTFN traditional use is not reflected in the ESA, therefore has not been considered or mitigated.
Sec.
7.2.11
Page 7-12  DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects human health section of the ESA. DTFN activities as land
to         users were not considered.
                                                                                                                                        Page   116
Page 7-13
Sec
7.2.11
Page 7-12 DTFN finds the conclusion “it is anticipated that for most land users in the area, these strategies will address their
to        concems”to be deficient as DTFN concerns were not considered, nor was their input used to develop the above mentioned
Page 7-13 strategies.
Sec.
7.2.11
Page 7-12 DTFN disagrees with no additional human health mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other than those
to        proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6,2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects. DTFN requires
Page 7-13 mitigaUon measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated.
Sec.
7.2.11
Page 7-12
to
Page 7-13 DFTN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure mitigation commitments are met.
Sec.
7.2.12
Page 7-13 DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects infrastructure and services section of the ESA.
Sec.      DTFN disagrees with no additional infrastructure and services mitigation being developed for the listed cumulative effects other
7.2.12    than those proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mitigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects.
Page 7-13 DTFN requires mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated
Sec.
7.2.12
Page 7-13 DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure mitigation commitments are met.
Sec.
7.2.13
Page 7-13 DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal involvement in the cumulative effects accidents and malfunctions section of the ESA.
Sec.      DTEN disagrees with no additional accidents and malfunction mifigaUon being developed for the listed cumulative effects other
7.2.13    than those proposed in table 6.2. As stated in table 6.2, those mifigation measures, once applied, resulted in residual effects.
Page 7-13 DTFN requires mitigation measures to be developed and implemented to ensure the residual effects are wholly mitigated
                                                                                                                                            P  g  e I 17
  Sec.
  7.2.13
  Page 7-13   DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure mitigation commitments are met.
  Sec. 7.3    DTFN rejects Westcoast’s summary of the assessment of potential cumulative residual effects of the project based on lack of
  Page 7-14    DTFN involvement, lack of consultation and circular reasoning.
  8.0 Environmental Compliance Strategy
  Sec. 8.0    DTFN was not consulted during the development of mitigative measures presented in section 6.0 and requires ongoing monitoring
  Page 8-1    to ensure the mitigation measures protect DTFN interests.
  Sec. 8.0    DTFN requires a copy of Westcoast’s environmental manual for construction projects in Canada (Environmental Manual)(2006) to
  Page 8-1    review.
  Sec. 8.1
  Page 8-1    DTFN was not consulted in the development of the environmental protection plan.
  Sec. 8.2
  Page 8-1    DTFN requires Westcoast to include key Aboriginal issues in their environmental orientation prior to construction.
  Sec. 8.3    DTFN requires a DTFN monitor to accompany the environmental inspector during all the critical phases of construction. This will
  Page 8-1    ensure the mitigative measures are effective for protecting DTFN interests in the area.
  Sec. 8.3
  Page 8-2    DTFN requires Aboriginal awareness training for the Environmental Inspector to ensure they are aware of DTFN interests.
  9.0 Post Construction Monitoring
  Sec. 9.1    DFTN requires periodic monitoring of the project footprint. This includes post-construction, vegetation, effects of wind and water,
  Page 9-1    wildlife and any other issue DTFN identifies.
  10.0_Conclusions
              DTFN rejects Westcoast’s conclusion that construction and operation of the facility will not result in significant adverse
  Sec. 10.0
  Page 10-1
            J environmental and socio-economic residual effects as DTFN was not consulted, included or used as a significance critea
              throughout the ESA.
  Appendix A Air Quality
r
                —
              DTFN was not consulted or included in the development or execution of the air quality assessment or mitigation measures that
              resulted from the study.
                                                                                                                                            e I 18
           DTFN requires periodic monitoring of air quality at the site to ensure the predicted values outlined in the ESA are accurate.
Sec
5.5,1 .6   DTFN requires periodic monitoring of all receptor locations that have predicted exceedences for the Legge visible foliar injury
Page 42    criteria to ensure that the assumptions of the area not containing trees is correct and to ensure no foliar injury occurs.
           DTFN rejects the conclusion that because there are no nearby ambient measurements that would be representative of the study
Sec. 5.5.2 area that background concentrations of the contaminents were not added to predicted concentrations. DTFN requires Westcoast
Page 45    to measure the ambient concentrations and conduct the modeling with those values.
           DTFN notes that this section merely describes EnCana’s air quality results independent of Westcoast’s air quality results, yet
Sec. 5.5.3 refers to Encana as being considered for the Project cumulative effects. DTFN requires information on the combined results of
Page 46    these two predictive modeling exercises.
Sec. 6.0   DTFN rejects the conclusion that because the project will incorporate mitigation measures, the project effects assessment is also
Page 48    the residual effects assessment.
Sec. 6.2.2 DTFN notes the use of standards set by the US EPA. DTFN requires more information on whether these standards are accepted
Page 66    in Canada or are equivalent to Canadian standards (should they exist).
           In the absence of a DTFN traditional land use study, Westcoast has no clear information on whether DTFN used, uses or plans b
           use the small area west of the Project’s property boundary where the highest predicted one-hour, 24 hour and annual average for
           . Westcoast also has no clear information on whether DTFN used, uses or plans to use the SOOm from the project boundary
           NO
           2
Sec. 6.2.3 where the highest predicted levels of 802 were predicted. DTFN requires a TLUS to be completed and this information to be
Page 67    incorporated in the Air Quality Assessment.
           DTFN is concerned that the total annual emission rate of carbon dioxide equivalent greenhouse gas emissions from fuel
Sec. 6.3.2 combustion is 229,912 tonnes which is more than double the threshold of reporting to the federal GHG emissions reporting
Page 79    program (100,000 tonnes). DTFN requires Westcoast to explore options to reduce their GHGs.
           DTFN requires justification of why the digital files for the EnCana Cabin Gas Plant air quality assessment were not requested nor
Sec. 7.0   used for the cumulative environmental effects assessment. DTFN rejects this approach as the results are purely qualitative and
Page 81    are subject to interpretation.
           DTFN rejects the conclusion that there are no residences or camps in the area of SO2 concentration greater than Level A
Sec. 7.1   objectives as no TLUS was completed for DTFN. In the absence of this TLUS Westcoast and its consultants cannot definitively
Page 81    conclude that DTFN does not hold cabins or seasonal campsites in the area.
           DTFN requires periodic monitoring at the two receptors on the northeast side of BS19 where the maximum predicted NOx
Sec. 7.2   concentration is greater than the NOx guideline set by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe to ensure there are
Page 93    no trees in the area currently and that any trees that establish in this area do not incur foliar injury.
                                                                                                                                        Page   119
           DTFN rejects the conclusion that there are no residences or camps in the area of SO2 concentration greater than Level A
Sec. 7.3   objecflves as no TLUS was completed for DTFN. In the absence of this TLUS Westcoast and its consultants cannot definitively
Page 95    conclude that DTFN does not hold cabins or seasonal campsites in the area.
Sec. 7.4   DTFN requires periodic monitoring at the five receptors on the northeast side of the BS19 property boundary where the
Page 106   concentrations of NOx are greater than the European NOx guidelines.
Sec. 7.6   DTFN requires periodic monitoring at the one receptor on the northeast side of the BS1 9 property boundary where the
Page 118   concentrations of NOx are greater than the European NOx guidelines.
Sec. 7.6   DTFN requires periodic monitoring of all receptor locations that have predicted exceedences for the Legge visible foliar injury
Page 119   criteria to ensure that the assumptions of the area not containing trees is correct and to ensure no foliar injury occurs.
Sec. 7.7   DTFN is concerned with the overall increase of 3,9% to BC’s GHG emissions and 0.3% increase to Canada’s emissions. DTFN
Page 119   believes these levels are high for only two facilities.
Sec. 8.1   DTFN requests more information on how Westcoast proposes to reverse the effects expected from CACs and GHGs. If this
Page 120   information is not available, DTFN requires Westcoast to revise their wording to reflect this.
Sec. 8.1   DTFN requires periodic monitoring to ensure the residual effects are small and localized as per the conclusions made in this
Page 120   section.
Sec. 8.2   I3TFN requires periodic monitoring to ensure the cumulative effects are consistent with those qualitative conclusions made in this
Page 122   section.
           DTFN disagrees with the conclusion that the cumulative effects due to increases in CAC concentrations or GHG emissions are
Sec. 8.2   considered not significant as the total emissions from the Project are estimated to be greater than the federal and provincial
Page 122   reporting criteria.
Sec. 9.3
Page 126   DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure best management practices are followed.
Appendix B   —  Noise Impact Assessment
           DTFN was not consulted or included in the development or execution of the noise impact assessment or mitigation measures that
           resulted from the study.
Sec. 1.3   DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal rights and interests as a key issue for noise. DTFN exercise of treaty rights can be affected by
Page 2     excessive levels of environmental noise and should not be classified with general outdoor activities.
           DTFN require periodic monitoring to ensure the amine regen condenser fans, amine trim cooler, excess steam condenser fans,
Sec. 4.1.3 and natural gas generator exhaust stacks do not exceed the levels outlined in the ESA. This can occur concurrently with the
Page 12    recommended follow-up, post construction monitoring recommended to confirm compliance
                                                                                                                                          Page 120
Appendix C Wetland Assessment
             —
          DTFN was not consulted or included in the development or execution of the wetland assessment or mitigation measures that
          resulted from this assessment. DTFN input and traditional knowledge is not reflected in this section.
          DTFN notes a lack of project specific potential effect information in this section.
          For example, the percentage of wetland removed from the RM area is not noted. The amount of wetland disturbed on the project
          footprint is not noted.
          DTFN requires Westcoast to provide specific details from their wetland study that show the potential project impacts, a section that
          it missing at present. Currently DTFN notes only broad examples of potential impacts listed in the recommendations and
          conclusions section (5.0).
Sec. 3.2  DTFN requires more information on how Westcoast will accurately identify the primary function of wetlands located on or in the
Page 7    vicinity of the Project area without quantifying the total wetland area.
Sec. 5.1  DTFN was not included in the development of the Environmental Protection Plan for the Proposed Westcoast Energy Inc. Fort
Page 10   Nelson North Processing Facility and had no input into the mitigation measures contained therein.
          DTFN find this section to lack details of how peatland function will be altered, how the hydrologic function of peatland will be
Sec. 5.2  altered and how the water quality function of peatland will be affected. DTFN has reviewed section 6.0 and finds no elaboration of
Page 11   these themes. DTFN requires the study data on how these three functions of peatland will be affected.
Appendix D Rare Plant Survey
             —
          DTFN was not consulted or included in the development or execution of the rare plant survey or mitigation measures that resulted
          from this assessment. DTFN input and traditional knowledge is not reflected in this section.
          DTFN notes a lack of project specific potential effect information in this section.
          For example, the percentage of habitat suitable for rare plants removed from the RM or LAA is not noted. The amount of habitat
          available and subsequently disturbed on the footprint is not noted. The effects of the Project noise, air quality, water effects etc. on
          rare plants is not noted.
          DTFN requires Westcoast to provide specific details from their rare survey that show the potential project impacts, a secUon that is
          missing presently.
          DTFN requires clarification on the point made in this section “None of the potential rare plant species or rare ecological
          communities in the Project area have a designation under COSEWIC or SARA.” Please clarify if this conclusion was based
Sec. 2.1  solely on desktop review, as it is in that section, or was also based on ground-truthing exercises. DTFN notes that later in this
Page 2    report there are rare plants identified and finds this statement to be contradictory.
Sec. 2.2  DTFN finds the statement that “due to the large area of the proposed facility site, the rare plant survey for this Project was
Page 2   conducted via a series of transects” to be insufficient for not surveying the entire Project site for rare plant communities.
                                                                                                                                              I’   2 2  I 21
  Sec. 2.2  DTFN questions the lack of a secondary rare plant survey that is stated to be standard methodology; If the growing season was
  Page3     abbreviated, the second survey could have been conducted sooner than is usual.
  Sec. 2.2  DTFN questions the comment that “this survey did not address all rare nonvascular species (mosses, liverworts, lichens). DTFN
  Page 3    requires an explanation of why these were not addressed.
            DTFN requires clarification on these two statements that comprise this section. DTFN notes that later in this report there are rare
  Sec. 3.0  plants identified and finds these statements to be contradictory. As they are not included in the desktop review section DTFN
  Page 5    questions the need for these statements in the ESA.
  Sec. 4.0
  Page 5    DTFN notes the lack of Aboriginal input and traditional knowledge in the listing of results.
  Sec. 4.1  DTFN notes the comment that rare plant surveys cannot definitively state that rare plant species are not present on a site, Yet
  Page 6    DTFN notes that this statement is made twice previously. DTFN requires clarification on both of the previous mentioned points.
  Sec. 4.2  DTFN notes the study team findings of moose droppings and wildlife trails on the plant site. DTFN harvesters traditionally hunt
  Page 6    moose and travel wildlife trails, however this traditional knowledge was not included due to lack of DTFN consultation.
            DTFN rejects the conclusion that because Western Jacob’s-ladder is plentiful on the plant site and resilient to some degree of
  Sec. 5.2  human-induced disturbance no further mitigation is recommended. This plant is a blue listed rare plant and any impact to
  Page 11   populations should be mitigated. DTFN requires input into mitigation for this plant and other rare plants.
  Sec. 5.4  DTFN requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that the mitigation proposed is successful in containing non-native and invasive
  Page 11   species.
  Appendix E Wildlife Survey
              —
            DTFN was not consulted or included in the development or execution of the wildlife survey or mitigation measures that resulted
            from this assessment. DTFN input and traditional knowledge is not reflected in this section.
            DTFN notes the lack of habitat identification in this wildlife survey or changes in habitat availability outlined in the ESA.
:
            DTFN notes a lack of project specific potential effect information in this section.
            For example, the percentage of wildlife habitat removed from the RAA or LAA is not noted. The amount of habitat available and
I           subsequently disturbed on the footprint is not noted. The effects of the Project noise, air quality, water effects etc. on wildlife is not
            noted.
            DTFN requires Westcoast to provide specific details from their wildlife survey that show the potential project impacts, a section
            that is missing presently.
                                                                                                                                              P   p I 22
Section 1.1   Westcoast states in this section that one of the objectives of the wildlife survey was to identify “species of concern”. DTFN was
Page 1        not consulted and species of concern to DTFN were not considered.
Section 1.1
Page 1        Dene Tha’ were not involved in the design or the field component of the survey.
            I DTFN objects to a one day aerial survey that may have been impeded by cold temperatures, which the report suggests could have
Sec. 2.2.1 restricted animal movements. DTFN feels that this one day approach can skew the survey results in favor of no animals being
Page 3        located within the project area.
Sec. 2.2.1    DTFN rejects the aerial survey as a way to document human use. DTFN requires a traditional land use study to accurately capture
Page 3        DTFN use in the project area.
Sec. 2.2.1
Page 3        DTFN was not included in the execution or design of the aerial reconnaissance.
Sec. 2.2.2
Page 4        DTFN was not included in the execution or design of the summer survey.
              While the project is not located specifically within a core caribou habitat area, DTFN notes that the Project is located within the
              caribou range. DTFN notes the lack of information in the ESA on how the Project will affect migration between the core areas, and
Sec. 3.1.1 contribute to habitat fragmentation. The OGC Guidelines referenced earlier in this table highlighted the need for application of
Page 5        best practices and mitigation measures within identified boreal caribou ranges, not just core habitats.
Sec. 4.0      DTFN notes a general description of the habitat in this section but notes there are no linkages between this general deschpDon
Page 8        and the species that this can support.
Sec. 4.1      As DTFN has previously rejected the one-day aerial survey that may/may not have been impeded by cold weather, the
Page 8        conclusions from this survey are deemed inadequate.
              DTFN was not included in the identification of wildlife species of concern. Westcoast’s conclusion, from the summer survey, that
              there were no other wildlife species of concern other than caribou is flawed.
Section 4,2   As identified in Appendix 3 one of the species identified in the project area was moose, which is a critical species used in the
Page 8        exercise of DTFN treaty rights.
Sec. 4.2      DTFN rejects the conclusion that due to a lack of browse evidence on the Project site, that moose activity is low. The survey team
Page 8        notes several instances of moose tracks which could indicate the Project site is a migration path for moose.
                                                                                                                                        P a a  I 23
           DTFN notes that timing windows were mentioned but not elaborated on in Table 6.0. DTFN requires adherence to timing windows
           to ensure caribou are not affected by the Project. DTFN rejects the conclusion that because the area is not within a core area for
           caribou that timing windows are not required. The Project is located within a caribou range and timing windows should be adhered
Sec. 5,1   to. DTFN again references the OGC’s Guidelines and the best practices and recommendations contained in those Guidelines,
Page 10    which, at a bare minimum, need to be followed in respect of the Project.
Sec. 5.1
Page 10    DTFN requires periodic monitoring to ensure timing windows are adhered to and the Project minimizes its effect to caribou.
Sec. 5.1
Page 10    DTFN requires periodic monitoring to ensure that clearing does not impact migratory birds.
Sec. 5.1   DTFN notes a lack of information related to migratory birds. The ESA does not specify which birds could use the Project site as
Page_10    potential habitat, values of available habitat are not included and amount of habitat lost are not specified.
Sec. 5.2   DTFN was not included in the development of the Environmental Protection Plan for the Proposed Westcoast Energy Inc. Fort
Page_10    Nelson North Processing Facility and had no input into the mitigation measures contained therein.
           DTFN notes numerous species listed in appendix 2 that DTFN use in the exercise of their treaty rights. DTFN requires consultation
Appendix 2 and a traditional land use study to ensure the traditional ecological knowledge related to these species is captured by the ESA.
Appendix F Archaeological Assessment
             —
           DTFN was not consulted or included in the development or execution of the archaeological assessment or mitigation measures
           that resulted from this assessment. DTFN input and traditional knowledge is not reflected in this section.
Project    DTFN disagrees with the opinion that no further archaeological assessments are required as DTFN did not participate in the
Summary    original study.
Sec. 1     DTFN considers the archaeological assessment to be deficient with only one (1) Fort Nelson First Nation representative on the
page 8     archaeological field survey.
Section 1  DTFN notes that the development is located within their traditional territory. As per the NEB filing manual DTFN should be
Page 8     consulted and included in the archaeological assessment.
           The methodology strategy as per the BC Heritage Inspection Permit 2009-0227 and outlined in point #1 Pre-field project planning
Section 1  requires discussion of land use interests wfth aboriginal communiUes.
page 9     There have been no discussions with DTFN regarding their land use interests are in the project area.
                                                                                                                                            !‘.:*g& 124
               Under point #3 Impact Mifigation Recommendation the report identifies that recommendation will be made in consideration of
               participating aboriginal communities,
               DTFN was not involved and any considerafions do not take DTFN interests into account. DTFN considers it insufficient to only
  Section 1   involve Fort Nelson First Nation and only use the input of one (1) member of this nation to identify appropriate mitigative
  page 10      measures.
  Section 4.2 As previously identified, DTFN were not notified of the field study and hence where not part of the identification of concerns or
  Page 21      mitigative measures.
              The map depicting transects is confusing. DTFN requires more information including:
                    .   Was the entire footprint area surveyed including the low potential areas or where these areas excluded?
                    • If the low potential areas were not surveyed the DTFN would like to know how the low Archaeological Potential was
                        verified.
               DTFN also requires more information on what the classification of low potential was based on. DTFN requires more information on
  Figure 4    the Archaeological Potential Model.
              As there was no ground visibility at the time of assessment for areas that were not previously disturbed, DTFN requires more
              information on the percentage of the Project area that could not be accurately assessed due to this reason.
  Section 4.3 DTFN requires more information on whether these areas will be impacted directly by the project footprint and what the mitigative
  Page 21     measures are in the event that cultural remains are found during the construction phase of the project.
              As there was no ground visibility along the corridor for the proposed access road, DTFN question the efficiency of walking
  Section 4.3 transects, DTFN also finds the distance between transects, lOm apart, to be too widespread.
  Page_23     DTFN finds this method for identifying areas of moderate to high potential to be deficient.
  Section 4.4 DTFN rejects the concept of ‘Ethnic Significance’ as they were not included in the assessment of significance and consider it
  Page 30     unacceptable to rely on the conclusion of one individual to determine ethnic significance of a site.
  Section 5   It is unclear whether transects were done in low potential areas. DTFN requires more information on whether the transects were
  Page 42     done in low, moderate or high potential areas.
  Appendix F Traditional Land Use Site Assessment Basic Report
                —
r
                                                                    —
              DTFN was not consulted or included in the development or execufion of the archaeological assessment or mitigation measures
              that resulted from this assessment. DTFN input and traditional knowledge is not reflected in this section.
                                                                                                                                                     125
Section 1.2 The proposed project is located within DTFN tradifional territory yet there was no DTFN representation on the field crew. DTFN
Page 11      requires a traditional land use study be completed for DTFN.
Section
1.3.1        DTFN was excluded despite having traditional land use interests in the project area; this is contrary to the NEB filing manual
Page 13     guidelines.
Section
13.2
Page 13     DTFN were not invited to participate in on-site investigations despite having interest in the area
Section
1.3.2
Page 13     A pedestrian traverse with just one First Nation representative is not sufficient to identify traditional land use in the project area,
Section      It is insufficient to base the evaluation of significance of TLLJ sites on one First Nation individual. The report does outline that
1.3.2       significance might change from individual to individual or over time and that a follow-up is recommended by the TLU site
Page 13     assessment team and Westcoast representatives, but the TLU site assessment report does not show follow-up.
Section 2.3
Page 25     DTFN notes the Project area is within the DTFN traditional territory.
Section 2.3
Page 25     DTFN did not participate in the TLU site assessment.
Section 3.2
Page 29     DTFN were not introduced to the project by Landsong in July 2009.
            The report states that each site was recorded in a level of detail considered appropriate to the site type and significance. As stated
            above, DTFN consider the method of significance determination insufficient.
            “the team discussed the site’s significance within a context of traditional ecological knowledge and aboriginal histo,y...”
Section 3.3 DTFN finds it inappropriate that the TLU site assessment team determines the significance without representation of DTFN and
Page 29     further considers it insufficient to discuss significance with just one member of a Nation.
            Not all TLU sites were recorded as “...some TLU sites are specific to individual aboriginal families who may not have been
            represented by the TLU team.”
Section 3.3 DTFN wonders how many sites were excluded from consideration as there was only one (1) First Nation representative (Fort
Page 30     Nelson First Nation) on the field crew and there was no effort made to interview other members.
                                                                                                                                                  126
             DTFN understands that it is not possible to capture all TLU sites as not all members of a nation could possibly be interviewed.
            However, the Dene Tha’ would like to not only have representation on all field crews but also have DTFN members interviewed
            who use the Project site to exercise their treaty rights.
            DTFN finds the quote “Consensus regarding site significance and mitigation strategies was reached in the field whenever
            possible” a demonstration of invalid methodology.
Section 3.3 The field crew is not the appropriate vehicle to judge significance for an entire Nation. Additionally) DTFN had no representation on
Page_30     the field crew, so DTFN interests were not captured or mitigated.
            DTFN finds the quote       “specific information-sharing protocols were discussed in the field at each site and in relation to
            each concern” a demonstration of invalid methodology.
Section 3.4 The field crew is not the appropriate vehicle to approve information sharing protocols, nor the proper vehicle to document Nation
Page 31     concerns.
Section
4.1.3       DTFN rejects the methodology of documenting single traps rather than trapping areas. This approach is deficient and doesn’t
Page 36     capture the entirety of use.
Section
4.1.4
Page 36     This report does not consider current human habitation sites, such as trapper cabins, as TLU sites. DTFN considers this deficient.
Section 5.2 DTFN consider it insufficient to have one member of a Nation identifying significance and mitigative measures for idenflfied TLU
Page 52     sites on behalf of the entire Nation.
            The Fort Nelson First Nation participant expressed concern regarding cumulative impacts to animal habitat and traplines. This
Section     concern was not addressed in the TLU site assessment report or the application itself.
5.2.1       DTFN was not provided with an opportunity to express their concerns.
Section 5.3
            DTFN consider the listing of mitigation measures in a table as insufficient. DTFN understands that some information is sensitive to
            the Nation and should be adequately protected (i.e. burials). However, the report fails to idenUfy what types of sites were found in
            its entirety. The report identifies GPS location for each site) but not what type of site the point represents.
Table 2     DTFN questions this methodology and believes it would be more appropriate to identify the sites that were found but not list the
                                                                                                                                              I 27
            GPS coordinates as a measure of protection.
            DTFN has no way of judging significance and the appropriateness of mitigative measures from this report as site types are not
            specified and DTFN were not included.
            The TLU site assessment report was based on a method that is appropriate for conduction Archaeological Impact Assessments
General     but not for Traditional Land Use Studies. DTFN requests involvement in a Project specific TLUS.
            The report identifies the location of specific use sites, but fails to show use areas. For example, as mentioned before trapping
General     activities are usually conducted in an area and are not specific to the site to the traps itself.
Appendix G    —  Environmental Protection Plan
General     DTFN was not consulted in the preparation of the EPP.
General     DTFN requires consultation on all monitoring activities and requires periodic monitoring as outlined throughout this document.
App.G
Section 8   There are no mitigative measures mentioned for wildlife encounters in the EPP or any monitoring activities throughout the
Page 16     construction or operations phase. DTFN requires monitors throughout the operations phase of the project.
App.G
Section 9
Page 18     DTFN requires consultation and have into the reclamation design and procedures of the site.
App.G
Section 10
Page 29     DTFN requires inclusion in any monitoring activities including post-construction monitoring and long-term monitoring.
App.lV      DTFN requires consultation on the Wildlife Species of Concern Discovery Contingency Plan. In particular, DTFN requires
Section 4.0 involvement in any monitoring activities and mitigative measures in regards to this contingency plan.
App.lV
Section 6.0 DTFN requires consultation on the Heritage Resource Discovery Contingency Plan. In particular the Dene Tha’ requires
            involvement in the discussions relating to monitoring activities and mitigative measures.
App.VI
Section 6.0 DTFN requires consultation on all environmental management practices as they relate to the project.
                                                                                                                                          Page   128
Page 6-1
App.Vl
Section 6.1 DTFN requires consultation on the general practices applied to all environmental and socio-economic features potentially
Page 6-1    impacted by the project.
App.Vl
Section 6.2
Page 6-2    DTFN requires consultation on any environmental management practices for various physical elements related to the project.
App.Vl
Section 6.3
Page 6-4    DTFN requires consultation on any soils issues related to the project including monitoring activities and mitigative measures.
App,Vl
Section 6.4
Page 6-7    DTFN requires consultation on any vegetation issues related to the project including monitoring activities and mitigative measures.
App.Vl
(Westcoast
Env.
Manual)
Section
6.4.2
Page 6-9    DTFN requires consultation and input into the reclamation and re-vegetation plan of the project area.
App,Vl      DTFN requires consultation on any water quality issues related to the project including monitoring activities and mitigative
Section 6.5 measures.
Page 6-10   DTFN requires consultation on water permits and the quantity of water required for the project and its sources.
App.Vl
Section 6.6
Page 6-11   DTFN requires input in aquatic resources management activities in and surrounding the project area.
App. VI
Section 6.6 DTFN requires input into the determination of Riparian Buffer Zones
                                                                                                                                               e I 29
Page 6-12
App. VI
Section 6.7
Page 6-18 Due to the importance of wetlands to First Nation land use practices, DTFN requires consultation on any wetland issues.
App.Vl
Section 6.8
Page 6-19 DTFN requires consultation on any wildlife related issues on the project site including monitoring activities and mitigation plans.
App. VI
Section 6.9
Page 6-20 DTFN requires consultation on any air quality and noise issues including monitoring activities and mitigation plans.
App. VI
Section
6.10
Page 6-21
Item 3)     DTFN requires notification of the construction schedule prior to commencement along with the other local land users.
App. VI
Section
6.10
Page 6-21 DTFN requires consultation on socio-economic issues as related to the project including mitigation strategies, employment and
            training strategies.
App. VI
Section
6.10
Page 6-22
Item 13)    DTFN requires consultation in the event any heritage resources are found during the construction of the project. DIEN requires
            monitoring activities and to be consulted on the mitigative measures in regards to such heritage resources.
App. VI
Section     DTFN requires consultation on Contingency Plans and have the appropriate contact information in case of an emergency.
                                                                                                                                     Page 130
6.11
Page 6-22
App. VI
Section 7.1
Page 7-1    DTFN requires consultation on Post Construction Environmental Management practices including the monitoring program,
            mitigative measures and the company’s operation and maintenance program.
App.Vl
Section 7.2
Page 7-2
            DTFN requires consultation on the Follow-up Program as required by the Environmental Assessment report.
            The EPP fails to comply with the following minimum EPP requirements as outlined in the NEB Filing Manual:
                • Provide criteria for evaluating the success of practices and procedures, particularly for reclamation and any new
General              mitigation measures;
EPP             • Provide criteria by which decisions will be made as to which pracUces and procedures to implement and under what
comments             circumstances
                          Legend                                            09/08/2009
                             Proposed Disturbances
Spectra FN North Project     (Arcis Sehdoanah Creek. EnCane Gas Cabin.
                             Spectra FN North and Booster Station.
 Existing and Proposed       TCPL -torn River Mainline)
                             Existing Disturbances (DGC arid Encarta data)
      Disturbances       [J       keisc Firs: kalisr Reserve
0110512010    10:23 DTFHSpcctra                                                                    P0021005
                                JANES FREEDMAN KYLE
                                                              Suite 340— 1122 Mainland Street
                                                              Vancouver, BC V6B MA
                                                              Phone; 604.687.0549 Fax; 604,68T2696
                                                              www.jfkIaw.ca
   January 5,2010                                             Rc,anne M. Kyle
                                                              Direct Line: 604.687.0549, en. 107
                                                              .-meiI; rkylefdaw,ca
   Delivered by Fax
  National Energy Board                                       File No. 1003-041
  444 Seventh Ave. SW
   Calgary, AR T2P OXX                                                                          rn
  Attention:      Arnie-Marie Erickson
                  Acting Secretary of the Board
  Dear Ms. Erickson:
  Re:     Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
           (“Westcoast”), section 58 applicatIon to the NE)3 for the Fort Nejson North Processing
          Facility (the “Project”)
  We are writing thither to your letter of December 9, 2009 to Mr. Mel Thorp.
  Dene ma’ First Nation (“DTFN”) submits that an oral public hearing would be the most appropriate
  way for the application for the above-noted Project to proceed given the potential impacts to, and
  infringements of, DTFN’s aboriginal and treaty rights from the proposed Project. This is warranted on
  the following grounds:
       1. Nature of Oral Nistory and Traditional Land Use Information
      2. Project Scope and Cumulative Impacts
      3. Environmental Setting of the Project
      4. Testing of Evidence and Need for Cross-Examination
      5. Public Interest
  These grounds are set out in more detail below.
   01105/2010       10:23 DWNspectra                                                 0M)                        P.003100 5
                                                                                                                   2
          1. Oral History and Traditional Land Use Information
     As the NEB itself stated in relation to the proposed Keystone Pipeline Project:
              Because the Board is a quasi-judicial tribunal it cannot engage in off the record discussions with
              Aboriginals. Instead, it must rely on the open public hearing process to ensure it has the best
              possible evidence of the potential effects of a proj ect on Aboriginal interests so that it may factor
              that evidence into its decision.
     Similarly, the following comments were made in the NEB’s Reasons for Decision: Enbridge Southern
     Lights GP on behalf of Enbridge Southern Lights LP and Enbridge Pipelines Inc., OH-3-2007 (upheld in
     Standing Buffalo Dakota First Nation v. Enbridge Pipelines Inc. (2009 FCA 308)):
            Since the NEB is an impartial, quasi-judicial tribunal bound by the principles of natural justice, it
            must receive information about Aboriginal concerns with respect to a specific project through its
            public hearing process.
            In addition to the information provided to the Board via the Applicant, there are numerous ways
            for Aboriginal people to make their views known directly to the Board, This can include a letter of
            comment, oral statements, written evidence, oral testimony by elders, cross-examination of the
            Applicant and other parties, and final argument. The Board is obligated to carry out its tbnctions
            in accordance with the rules of natural justice and procedural fairness. To the extent possible and
            within the parameters of procedural fairness, the Board has adopted a fair and flexible process that
            allows Aboriginal people to prô’iide their views and evidence to the Board.
            The Board’s process is designed to ensure it has the best information available about Aboriginal
            concerns so that it may take these concerns into consideration before it renders a decision.
    An oral hearing would provide DTFN with an opportunity to lead oral evidence in relation to their
    aboriginal and treaty rights and potential impacts on those rights from the Project, Unless this
    application proceeds by way of an oral hearing, the Board may not benefit from this evidence because it
-   may not be possible to summarize in written form. For instance, the unique nature of Traditional Land
    Use information lends itself to oral presentation. Similarly, the only way for the NEB to be in a position
    to properly consider oral history evidence is to hear live witnesses describe it so that it is meaningful and
    so that cross-examination on the evidence can occur.
    It is critical that the NEB be sensitive to the importance of oral traditions to DTFN. As the Supreme
    Court of Canada stated in R. v. Van tier Pen, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507, decision-makers must “approach the
    rules of evidence, and interpret the evidence that exists, with a consciousness of the special nature of
    aboriginal claims”. In Delgamuu/nv v, British Columbia, [1997] 3 S,C.R, 1010, the Supreme Court of
    Canada again recognized the importance of oral traditions and stated that decision-makers must consider
    equally the perspectives of the common law and of Aboriginal people themselves in assessing the
    evidence given and “come to terms with the oral histories of Aboriginal societies, which for many
    Aboriginal Nations, are the only record of their past”,
 0110512010      10:23 Dmhspectra                                                                            P.0041005
                                                                                                                3
        2. Project Scope and Cumulative Impacts
   DTFN tbrther submits that an oral hearing for the Project is warranted on the basis of scope of the
   proposed Project. The scope of the Project is significant. The proposed Project will at minimum
   involve land clearing, facility construction and operation, onsite power generation, and construction and
   operation of an all-season road. The Project will also necessarily tie into a pipeline component, which
   must be considered in this application to avoid improper “project splitting”. Facility processes will
   include inlet separation, gas sweetening, amine regeneration, acid gas incineration, gas dehydration and
   sales gas compression. The total land footprint required for the Project will be, at minimum, 80
   hectares, of which approximately 50 hectares are expected to require clearing. The Project is located
   within the Snake-Sahtaneh caribou range, and there are at least four provincially listed plant species and
   one wetland within the Project area,
   In addition, a number of other projects have been approved, or are being proposed, in the general
   vicinity of the Project. The potential impacts of this Project in conjunction with other proposed projects
   in the area (including other gas processing facilities, pipeline tie ins) and other existing facilities in the
   area warrant a complete and thorough examination of potential effects through an oral hearing.
       3. Environmental Setting of the Project
  The environmental setting of the Project also warrants a thu oral bearing: the Project is located within
  the Snalce-Sahtaneh Caribou Range; will impact at least four provincially-listed plant species; is in close
  proximity to wetland areas; and is located on Etsho Plateau which is critical Traditional Land Use area
  for DTFN members,
  Clearly, a Project of this magnitude and scope is best assessed through an oral hearing process that
  allows all parties the maximum opportunities to fuily examine and test the evidence, and to present their
  concerns to the decision-makers. In Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia, 2007 BCSC 1700, the Court
  noted the importance of decision-makers having sufficient credible information to allow a proper
  assessment of resources that are subject to aboriginal rights in the area, and potential impacts to those
  resources,
       4. Testing of Evidence and Opportunity for Cross-Examination
  As the DTFN was not consulted or involved in the preparation of the application submitted to the NEB
  by Westcoast, DTFN would like the opportunity to orally question Westcoast and its consultants on the
  conclusions reached in the application regarding the impacts arising from this Project. Proceeding by
  way of an oral hearing would provide DTFN with an opportunity to test the evidence by way of cross-
  examining witnesses, In particular, DUN requires an opportunity to cross-examine and raise a number
  of issues with the environmental consultants relied upon by Westcoast. Without an opportunity to do so,
  it will be extremely difficult for DTFN to have any confidence in the application prooess or the Project
  itself
       5. Public Interest
  There is also significant public interest in the Project and the related proceedings, particularly in light of
  the potential adverse impacts to constitutionally-protected aboriginal and treaty rights of First Nations in
 0110512010      10:23 DlFHspectra                                               (FZ)                     P.0051005
                                                                                                             4
   the area, including DTFN. This fact aione, we submit, constitutes sufficient grounds to continue the
   application as an oral hearing.
   In light of all of these considerations, DTFN is of the opinion that neither a written public hearing nor a
   continued application review is an adequate process by which to continue the application. Rather, the
   application should continue as an oral hearing.
   In addition, we note that meaningful consultation requires adequate financial capacity on the part of the
   First Nation. In order for DTFN to meaningfully participate in the application review for this Project, it
  requires capacity funding. Please advise if any capacity funding is accessible to DTFN in relation to the
   application review, either from the NEB or from other federal departments or agencies.
  If you have any questions or concerns, please contact the undersigned. We look forward to hearing from
  the NEB on this matter.
  Yours truly,
  Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
  Per:
• Rosanne M. Kyle
  RMK/ejr
  cc:      IDTFN Chief and Council
           Valerie Bonnes, DTFN Lands Department
           Tracy Campbell, Callicu Gmup
           Robert Freedman, lanes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
           Lorraine Clayton, MOPO
           Westecast Energy Lie., Attn.: Peter Spicker (via courier)
 0110512010    10:22 DTFHSpectra                                                   WAY)                       P.0011005
                                JANES FREEDMAN KYLE
                                          /
      >   ‘‘•-
                                                                   Suite 340— 1122 Mainland Street
                                                                   VanOuvtI BC ‘VóB 5L1
                                                                  Phone: 604.6870549 Fax: 604687.2696
                                                                  www.jflclaw.ca
        FAX TRANSMISSION COVER
       To:        Anne-Marie Erickson                       Fax:      1.877.288.8803
                  National Energy Board
                   1.800.899.1265
       From:      Rosanne M. Kyle                          FIle:      1003-041
                  rkyle@jflclaw.ca
       Date:       January 5, 2010                         Pages (including this covei):
       If you have any problems with. this transmission, please contact our office.
                                                 MESSAGE
     Please see attached.
                                                                                                         (I)
                                                                                                         3,-
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   C
                                                                                             r
                                                                                                    C),
                                                                                                    -p
                                                                                                      N)
                                                                                                      CD
JAN. 6.2010 10:55AM           EOG RESOURCES CANADA #4032979199                            NO. 2244        P. 1
óeog resoa irces                                                                  EQO Re,ou,ccs Canada Inc.
                                                                                   7300. 700 9th Avonuc SW
                                                                                             -
                                                                                  Calgaiy Alberta t?P 3V4
      January 5,2010                                        SALLhH                (403) 297-9700
                                                                                  Fax (403) 297-9199
                                                                                  Fax (403) 297-9199 Aecountinrj
      National Energy Board
      444 Seventh Avenue SW
                                                            2010 JAN —b A 10: 1   X (403) 297-9246 Land
                                                                                  9
      Calgary, Alberta
     T2P 0X8
     Attention:      Ms. Anne- Marie Erickson
                     Acting Sec retary of the Board
     Dear Niadant
     Re:     Westeoast Energ Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
             (Westeoast), Secti on 58 National Energy Act Application for Fort Nelson North
             Processing Facilh y Comments on Process
                                  -
     BOG Resources Canada C ‘EOG”) will, over the corning years, require additional natural gas
     processing service for its hale gas production from the Horn River Basin in Northeast British
     Columbia. To help satisfy this requirement, EGG has executed an expansion agreement with
     Westcoast for such servic( which is to be provided, in part, at the proposed Spectra Fort Nelson
     North Processing Facility the “Facility”).
     BOG is in receipt of a cop of the letter from the National Energy Board (the ‘NED”) dated
     December 9, 2009.
     As an interested party, EQ desires that the application proceed in the most efficient manner.
     EOG has no concerns witt the Facility as proposed and is not aware of any material third party
     concerns that would requii e a written or oral hearing. EGG is therefore of the belief that the
    most efficient use of resou ces would be to proceed with the first option identified in the
    December 9. 2009 letter w tereby the NED continues to review the application including further
    information requests of W steoast and other interested parties.
    Please contact the undersi ned at (403) 297-9107 if you would like further information from
    BOG.
    Your truly,
    EOG RESOURCES CA ADA, by its
    Managing partner,
    EU       ESO      CES CA ADA INC.
       mie Bowman,
    Vice President, Marketing
                                       energy opportunity growth
=— Eleven Canada Enrp-oratien 403 232 mu Phene
2000, 400 - 3"" Avenue 5.1M. vmwﬁevenenergytem
devon Calgary, AB ‘l'2F' 4H2
.Ienut'jlryr 6, 2010
Natienal Energy Beard
444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
Calgary, Alberta
T2P 0X3
Attention: Hts. Anne-Marie Erickson
Acting Secretary ef the Beard
Dear Madam:
Re: Westceast Energy Inc., carrying an business as Spectra Energy Transmissien
(Westceast), Sectien 53 Natiena! Energy Act Application fer Fort Nelson
Nerth Processing Facility - Comments en Precess
In respense tn the abeve neted letter from the Natienal Energy Beard (“NEB”) dated
December 9””, 2009, Devan Canada Cerperatien (“Devan”) wishes te previde the
fellewing comments.
Devan has requested incremental gathering and precessing service in the Fert Nelsen
reseurce area fer its Hern River natural gas develepment and has executed an
expansien agreement with Westeeast fer such service. Devan understands that time is
ef the essence in erder fer Westeeest te meet its target in-service date ef May 1, 2012
for the Fert Nelsen Nerth Precessing Facility.
Devon therefere requests that the NEB cemplete its applicatien review by setting
timelines for any further information requests ef Westceast, and pessibly interested
parties, in order te allow the NEB te issue its decision in a timely manner. In Devon’s
View, given the circumstances, we feel there is ne need fer the NEB to initiate a
public hearing en this matter.
Yeurs truly,
Keith Fardy
Manager, Natural Gas Marketing
Devan Canada Cerperatien

ConocoPhiilips Canada
401 w 9th Avenue SW,
x 9,0. Box 130, Station ‘M'
. ‘ ~ Catgary. AB T2? 2H7
ConocoPhIlllps
January 6, 2010
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue SW.
Calgary, Alberta
T2P 0X8 2
Attention: Ms. Anne-Marie Erickson
Acting Secretary of the Board
Dear Madam: ‘
Re: Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy
Transmission (Westcoast), Section 58 National Energy Board Act
’ Application for Fort Nelson North Processing Facitity - Comments on
Process
In response to the National Energy Board ("NEB") letter dated December 9, 2009
ConocoPhillips Canada (“ConocoPhiilips”) hereby has the following comments.
ConocoPhillips has a requirement for additional processing service in the Fort Nelson
area and believes that option #1 as identified in the NEB letter dated December 9, 2009
is the preferred process to follow. ConocoPhillips is concerned that any delays to the
existing appiication review process may adversely affect the expected start up date of
May 1, 2012.
ConocoPhillips therefore requests that the NEB continue the current application review
process that is underway so a decision can be issued in a timely manner.
Yours truiy,
CONOCOPHILLIPS CANADA
<Filed Electronically>
«- Jim Gilholme
Coordinator, Regulatory Affairs

January 6, 2010
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
Calgary, Alberta
T2P 0X8
Attention:          Ms. Anne-Marie Erickson
                    Acting Secretary of the Board
Dear Madam:
Re:      Westcoast Energy Inc., Carrying On Business as Spectra Energy Transmission (“Westcoast”),
         Section 58 National Energy Act Application for Fort Nelson North Processing Facility - Comments
         on Process
Quicksilver Resources Canada Inc. (“Quicksilver”) has received the letter from the National Energy Board
("Board") dated December 9, 2009, and hereby provides comments in response to this letter.
Quicksilver has a requirement for incremental processing service in the Fort Nelson resource area and
has executed an expansion agreement with Westcoast for such service. Quicksilver understands that, to
meet the target in-service date commencing May 1, 2012, Westcoast will need to start site work on the
Fort Nelson North Processing Facility (“Facility”) as soon as possible. Time is therefore of the essence in
processing the Westcoast application.
Quicksilver understands that concerns have been raised from the Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN”).
Quicksilver believes that Westcoast has an outstanding program in place to work with the communities /
Aboriginal Peoples that may be impacted by its activities, and supports its ongoing efforts in these areas
to resolve and accommodate these concerns. Quicksilver believes that these efforts, combined with the
ongoing processes available to the Board to request comments and to make decisions on how to
proceed, should allow the Board to continue the application review process without proceeding to
hearing. Quicksilver believes that this should occur in a positive, constructive manner without being
detrimental to third party interests.
In summary, Quicksilver believes that Westcoast will proactively work to resolve and accommodate the
concerns raised by any affected third party involving Westcoast’s Facility application, and also
understands that there are important time considerations relating to the Facility. Accordingly, Quicksilver
requests that the Board proceed with Option 1 outlined in the December 9, 2009 letter; to “continue the
application review process including further information requests of Westcoast and possibly interested
parties”.
Yours Sincerely,
Doreen Rempel, P.Eng.
Community and Regulatory Affairs Manager
Office: (403) 537-2478 / Cell: (403) 862-4379
Email: drempel@qrinc.ca
Copies:
QRCI: Joe Farley, Tony Kuehne
QRI: John Hinton
                                            Quicksilver Resources Canada Inc.
2000, 125 – 9th Avenue SE Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2G 0P8   Phone: 403.537.2455 fax: 403.262.6115 website: www.qrinc.ca
January 5, 2010
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
Calgary, Alberta
T2P 0X8
Attention:      Ms. Anne-Marie Erickson
                Acting Secretary of the Board
Dear Madam:
Re:    Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
       (Westcoast), Section 58 National Energy Act Application for Fort Nelson North
       Processing Facility - Comments on Process
Following are the comments of Black Diamond Dene, a Company owed equally by the Fort
Nelson First Nation and Black Diamond Group Limited of Calgary Alberta and operating in the
Horn River Basin, in response to the letter from the National Energy Board ("Board") dated
December 9, 2009.
The Horn River basin has a requirement for incremental processing service in the Fort Nelson
resource area. In order to meet the increased demands Westcoast has proposed to built a
processing facility adjacent to their compressor station site.
Black Diamond Dene feels that NEB can continue their review process of the Westcoast
application and ask for more information as and when required in order to ensure responsible and
orderly development of the area.
Yours truly,
Trevor Haynes
President and CEO
Black Diamond Dene
P – 403 206 4737
F – 403 264 9281
0110612010    16:10 DlFHSpectra                                                    Y)2SO 381 8567     P.0021003
                                JANES FREEDMAN KYLE
                                           A                           :‘
                                                                                                 r
                                                               Suite 816— 1175 Douglas Street
                                                               Victorie, BC V$W 2E1
                                                               Phone: 250403.3460 Fax: 250.381.8367
                                                               wwwifl<law on               -
       January 6,2010                                          Robert C. Freedman
                                                               Dirsct Lint: 250405.3464
                                                               E-mail: rfreedman@jfklaw.ca
      Delivered by: Fax (4O3-2925503)
      National Energy Board                                    File No, 1003-041
           7
           th                                                                                    C.
              Aye, SW
      Calgary, Alberta
      T2P 0X8                                                                                   0
                                                                                               C
                                                                                                -o
      Attention; Anne-Marie Edckson
                                                                                               -D
      Dear Ms. Erickson;
      Re      Westcoast)Speetra Energy Section 58 Application Fort Nelson North Processing
                                                                     -
              Facility NEB File OF-Fac-Gas-W102-2009-04 01
                       -
      I am legal counsel to the Dene Tha’ First Nation in respect of the above-captioned matter. We
      received today a copy of a letter that Westcoast/Spectra Energy sent to the NED, setting out the
      Company’s reasons for why (in their view) there is no need for a broad written or orai hearing in
      respect of the application. Our clients fundamentally disagree with many of the positions being
      taken by Westcoast/Spectra Energy in that letter     In light of the importance of the issues to
      Dene Tha’ raised by the application, and the potential for the application to adversely impact
 01/0612010     16:10 DlFNspectra                                               Y)25O 381 8567          P.0031003
                                                        2
       Dene Tha’s rights, we respectfully request 10 days to reply to the comments and assertions made
       in Westcoast/Spectra’s lefter to the Board.      In particular, we are of the strong view that
       WestcoastlSpeotra has made a number of assertions which require response and which go to the
       heart of the issues that Dene Tha’ wishes to raise in an oral hearing or expanded written process,
       if one is called by the MRS.
       We look forward to your response.
       Yours truly.
       lanes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
      Per:
                                                                   -
      Robert C. Freedman
      RCF/nicc
      cc:      Bruce Pydee, Spectra Energy          -
               Rosanne Kyle, lanes Freedman Kyle
               Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group
               James Abuassay, Chief, Dene Tha’ First Nation
 0110612010        16:10 DlFHspcctra                                                                     Y)250 381 8567               P.0011003
                                       JANES FREEDMAN KYLE
                                                I_           \\2                   I   .‘
                                                                                                U PA             TIC) N
                                                                           SuIte 816— 1175 Douglas Street
                                                                           Victoria. BC VSW 2E1
                                                                           Phone 250.405.3460 Fax: 250.381.8567
   Date: January 6, 2010
   File No: 1003-041
                                              FAX COVER SHEET
   TO: Anne-Marie Erickson
   FAX No.: 1-403-292-5503
   Number of pages including this cover page c_S
   Please see attached correspondence.
   Thank you,
   Monique Cotton (mcottoniflclaw.ca Tel: 250-405-3469)
   Legal Assistant to Rñbert C. Freedman
  This communication Is intended only for the use by the Individual or entity to which it is addressed and may contain information that is
  privileged, confidential and protected from disclosure under law. If you are not the intended addressee, or a person authorized to deliver
  this document to. the addressee, any review, disclosure. copying or other action based on the content of this coatmunication is strictly
  prohibited. tf you receive this conununication in error, please noti& the sender immediately by telephone or email. Thanlc you.
Imperial Oil
Imperial Oil Resources
237 Fourth Avenue SW D. A. (Dee) Brandes Gas, Power & NGL Marketing
Calgary, Alberta Manager Tel. (403) 237-4478
Fax. (403) 232-5870
January 5, 2010
Anne—Marie Erickson
Secretary of the Board
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue SW
Calgary, Alberta T2P 0X8
Re: Westcoast Energy InC., carrying on business as Spectra Energy
Transmission (Westcoast), Section 58 National Energy ActApplication for
Fort Nelson North Processing Facility ("Application") - Comments on Process
Dear Madam:
Imperial Oil Resources ("Imperial") provides the following response to the National Energy
Board (”Board") request for Comments on Process dated December 9, 2009.
Imperial has a requirement for the incremental processing service in the Fort Nelson resource
area and has executed an expansion agreement with Westcoast for such service.
We note objections to this Application have been raised by the Dene Tha' First Nation (”DTFN")
regarding the adequacy of consultation and Westcoast has filed information that represents
ongoing discussion and information distribution to DTFN. As such, Imperial believes the issues
can be addressed and resolved by the Board through continuation of the current application
review process, including further information requests of Westcoast and any interested parties.
Imperial supports a timely, efficient and thorough review process and believes this can be
achieved for this Application without a written or oral public hearing.
Yours very truly,
(”<?*@W
“I'DMTJA. (Dee) Brandes
Manager,
Gas, Power and NGL Marketing
an Alberta limited partnership

EnCena Corporation
EN ANA m Enﬁena en 3'" Rinde K. Powell
1333 333 2"“ 33331333 Tel {433} 3433333
m 333 333 2333 F33: (433)3433333
- {lelgerjnﬁnr AB T2F' 235
VIA E-File

January 5, 2010

Netienal Energy Beard

444 — 7"“ Avenue S.W.

Calgary, Alberta

T2P 0X3

Attentien: Ann-Merie Eriekeen

Acting Secreteﬂ ef the Beard

Deer M3. Erickeen:

Re: Weeteeeet Energy lne., carrying an business as Spectra Energyr Transmission
(Weeteeaet). Section 58 Netienel Energy Act Application for Fert Nelsen Nerth
Processing Facility - Comments en Preeeee

Pursuant to the National Energy Beard'e (“Beard") letter Dated December 9, 2009 EnCene

Cerperetien (“EnCene”) preuides the fellewing eemmente en the preferred preeeee.

EnCene i3 3 predueer and shipper en the Weeteeeet system and i3 ene ef 3evere| gee

predueere with significant reeeruee in the Horn River Basin. EnCene i3 else the eperater ef the

gas preeeeeing facility known in the Weeteeeet applieatien 33 the EnCane Cabin Gas Plant. A3

a majer produeer in the Hem River area, EnCene requires incremental preceeeing service in the

Fert Nelsen eemplex area. The Fert Neleen Nerth Processing facility is required te provide the

increased preceeeing capability fer the area.

EnCene euppene Option 1 33 eutlined in the Beerd’e letter, “centinued application review by the

Beard including further information requeete ef Weeteeeet end peeeibly interested partiee”.

EnCena believes that any ieeuee arising can be 3333mmed3ted and addressed within the

current preeeee and will enable Weetecaet to meet the target in service date of May 1, 2012.

Yeurs truly,

. ENCANA CORPORATION
J
Rinde K. Pewell, P.Eng.
Directer, Regutatery Servieee

                             ruru
Jan. 6. 2U1U 2:QzM           r’ri
                  a P
                                                                  Fort Nelson First Nation
                                                              R.R.#l, Mile 295, Alaska Highway
                                                                 Fort Nelson, B.C. VOC 1RO
                                                                   Telephone 250-774-7257
                                                                      Fax 250-774-7260
         January 6, 2010
         National Energy Board                                                            C—
        444 Seventh Avenue SW,                                                            -T-]
                                                                                           U
         Calgary, Alberta
        T2POXS
                                                                                          —
                                                                                          N)
        Attention:      Ms. Anne-Marie Erickson
                        Acting Secretary of the Board
        Dear Madam:
        Re:     Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as
                                                                   Spectra Energy Transmission
                (Westcoast), Section 58 National Energy Act
                                                               Application for Fort Nelson North
                Processing Facility Comments on Process
                                    -
        The Council of the Fort Nelson First Nation has
                                                         reviewed the recent letter from
        Westcoast Energy / Speefra Energy Transmission conc
                                                                 erning their NEB application. The
       Council has decided that they have no objection to
                                                             the application proceeding through the
       usual route, option 1.
       The Council is relying on the NEB to ensure that
                                                           any decision they make on tins
       application is based on the principle of responsib
                                                          le development.
       Sincerely;
       Kathi Dickie
       Chief Councillor
                                                                                          CANADA LTD
SJITF 1C / 7W 9th AVENLC SW I CLG8W. ALBERTA, C&4ADA T2P 3V4
                -
                                                                                           :4Ds: 2a-12rn
                                                                                       FOY 432 26-1 246
       January 6, 2010
       National Energy Board
                                                                                             S
       444 Seventh Avenue SW.
                                                                                             C..   r —--A
       Calgary, Alberta                                                              ,—,.
       T2POX8                                                                        CD
                                                                                             0
                                                                                     C
       Attention:      Ms. Anne-Marie Erickson
                                                                                    rn
                                                                                             -o
                       Acting Secretary of the Board
                                                                                             NJ
       Dear Madam:                                                                           —
       Re:     Westcoast Energy Inc.. carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
               (Westcoast), Section 58 National Energy Act Application for Fort Nelson North
               Processing Facility Comments on Process
                                    -
       Fo!lowing are the comments in response to the letter from the National Energy Board (Board)
       dated December 9. 2009.
       Apache Caiada Ltd. has a requirement for incremental processing service in the Fort Ne]sori
       resource area and has executed an expaxision agreement with Westcoast for such service. To
       meet the target in-service date commencing May 1.2012, Westcoast needs to start site work on
       the Fort Nelson North Processing Facility as soon as possible. Time is therefore of the essence
       in processing the Westcoast application.
       Apache Canada Ltd. therefore urges the Board to complete the current process by establishing
       timelines for any further comments and for reply comments by Westcoast, so that the Board is in
       a position to thereafter ssue its decision in a timely manner.
       Yours  truly.
       Tim Wall
       P:es;dent. Apache Canada Ltd.
            -       4
    —               Wa.
   Li   mnrr’fl4n                                     Sun Life Plaza, West Tower
   3                                                 2800, 144_4thAvenueSW
                                                          Calgary,ABT2P3N4
MOUNTAIN Resources Ltd.
December 30, 2009
                                                                         2      C     r
                                                                               -J
                                                                         0
National Energy Board                                                    zr    >
444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
Calgary, Alberta
T2POX8
Attention:       Ms. Anne-Marie Erickson
                 Acting Secretary of the Board
Dear Madam:
Re:      Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
         (Westcoast), Section 58 National Energy Act Application for Fort Nelson
         North Processing Facility Comments on Process
                                     -
In response to the letter from the National Energy Board (“Board”) dated December 9,
2009, Stone Mountain Resources Ltd. (SMR) is pleased to provide the following
comments.
SMR has a requirement for incremental processing service in the Fort Nelson resource
area and has executed an expansion agreement with Westcoast for such service. It is our
understanding that in order to meet the target in-service date of May 1, 2012, Westcoast
will need to start site work on the Fort Nelson North Processing Facility as soon as
possible. Time is therefore of the essence in processing the Westcoast application in
order to continue moving this very important project forward.
It is our further understanding that at this point the only party that appears to have raised
concerns about the Project is the Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN”). SMR believes that
the specific concerns of the DTFN can be addressed and adjudicated by the Board as part
of the current review process. Accordingly, SMR sees no need for the Board to now
initiate a public hearing.
SMR would therefore urge the Board to complete the current process by establishing
timelines for any further comments from the DTFN and for reply comments by
Westcoast, so that the Board will be in a position to thereafter issue its decision in a
timely manner.
                               STONE MOUNTAIN RESOURCES LTD.
                                PHONE: 403261.3399 FAX: 403.261.3377
 Thank you for your attention to this matter, please advise if further comments are
necessary or required.
Y7
Ha vey Klingensmith
President & CEO
Stone Mountain Resources Ltd.
                             STONE MOUNTAIN RESOURCES Lrn.
                              P1-lONE: 403261.3399 FAX: 403.261.3377
       BOUCHARD & KENNEDY RESEARCH CONSULTANTS
DENE THA’ PRESENCE IN
   NORTHEASTERN BC
Prepared for: Calliou Group, Calgary, Alberta
   on Behalf of the Dene Tha’ First Nation
                    Randy Bouchard
                      14 July 2009
 Table of Contents
1.0    INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 1
   1.1   Linguistic and Ethnic Affiliations of the Dene Tha’ ........................................................ 1
2.0    SOME DOCUMENTARY REFERENCES TO THE DENE THA’ PRESENCE IN
NORTHEASTERN BC .................................................................................................................. 4
3.0    PROPOSED DENE THA’ TRANSBOUNDARY HUNTING RESERVE ........................ 7
   3.1   Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC, As Documented in the Early 1930s ............... 7
   3.2   The Proposed 1934 Dene Tha’ Transboundary Hunting Reserve.................................. 14
4.0    CONTINUED DOCUMENTATION OF DENE THA’ TRAPPING AND HUNTING IN
NORTHEASTERN BC ................................................................................................................ 21
5.0     CONCLUSIONS............................................................................................................... 23
6.0     FIGURES ..........................................................................................................................24
 1.0       INTRODUCTION
This overview report of the Dene Tha presence in northeastern British Columbia is based on
Randy Bouchard’s literature review undertaken over a four-year period between June 2005 and
June 2009. While this review of known and available ethnohistoric, ethnographic and linguistic
source materials has been wide-ranging and thorough, it is not exhaustive. A number of sources
remain to be reviewed.
1.1       Linguistic and Ethnic Affiliations of the Dene Tha’
The Dene Tha’ have been referred to in the literature by a number of names, including: “Upper
Hay River Band of Slaves”; “Hay River Indians”; “Hay Lakes Indians”; “Chateh/Assumption
Indians”; “Slavey Indians at Hay Lake(s)”; “Upper Hay River Post Indians”; and “Bistcho Lake
Tribe.”
In 1978 the name of the “Slaves of the Upper Hay River Band” was officially changed to “Dene
Tha’.” As stated in an April 1978 Band Council Resolution, “Dene Tha’ . . .is a name which the
people have been using to address themselves for Centuries.” 1 This change of Band name was
made because the terms “Slave” or “Slavey” are derogatory and offensive to modern generations
of the Dene Tha’. According to present-day Dene Tha’, the terms “Slave” or “Slavey” came
about not because of Native terms used by neighbouring tribes to refer to the Dene Tha’, 2 but
through a series of mis-understandings by early explorers and other non-Aboriginals as to who
the Dene Tha’ really are. 3
“Dene Tha’,” the preferred ethnonym, 4 will be used wherever possible in the present overview,
together with another preferred term, “Dene” 5 —referring to single groups of Northern
1
  Band Council Resolution 1978/79 – 06, 14 April 1978, of the Slaves of the Upper Hay River Band, together with
letter of 29 June 1978 confirming this BCR, from H.H. Chapman, Registrar of Indian Land Registry, Indian and
Northern Affairs Headquarters, Ottawa. Instrument No. 59565, Indian Land Registry, Indian and Northern Affairs
Headquarters, Ottawa.
2
  See: Michael Asch (1981). Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic. Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. Pp. 347-348
3
  Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 11-12 July
2009.
4
  An ethnonym is the name used by a group of people for self-identification.
5
  A number of tribal groups speaking Athapaskan languages (see the footnote that follows) use variations of the
Native term anglicized as “Dene”—meaning ‘man’ or ‘person’—to identify themselves. See Beryl C. Gillespie
(1981). Territorial Groups Before 1821: Athapaskans of the Shield and the Mackenzie Drainage, Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 6: Subarctic. Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 168. “Dene”
also means ‘people,’ as well as ‘man’ or ‘person’ (Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to
Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
                                                        1
 Athapaskans, 6 several Northern Athapaskan peoples collectively, or to Northern Athapaskans in
general—although it will also be necessary to use the term “Slavey” (“Slave”) when citing the
literature.
The term “Slavey” (“Slave”) has commonly been used by anthropologists and linguists to refer
to the larger entity of which the Dene Tha’ are a component group. 7 Linguists Michael Krauss
and Victor Golla in 1980 referred to this larger entity as “Slavey-Hare” because their research
indicated that the groups known as Slavey, Mountain, Bear Lake and Hare all speak closely-
related dialects of the same language. Krauss and Golla classified the “Slavey-Hare” language, a
dialect of which is spoken by the Dene Tha’, as one of 23 languages comprising “Northern
Athapaskan,” a recognized geographical subdivision of the Athapaskan Language Family. 8
Anthropologist Jean-Guy Goulet, who undertook extensive research among the Dene Tha’ over a
six-year period beginning in 1979, pointed out in a recent publication that when anthropologists
adopted “Slavey” as the English term to refer to all the “Slavey proper” populations, “they
collapsed into one general category various groups dispersed over a wide area.” 9
As Krauss and Golla have pointed out, the most widely spoken of the modern dialects of the
“Slavey-Hare” language is “Slavey proper” which is the dominant dialect not only of the Dene
Tha’ communities in Alberta but also of other Dene communities in the southern North West
Territories at lower Hay River (now known as “Katlodeeche Dene”), Fort Providence (now
known as “Deh Hah Gotie Dene”), Kakisa Lake (now known as “Ka’agee Tu Dene”), Trout
Lake (now known as “Sambaa K’e Dene”), Fort Liard (now known as “Acho Dene Koe”), Jean
Marie River (now known as “Tthe’K’ehdeli Dene”), Nahanni Butte (now known as “N’ah adehe
Dene”) and Fort Simpson (now known as “Liidli Keu Dene”), and in British Columbia at Fort
6
  “Athapaskan” is an arbitrary designation introduced in the 1830’s-1840’s to denote “linguistically related Indian
groups in the interior of northwestern North America beyond the Churchill River”; see Gillespie 1981, p. 168.
7
  Asch 1981, pp. 338-339.
8
  Michael Krauss and Victor Golla (1981). Northern Athapaskan Languages. Handbook of North American Indians,
Vol. 6, Subarctic, Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., pp. 67, 79-80. In 1995, linguist
Keren Rice proposed a slightly different sub-classification in which the “Slavey-Hare” language was classified as
part of what she called the “Mackenzie” grouping in “Northwestern Canada” within the overall Athapaskan
Language Family. See Ives Goddard (1996). Introduction. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 17,
Languages. Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. Pp. 4-5.
9
  Jean-Guy Goulet (2004). The Dene Tha of Chateh: Continuities and Transformation. Native Peoples: The
Canadian Experience. Ed. by R. Bruce Morrison and C. Roderick Wilson. Published by Oxford University Press,
Toronto and Oxford. P. 160.
                                                          2
 Nelson; there are also significant numbers of Slavey speakers in Fort Wrigley (now known as
“Pehdzeh Ki Dene”) and Fort Norman. 10
While the Dene Tha’ speak one of the dialects of the “Slavey proper” division of the “Slavey-
Hare” language, they also recognize sub-dialects within their own speech area. The Dene Tha’—
sometimes written as “Dene Dháa”—refer to their speech as “Dene Dháh.” Thus, “Dene Tha’”
(“Dene Dháa”) means ‘ordinary people’ and “Dene Dháh” means ‘ordinary people’s language.’
Linguist Patrick Moore identifies three “Dene Dháh” dialects: Kegúnht’u, the Bistcho Lake
Dialect; Xewόnht’e, the Assumption/ Habay Dialect; and, Xewόnst’e, the Fort Vermilion/ Eleske
Dialect. 11 The Beaver people, who speak a different but closely-related language to the Dene
Tha’, . 12 refer to themselves as “Dene Dzaa,” 13 which is said to mean ‘real people.’ 14
10
   Krauss and Golla 1981, pp. 79-80. For the contemporary names of Slavey-speaking groups, see Michael Asch
and Robert Wishart (2004). The Slavey Indians: The Relevance of Ethnohistory to Development. Native Peoples:
The Canadian Experience. Ed. by R. Bruce Morrison and C. Roderick Wilson. Published by Oxford University
Press, Toronto and Oxford. P. 196. See also: http://www.dehchofirstnations.com/members/fort_providence.htm,
accessed on 9 May 2006.
11
    Patrick Moore and Angela Wheelock (editors) (1990). Wolverine Myths and Visions: Dene Traditions from
Northern Alberta. Compiled by the Dene Wodih Society. Published by the University of Alberta Press, Edmonton,
Alberta and the University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. Pp. xi, 94-96. Additional clarification is provided
by Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay, who points out that “Dene Tha’” means ‘regular; normal; common’ and that
“Dene Dhah” means ‘people’s language’ (Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to Tracy
Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
12
   Krauss and Golla 1981, p. 81.
13
   Robin Ridington (1981). Beaver. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic, Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., p. 350; also, personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James
Ahnassay to Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
14
   Ridington 1981, p. 350.
                                                        3
 2.0       SOME DOCUMENTARY REFERENCES TO THE DENE THA’
          PRESENCE IN NORTHEASTERN BC
A map of the Hay River valley and surrounding areas appears as Figure 1 in the present
overview report. 15
Maps of overall “Slavey” territory circa 1725 and circa 1850 appear here respectively as Figures
2 16 and 3, 17 and a map showing the approximate twentieth-century boundary of the area used
by the Dene Tha’ appears as Figure 4. 18
A map illustrating Aboriginal occupation of the Hay River area circa 1870-1875 appears in the
present overview report as Figure 5. 19
Despite the wealth of existing documents from the North West Company’s and Hudson’s Bay
Company’s Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District fur trade, there is little in this early
historical material that distinguishes the Dene Tha’ from other “Slavey-speaking” groups.
Occasionally, groups were distinguished on the basis of clothing, such as the Hare Athapaskan
being known for their use of rabbit skin, or the group who called themselves “Embayo dinnah”
being known to the traders as the “Gens de Mouten” on account of their use of sheep skin for
clothing. 20 Sometimes linguistic distinctions came to the fore when translators’ abilities were
found lacking, but culturally-similar subgroups of Athapaskan peoples remained largely
undefined until the mid-19th century. Moreover, nomenclature used during the 18th and early 19th
century fur trade was not consistently applied, a situation that researchers have acknowledged
throughout the region. 21 Traders seldom attempted to seek out knowledge of ethnonyms—the
names by which groups of people self-identified—and instead applied murky generic terms such
as “Slave” or ‘Slavey” to people of the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District; sometimes this
15
   David A. Ian Harrison (1984). Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of Site and Situation.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Alberta, Edmonton. P. 28.
16
   Diamond Jenness (1932). Tribes of the Mackenzie and Yukon Basins. In, The Indians of Canada (Sixth Edition).
National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 65, Anthropological Series No. 15. Reprinted in 1963 by the Queen’s
Printer, Ottawa. P. 378.
17
   Michael J. Asch (1981). Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic. Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 338.
18
   Moore and Wheelock 1990, p. xv.
19
   Harrison 1984, p. 101.
20
   Lloyd Keith (2001). North of Athabasca: Slave Lake and Mackenzie River Documents of the North West
Company, 1800-1821. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. Pp. 237, 333.
21
   Gillespie 1981. Pp. 161-168.
                                                      4
 identity included people known otherwise as “Beaver.” Similarly, the term “Beaver”
occasionally included groups more often identified as “Slavey” and very likely included in some
instances the ancestors of those identified today as Dene Tha’.
Not even documents remaining from fur trade activities located in the area used by the Dene
Tha’ provide acknowledgement of the Aboriginal people’s own form of identification. Instead,
semi-nomadic groups of people, when distinguished at all, were sometimes associated with a
general geographical area. An example of such a practice can be seen in the records of the North
West Company, compiled for publication by historian Lloyd Keith. Historical accounts indicate
that as early as the fall of 1806 the North West Company established a trading post on the Hay
River, at a site subsequently identified as being within the general area where ancestors of the
Dene Tha’ commonly travelled for resource harvesting. Summarizing documents of the
Company’s activities in the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River regions, historian Lloyd Keith
wrote:
                  As early as the fall of 1806, the Nor’Westers established a post on
                  Hay River, a stream that empties into Great Slave Lake near the
                  head of the Mackenzie River. Although provisioned from Fort
                  Vermilion on Peace River, Hay River Post received peltry from the
                  Slaveys of the upper Mackenzie and Liard Rivers and was intended
                  to serve as a buffer to deter any Hudson’s Bay Company expansion
                  in the direction of Mackenzie River. 22
Geographer David Harrison concluded, on the basis of his review of the documentation, that this
trading post was situated at some point upstream, on the bank of the Hay River near the junction
with the Meander River. 23 A site up the Hay River in this same area—the confluence of the Hay
and Meander Rivers—is clearly identified on Murdoch McPherson’s 1824 map as an abandoned
post. 24 McPherson had knowledge of the country, for in 1822 the HBC had ordered him to
construct a post at the confluence of the Liard and Black (Petitot) Rivers that would become
known as Fort Liard. 25
Natives identified as “Slavey,” as well as Beaver, Chipewyans and possibly an occasional
Iroquois traded at Hay River Post, although Harrison notes that the Chipewyan had to be
persuaded and induced with presents to stay in the region. Hay River became the depot for those
“Slavey” who had traded at Fort Nelson and the Mackenzie River outposts prior to the closure of
these establishments. 26 Harrison concluded that at the time the North West Company operated
22
   Keith 2001, p. 70.
23
   Harrison 1984, pp. 74-75.
24
   Keith 2001, p. 45.
25
   Keith 2001, p. 70.
26
   Harrison 1984, p.77.
                                                    5
 the Hay River Post (1806-1820), “the Slaveys inhabited the area between the western edge of the
Hay River basin and both the Liard and Mackenzie River Valleys.” 27
Oblate Missionary Émile F.S. Petitot’s toponymic work among the Aboriginal peoples of the
Athabasca-Mackenzie region from approximately 1862-1883 has been inventoried and analyzed
by Donat Savoie who provided Petitot’s classification of the “Slaves” as follows, to include the
Hay River people and the Horn Mountain people:
                  . . . The Slaves properly speaking, who are divided into People of
                  the rivière au Foin [Hay River], of lac de Truite [Trout Lake], of
                  the montagne la Corne [Horn Mountain], of the Fourche du
                  Mackenzie [Fork of the Mackenzie] and of Fort Norman . . . 28
Geographer David Harrison’s map depicting the period circa 1870-1875 shows the “Hay River
Indians” [Dene Tha’] occupying the upper reaches of the Hay River drainage in British
Columbia (see Figure 5). 29
Government records for the general region of northeastern BC are very meagre until
approximately 1930. Very little information is provided in the Treaty 8 records from 1899-1900.
As well, the subsequent records of this region in the Annual Reports of the Department of Indian
Affairs are cursory. While brief comments on this region were made every year after 1900 by
H.A. Conroy in the report of the Treaty 8 Commissioner, these are lacking in useful detail.
Because of this region’s Treaty status, it was not administered through the British Columbia
Indian Inspectorate. Instead, the area became an adjunct of the Lesser Slave Agency, in Alberta.
Since the Indian Agent was based far from the region, and generally only came to visit only once
a year, in the summer when treaty payments were made, comments about the area in the Alberta
Agency's reports in the published Annual Reports are brief and generally unhelpful. The Royal
Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia which conducted relatively
detailed investigations between 1913-1916, kept detailed records, and is generally a major source
of information on Natives throughout British Columbia, is of minimal use here. Members of the
Royal Commission did not go to this region, stating in 1916 that the region's remoteness, and the
lack of dependable information about the local Native peoples’s requirements, made a visitation
pointless until basic preliminaries like a census were undertaken. The Sessional Papers of the
Department of Indian Affairs for British Columbia contain nothing of value about the region
until about 1930; these documents indicated that northeastern BC’s Aboriginal inhabitants were
"nomads" about whom little was known. It was not until 1934 that a Sub-Agency was established
at Fort St.John within the British Columbia Inspectorate.
27
   Harrison 1984, p.77.
28
   Donat Savoie, editor 2001. Land Occupancy by the Amerindians of the Canadian Northwest in the 19th Century,
as reported by Émile Petitot: Toponymic Inventory, Data Analyses, Legal Implications. CCI Press, Occasional
Publication No. 49. Ottawa: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. P. 17.
29
   Harrison 1984, p. 101.
                                                        6
 3.0       PROPOSED DENE THA’ TRANSBOUNDARY HUNTING RESERVE
The 1934 plan to set aside a very large transboundary “hunting reserve” for the exclusive use of
the Dene Tha’—encompassing the northwestern corner of Alberta, the northeastern corner of
British Columbia, and portions of the southern North West Territories—came about, in part,
because of concerns raised in the early 1930s when it was realized by government officials that
Dene Tha’ people had been trapping in northeastern BC “for generations.”
3.1       Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC, As Documented in the Early 1930s
One of the first government documents that refers to the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC
in the early 1930s is a radiogram of 5 March 1932 from the Commissioner of the BC Police to
his Commanding Officer in Prince George. The Commissioner stated he had been contacted that
same day by the Indian Commissioner for BC who complained that “some Hay Lake Indians”
[Dene Tha’] who had been trapping in northeastern BC “had been sent out of the Province,” even
though, he added, these same Native people, by Treaty, “are allowed to trap in British
Columbia.” 30
Further details about this incident were provided on 7 March 1932 by W.E. Ditchburn, the Indian
Commissioner for BC, who wrote to BC Provincial Game Commissioner Bryan Williams.
Ditchburn and said that it was reported in a 4 March 1932 telegram from Indian Affairs
Headquarters in Ottawa that a telegram had been received that same day from “Chief Tallay
Slave Band Haylakes, B.C.” complaining that:
                  ‘Police at Haylakes has ordered immediate vacation of Haylake
                  Indians from British Columbia who have trapped district for
                  generations.’ [underlining added]. This means added privation.
                  Please endeavour to have this order cancelled and wire reply. These
                  Indians have no reserve if chased from hunting grounds this winter
                  means hardship . . . 31
This same incident was also noted in Lesser Slave Lake Indian agent Napoleon L’Heureux’s
diary entry for 4 March 1932 where he wrote that the “Hay Lakes Chief” had wired him that
same day, “stating that the B.C. Police had ordered immediate evacuation of Indians from B.C.
and requesting the Dept. to endeavour to cancelle [sic] this order.” 32
30
   Radiogram of 5 March 1932 from the Commissioner of the BC Police, Victoria, to the Officer Commanding F
Division, Prince George. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
31
   Letter of 7 March 1932 from W.E. Ditchburn, Indian Commissioner for BC, Victoria, to A. Bryan Williams, BC
Provincial Game Commissioner, Victoria. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
32
   Glenbow Museum and Archives, Calgary, Alberta. M2216, Accession No. 35, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agency
Papers. Daily Journals kept by the Indian Agents, 1911-1937. Box 2, Journal entry for 4 March 1932 by Indian
                                                       7
 It was Ditchburn’s opinion, as expressed in his 7 March 1932 letter to BC Game Commissioner
Williams, that evicting these Hay Lakes [Dene Tha’] Alberta people from BC was wrong
because “the Indians in the western part of Alberta have by Treaty the right to trap in that part of
the Province of British Columbia west of the central range of the Rocky Mountains, as this right
is given to them under the conditions of Treaty No. 8 . . .”. Ditchburn concluded that in light of
the Game Wardens’ “misunderstanding on this point,” Williams should:
                  take such action as will permit of the full terms of this Treaty,
                  particularly with regard to the matter of hunting, trapping and
                  fishing, being carried out to the fullest extent by notifying your
                  Game Wardens to permit of the Indians coming under Treaty No. 8
                  continuing their trapping, hunting and fishing in that part of British
                  Columbia lying west of the central range of the Rocky Mountains. 33
Williams’ initial response to this 7 March 1932 letter of Ditchburn’s was firm. On 10 March
1932 Williams wrote that he was “very much inclined to think that we have every right to
prevent these Indians [the Dene Tha’] coming here.” He cited Section 6 of the Game Act which
at that time, he noted, specified “no Indian who is not a resident shall hunt of kill game in the
Province [of BC] at any time.” Thus Williams concluded “my Wardens who are enforcing the
Game Act are perfectly right in turning these Indians back.” While he acknowledged Treaty
rights to hunt, trap and fish, Williams pointed out that “such rights are subject to such
Regulations as my from time to time be made by the Government of the country.” Williams
concluded his letter by stating that he would seek the views of District Game Warden T. Van
Dyk on this same matter. 34
Also on 10 March 1932, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agent Napoleon L’Heureux wrote in his
journal:
                  Received reply from Ottawa re telegram of the 4th inst. stating that
                  the Province [BC] had been requested to allow Slave [Dene Tha’]
                  Indians to continue to trap in B.C. as formerly, as provided with
Agent Napoleon L’Heureux.
33
   Ditchburn to Williams, 7 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
34
   Williams to Ditchburn, 10 March 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                      8
                   treaty. Wired H.B. [Hudson’s Bay Company] Manager to notify
                  Indians. 35
Van Dyk was quick to respond to Williams’ request for his views on the subject of the Dene
Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC. On 15 March 1932 he sent a brief report to Williams that was
entitled “Alberta Indians (Hay Lakes) [Dene Tha’] trapping in British Columbia.” According to
Van Dyk, it had been the Game Department’s custom to enforce the Game Act in its entirety. He
also pointed out that “special instructions have been issued from time to time regarding Section
6, to the Constables and Game Wardens in the Peace River and Fort Nelson Districts.” Van Dyk
added that during the last two years he had given “special instructions to enforce Section 6” to
the Fort Nelson Game Warden, in response to complaints about “Alberta Indians” trapping in
northeastern BC. It was Van Dyk’s position that Section 6 of the Game Act should be
“maintained and enforced.” 36
Acknowledging Van Dyk’s report on 18 March, 1932, Williams commented that “what you have
written is almost identical with my answer [of 10 March 1932] to Mr. Ditchburn on the subject.”
Williams instructed Van Dyk “to continue to keep these Indians [Dene Tha’] out [of BC] until it
is absolutely proved that we have not the power to do so.” 37
Meanwhile Ditchburn, who was not satisfied with Williams’ response of 10 March 1932, wrote
directly to R.H. Pooley, the BC Attorney-General. In a 15 March 1932 letter to Pooley,
Ditchburn described the situation of the “Hay Lakes Indians” trapping in northeastern BC,
referenced Williams’ views on this as set out in his 10 March 1932 letter, and asked for Pooley’s
views “as to whether Section 6 of the British Columbia Game Act overrides the conditions
mentioned in Treaty No. 8.” Ditchburn concluded his letter by stating:
                  If I am right in my contention then I would strongly recommend
                  that Section 6 of the British Columbia Game Act be so amended at
                  the present Session by making provision that the Indians under
                  Treaty No. 8 will in future be permitted to enjoy the privileges
                  guaranteed to them when they surrendered their interest in the
                  territory covered by the Treaty mentioned. 38
35
   Glenbow Museum and Archives, Calgary, Alberta. M2216, Accession No. 35, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agency
Papers. Daily Journals kept by the Indian Agents, 1911-1937. Box 2, Journal entry for 10 March 1932 by Indian
Agent Napoleon L”Heureux.
36
   Report of Van Dyk to Williams, 15 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
37
   Williams to Van Dyk, 18 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
38
   Ditchburn to Pooley, 15 March 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                       9
 However, the views of the BC Game Department would soon change, as a result of a remarkable
“patrol report” dated 20 April 1932 by J.S. Clark, the Fort Nelson Game Warden. 39 This report
is discussed below.
Game Warden Clark, assisted by his colleague, Special Game Warden B. Villeneuve and using
two trains of sled dogs and toboggans, undertook a 90-day patrol between 21 January and 19
April 1932, covering a total distance of 1,430 miles between Fort Nelson and Hay Lakes,
Alberta, via the Shikillie, Hay, Black [Petitot] and Fontas Rivers. The primary object of this
patrol, according to Clark, was “to see that there were no infractions of the B.C. Game Laws by
the Alberta trappers.” Clark described the patrol as one of the most difficult ever undertaken
from the Fort Nelson detachment. The patrol was made during one of the worst winters in 20
years, with temperatures ranging from 10 to 60 degrees below zero, almost continuous winds,
and deep snow. And to make matters even worse, there were no accurate maps of this entire
region, and no boundaries had been demarcated on the ground between northeastern BC and
northwestern Alberta. 40 As Clark described the situation:
                  . . . The rivers and lakes that are on our maps are nothing like what
                  is actually in the country. You could never travel by any of the
                  maps or you would be sure to be lost. There has been no survey of
                  this country made, the outline of lakes and drainage is more or less
                  heresay. I could have got twenty convictions had there been a
                  boundary line cut . . .The B.C. Government is losing every year
                  about two thousand dollars in revenues, by not having this line [the
                  BC/Alberta boundary] cut out. . . 41
Clark pointed out that there was much more game in northeastern BC than in northwestern
Alberta:
                  The country between N.W.T. line and Kotcho Lake and thence to
                  the Alberta line is one of the very best Fur countrys in Western
                  Canada. While I was in the Shikillie River country I never seen
                  better fur signs and Beaver dams to e found all over the country,
                  and Big Game such as Moose and Caribou can be found all the way
39
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934. . Extracts from this same report are found in: LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
40
   It was not until the early 1950s that the Alberta–British Columbia Boundary Commission arranged for the
northern portion (i.e., north of approximately 57 degrees 30 minutes latitude) of their common boundary to be
surveyed and marked. See: Report of the Commission Appointed to Delimit the Boundary between the Provinces of
Alberta and British Columbia, Part IV, 1950-1953. Published by the Office of the Surveyor General, Ottawa, 1955.
41
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                          10
                   up and down the Shikilie River, and the same on the Black [Petitot]
                  River, and the Hay River. 42
When Clark was in the Hay Lakes area of Alberta in early April 1932 as part of this patrol, he
said that the “Hay Lakes Indians” [Dene Tha’] told him that “there has never been an Alberta
Game Warden at Hay Lakes or any where in that country” and that he (Clark) was “the first
Game Warden or Policeman to see Hay Lakes.” According to Clark, there was at this time at
Hay Lakes, Alberta “an Indian settlement with 29 hunters and 3 Fur-trading posts.” He noted
also that “20 of these Indians [from Hay Lakes] have trap-lines running into B.C.” Some of these
traplines, Clark added, “come within a short distance of Hay River, others West of the Shikilie
River [underlining added]. 43
The situation of the Dene Tha’ people at Hay Lakes, Alberta, as Clark described it in the winter
of 1932, was rather difficult, to say the least. Indeed, this situation moved Clark profoundly, as
indicated in the following observations he made in his report:
                  There was nothing I could do with these Indians even if I had
                  caught them on their lines, because these Indians are absolutely
                  destitute and starving . . .During the war [World War I] I seen lots
                  of poor people in Germany and France but I never seen anything
                  like what we have on the Boundary at Hay Lakes. I never had such
                  a pitiful job in my life when I advised these Indians, that only B.C.
                  Indians are given trapping privileges in B.C. The old people sat
                  there and cried, they told me I could not find enough food in any
                  one of their camps to feed one of my dogs for one night, which I
                  am sure was the truth, they told me that they had trapped towards
                  Hay River and the Shikilie River for generations [underlining
                  added] . . .The agent has never been to Hay Lakes, nor has any
                  Game Warden or Policemen been to see them . . .These Indians
                  informed me that, their agent told the chiefs at the Upper Hay River
                  last summer [1931] at treaty time that, the Indians could trap any
                  where, meaning Alberta, B.C. and N.W.T. as provided by their
                  treaty. [underlining added] 44
Clark was faced with a serious problem. As he put it, “There’s no question in my mind but
something has got to be done for these Hay Lake Indians trapping into B.C. ” He felt there were
3 options for these Aboriginal people: 1) give them special privileges to “trap into B.C. as they
42
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
43
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
44
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                     11
 have been doing”; 2) or, the Indian Department “will have to make them take up residence in
B.C.”; 3) or, “they will have to be kept out of B.C.” 45
Clark recommended the first of these three options. He envisaged a situation that would work
along the same lines as one already in place, in which “The N.W.T. Dept allow[s] the Alberta
and B.C. Indians to trap into the N.W.T. and Royaltys [sic] are taken care of by the Traders [fur-
traders] and paid to an agent the Postmaster at Fort Vermilion.” In recommending this plan,
Clark noted again that these Hay Lakes people [the Dene Tha’] “made their living in the Hay
River and Shikilie country for generations.” [underlining added]. To this he added:
                  I am sure it would be very much to the advantage of our dept to
                  allows these Indians to trap there [in northeast BC] providing they
                  register their trap-lines and royaltys paid on their Furs. I can attend
                  to their applications for registration. The Fur-traders at Hay Lakes
                  informed me that they would be only to[o] glad to pay the Province
                  from which the Furs are trapped in. 46
Divisional Game Supervisor T. Van Dyk forwarded Clark’s 20 April 1932 report to the BC
Game Commissioner, Bryan Williams, with a note that stated:
                  The work of our Game Wardens J.S. Clark and B. Villeneuve is
                  worthy of comment and I respectfully suggest that same be brought
                  to the attention of the Honorable the Attorney-General. 47
It is clear that Clark’s April 1932 report strongly influenced Williams’ previously-stated views
concerning the Dene Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC. In a 28 June 1932 letter to W.E.
Ditchburn, Indian Commissioner for BC, Williams stated the Clark report put this matter “in an
entirely different light.” Because of Clark’s report, Williams now said there was “no cause for
my fears.” Consequently Williams stated that:
                  . . . with the sanction of the Attorney General, I propose giving
                  serious consideration to the question of allowing these Indians to
                  register their trap lines exactly as our own Indians [of BC] do, in
                  accordance with the suggestion made by Game Warden Clark. 48
45
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
46
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
47
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
48
   Williams to Ditchburn, 28 June 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                     12
                     Williams concluded his letter by drawing Ditchburn’s attention to
                    the plight of the Hay Lakes Indians, as set out in the Clark report.
                    As well, Williams said he would be writing to Clark and
                    “sanctioning his action in this matter.” 49
One day later, on 29 June 1932, Williams wrote a similar letter to Van Dyk. He
referred to the Clark report as “extremely interesting” and again noted that this
report “places the matter of the Hay Lake Indians in an entirely different light.” 50
Williams advised Van Dyk by letter of 30 July 1932 that “after consulting the
Attorney-General in regard to this matter, it has been decided that you may
instruct Game Warden Clark to carry out his suggestion with regard to registering
these Indians [Hay Lake, i.e. Dene Tha’], and getting royalty collected by their
agent.” 51
Documents in this same file suggest the system of registration and royalty
collection that Clark suggested in April 1932 was in place by December 1932, and
that Dene Tha’ trappers began registering their trapping areas in northeastern BC
that same month (December). Clark stated in a letter/report of 18 January 1935
that when he was on patrol in this region in December 1932, he “received Ten
applications from the Hay Lake Indian’s [Dene Tha’] for registration of trap-
lines”. 52 This number of registrations is put into context by Clark’s statement that
when he was at Hay Lakes in the winter of 1932, there were 20 Hay Lakes
Aboriginal people [Dene Tha’] who were trapping in British Columbia. 53 By
1938, there were approximately 23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC Game
Department as trapping in the Fort Nelson District. 54
49
   Williams to Ditchburn, 28 June 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
50
   Williams to Van Dyk, 29 June 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
51
   Williams to Van Dyk, 30 July 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
52
   Letter/report of Clark to Williams, 18 January 1935, re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s in British
Columbia.. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934. In another GR 1085 document, Clark
stated that he was again in Hay Lakes, Alberta in December 1932, so presumably it was at this time he made these
initial ten trapline registrations for the Dene Tha’. See Clark to Van Dyk, 21 April 1933. BCA, GR 1085, Box 24,
File 9.
53
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
54
   BCA, GR 1085, Box 39, File 5.
                                                          13
 3.2       The Proposed 1934 Dene Tha’ Transboundary Hunting Reserve
Section 3.1 of the present overview report discusses the documentary record leading up to
December 1932 when the Dene Tha’ began to register their traplines in northeastern BC.
While historical documents from the early 1930s that have been reviewed to date give only a
general indication as to how far westward into BC the Dene Tha’ trapping activities extended at
that time—i.e.“West of the Shikilie River” [underlining added] 55 —a document from the late
1940s suggests that Fort Nelson was within the overall region used by the Dene Tha’ during the
course of their annual round of sustenance activities in former times. This document is a
December 1948 Indian Affairs report by Fort Vermilion Indian Agency Superintendent Neil
Walker in which he mentions that the “Hay Lakes Indians” [the Dene Tha’] “moved around” as
far west as Fort Nelson “in the olden days”:
          These people in the olden days were free to move around from Hay Lake to Fort
          Nelson in northern British Columbia, the Lower Hay River [in the NWT] and
          Great Slave Lake [in the NWT]. [underlining added] They would winter wherever
          winter caught up with them and they lived mainly off the country . . . 56
Another document from the late 1940s stated that “a large block in British Columbia” had been
registered in the name of the Hay Lake [Dene Tha’] people; this “large block,” the boundaries of
which were not provided in this particular document, was said to be “the ancestral trapping
grounds of the people of the Hay Lake area” [underlining added]. 57
This issue of the westward extent of the Dene Tha’ into British Columbia was taken into
consideration in 1934 when a transboundary Hunting Reserve for the Dene Tha’ was proposed,
as will be discussed below.
Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agent Napoleon L’Heureux indicated in a 12 September 1934 letter to
the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs (DSGIA) in Ottawa that he and the DSGIA
had “recently” discussed the establishment of a transboundary Hunting Reserve “exclusively for
the use of Treaty Indians of the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta who were so
unfortunate as to be deprived of their traplines where their registration has been made
compulsory.” In this same letter, L’Heureux proposed that a large tract of land be set aside for
this purpose, whose boundaries he recommended as follows:
55
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
56
   Neil Walker, 3 December 1948. Extract of letter from the Superintendent of the Fort Vermilion Indian Agency,
Neil Walker, to the Superintendent of Welfare. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6734, File 420 – 2 – 2 – 1 1.
57
   Report, Fort Vermilion (From Autumn of 1947 to the last day of March, 1951). Pp. 1 and 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol.
8444, File 775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02426A; Dene Tha’
document No. 2-5613A].
                                                         14
                     The South boundary to be a line running from East to West by 58
                    degrees 30 minutes latitude, the West boundary by 122 degrees
                    longitude, the North boundary to be as far North in the North-West
                    Territories as the Administration may grant and the East boundary
                    by 118 degrees longitude. 58
L’Heureux ended this letter by requesting that Ottawa advise him if the Department found such a
proposal to have practical value. A minute on the letter indicates that it was sent on for comment
to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for Alberta. 59
According to L’Heureux’s figures, this proposed Hunting Reserve would extend approximately
75 miles westward into BC from the BC/Alberta border, and about 105 miles southward into BC
from the BC/North West Territories border.
While L’Heureux, as stated above, had suggested the proposed Hunting Reserve was to be set
aside “exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians of the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta
who were so unfortunate as to be deprived of their traplines where their registration has been
made compulsory,” other more senior officials clearly understood it was for the exclusive use of
the Dene Tha’. For example, the Inspector of Indian Agencies for the Alberta Inspectorate, M.
Christianson, referring to L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter in his own letter of 27
September 1934 to the Secretary of Indian Affairs in Ottawa, referred to this as “a hunting
reserve exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River, which
location is in the Northwest corner of the Province of Alberta.” 60 There is no doubt whatsoever
that this is a reference to the Dene Tha’.
Christianson’s 27 September 1934 response to L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 proposal was not
encouraging. He stated it was “questionable whether the area mentioned in the Agent’s letter
could be set aside, being approximately 140 miles in breadth and 227 miles in length . . .making
it necessary for us to deal with three different governments.” As well, Christianson pointed out
that on the basis of information he had gathered, the Dene Tha’ “hunt mostly along the border of
Alberta and go into British Columbia, and some of them may, at times, go into the North West
Territories.” It was Christianson’s recommendation that the Indian Department take up the
matter individually with the three governments in question, but that it might be first of all
58
   Letter of Indian Agent N.P. L'Heureux to Dr. H.W. McGill, Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 12
September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02233; Dene Tha’ document No. 4024].
59
   L'Heureux to McGill, 12 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 6733, File 420-2X.
60
   Letter of M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta Inspectorate, to the Secretary [A.F. MacKenzie],
Department of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 27 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X. A copy of this
letter also exists in: BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                         15
 prudent for someone to visit the people at Hay Lakes and determine “the exact location as to
where these Indians have hunted in the past and wish to hunt in the future.” 61
It should be noted, however, that the known and available materials reviewed to date do not
indicate whether or not this very sensible suggestion of Christianson’s—to visit the Dene Tha’
and determine from them exactly where they have hunted in the past and wish to hunt in the
future—was ever followed up.
Having received Christianson’s 27 September 1934 letter, the Secretary of Indian Affairs, A.F.
MacKenzie on 6 October 1934 forwarded it to C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian Commissioner for
BC, in Victoria, and requested that Perry give it his attention and prepare a report on this matter.
MacKenzie also referred in his letter to this proposed Hunting Reserve as being set aside
“exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [Dene Tha’]. 62
When Christianson had first met the Dene Tha’ the previous year, 1933, he reported that the 460
Band members “live here and there throughout that part of the country and I understand that
quite a number of them live at Hay Lakes.” 63 The Acting Secretary of Indian Affairs used the
figure of 500 when he advised R.A. Gibson, Acting Deputy Minister of the Department of the
Interior, how many people would be affected by the reservation of the proposed lands. The plan,
in his view, would protect not only the interests of the Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River people
[the Dene Tha’], but would be in the interests of game conservation, as well. 64
The area proposed for the Dene Tha’ Hunting Reserve, almost 32,000 square miles in size, was
marked on a sketch map and blueprint, a copy of which was forwarded to various government
representatives, along with the request that they confer with their respective governments as to
the proposal’s viability. The map, itself, which followed the boundaries set out by Indian Agent
L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter (as discussed above), appears in the present report as
Figure 6. 65 The letter transmitting this map was written on 23 October 1934 by Indian Affairs
Secretary A.F. MacKenzie to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta
61
   Christianson to the Secretary of Indian Affairs, 27 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X.
62
   Letter of the Secretary of Indian Affairs, A.F. MacKenzie to C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian Commissioner for
BC, 6 October 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
63
   Memorandum of M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta, to Dr. H. McGill, Indian Affairs,
Ottawa, 24 July 1933. INAC Headquarters, Ottawa. Copy on file 775/30-3-212, Vol. 1. Surveys and Reserves,
Upper Hay River Reserve No. 212, Fort Vermilion Agency.
64
   Acting Secretary, Indian Affairs, to R.A. Gibson, Acting Deputy Minister of the Department of the Interior, 27
October 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X. [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02238; Dene Tha’ document No. 4029].
65
   The source of this map is: LAC, RG 10, Volume 11947, File 147/30-1, FA 10-105 [entered into Federal Court
Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02237A; Dene Tha’ document No. 4301A].
                                                          16
 Inspectorate, in response to Christianson’s letter to MacKenzie of 27 September 1934.
MacKenzie in this 23 October 1934 letter referred to the area in question as a “hunting reserve
exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [i.e. Dene Tha’]. 66
Responding to MacKenzie’s 23 October 1934 letter, Christianson on 9 November 1934 said that
he expected to meet with Alberta officials within several days concerning the proposed Hunting
Reserve for the “Indians of Upper Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [Dene Tha’]. He also noted
that MacKenzie was himself going to take up this matter with BC Government officials and with
the North West Territories Commission. And Christianson again referred to the position he had
taken, as set out in his 27 September 1934 letter, that is, the territory being requested “was
excessive to the requirements of these bands of Indians.” He ended his letter by stating: “I
believe we should go thoroughly into the matter of what these Indians [the Dene Tha’] actually
need, before this vast territory is set aside . . .”. 67
C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, responding to MacKenzie’s 6 October 1934
request to investigate the matter of this proposed Hunting Reserve with BC officials, reported on
23 November 1934 that he had travelled to Vancouver on 19 November. There Perry met with
Provincial Game Commissioner Cunningham and Inspector Butler of the Game Department to
seek their views. They decided to obtain additional input from the Fort Nelson Game Warden,
J.S. Clark, which would supplement his 1932 report, especially since the Commissioner thought
that there may be irregularities in the trapline records. Hence, Perry decided to wait for a
supplemental report from the Fort Nelson office, acknowledging that this might take some time
due to the remoteness of this area. 68 MacKenzie wrote to Christianson in Alberta on 28
November 1934 to advise him that the BC Game Department in consultation with Mr. Perry was
investigating the situation of the Hay Lake and Upper Hay River Indians’ [Dene Tha’] hunting
and that the results of this “will be communicated to the department at an early date.” 69
On 23 November 1934, Inspector F.R. Butler of the BC Game Department transmitted to the
Commanding Officer of the Game Department in Prince George, a copy of a letter dated 22
66
   Letter from A.F. Mackenzie, Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian
Agencies, Calgary, Alberta, 23 October 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 11947, File 147/30-1, FA 10-105 [entered into
Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02237; Dene Tha’ document No. 4301].
67
   M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for Alberta, to Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 9
November 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02241; Dene Tha’ document No. 4033].
68
   C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, to the Secretary of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 23 November
1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No.
02243; Dene Tha’ document No. 4034].
69
   A. Mackenzie, Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for
Alberta, 28 November 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as
Crown document No. 02244; Dene Tha’ document No. 4035].
                                                        17
 Novermber 1934 that he (Butler) had received from C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian
Commissioner for BC. Butler noted that Perry’s 22 November letter contained Indian Affairs’
correspondence relating to the proposed “exclusive hunting territory” for the “Treaty Indians at
Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River [Dene Tha’], in British Columbia and elsewhere.” As well,
Butler acknowledged Perry’s understanding that he (Butler) was awaiting a report from Game
Warden J.S. Clark of Fort Nelson. 70
Butler also stated in his 23 November 1934 letter to the Commanding Office of the Game
Department in Prince George that he was transmitting “a copy of the Game Regulations on
which I have marked the territory which the Indian Department desires set aside as an exclusive
hunting area for the Indians mentioned [the Dene Tha’].” He ended his letter by stating that he
wanted to have a “full and complete report” from Fort Nelson Game Warden Clark, together
with this Prince George Officer’s recommendations, “as soon as possible.” 71
The hand-drawn sketch map that Butler transmitted to Perry on 23 November 1934 appears in
the present overview report as Figure 7. 72 It differs in several ways from the map which has been
discussed above (and appears here as Figure 6) and which follows the geographical boundaries
set out in Indian Agent L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter. To begin with, Butler delineated
only the proposed boundaries in BC. He did not indicate the proposed boundaries in Alberta or in
the NWT, as L’Heureux had done. While Butler’s western boundary of the proposed Dene Tha’
Hunting Reserve in BC was the same as L’Heureux’s (122 degrees of longitude, which extends
about 75 miles west of the BC/Alberta border), Butler’s southern boundary extended about 32
miles further south to 58 degrees latitude, which is about 137 miles southward into BC from the
BC/North West Territories border.
Inspector T. Van Dyk, the officer in charge of “D” Division of the Game Department in Prince
George, to whom Butler’s 23 November 1934 letter and its enclosures had been sent, transmitted
these materials to the Fort Nelson Detachment of the Game Department [to the attention of
Game Warden Clark] on 27 November 1934. Van Dyk’s instructions and observations, as set out
in this letter, were as follows:
                  In reporting on this matter it would be advisable to show all Indians
                  registerd in the area claimed for the Hay Lake Indians, shown on
70
   The source of Butler’s letter is: F. R. Butler, BC Game Department Inspector, to the Commanding Officer of the
Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-
1934. The source of Perry’s letter is: C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, to F.R. Butler, BC Game
Department Inspector, 22 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
71
   Butler to the Commanding Officer of the Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085,
Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
72
   Map entitled “area claimed for Hay Lake Indians,” accompanying Butler’s letter to the Commanding Officer of
the Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-
1934.
                                                         18
                   the enclosed Map, and in order to cover the subject in its entirety
                  make a copy of the Map of N.B.C. [northern BC] and show all
                  Indian trap-lines entered on your map.
                  I am positive that it will be impossible to give the Hay Lake
                  Indians the area claimed, as it comes very close to Fort Nelson, and
                  the Fort Nelson Indians must be given consideration. The white
                  trappers in the area must also be protected in so far as their
                  registered trap-lines are concerned. 73
Van Dyk ended his letter by requesting that Clark give this matter his very close
attention and report back on this matter “as quickly as possible.” 74
 It was almost two months later that Van Dyk received the report he had requested. This was in
the form of a two-page report by Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, dated 18 January 1935
and entitled “Re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s [sic] in British Columbia.” Clark began
his report by saying that while he had “every respect and sympathy” for these Aboriginal people
[the Dene Tha’] and thoroughly understood “the condition they are living under,” he could see
“no justified reason why a game reserve should be made in the area in question, that is the
British Columbia area . . .”. Clark added the following concerning his views on this situation:
                  The Game Commissioner [of BC] has given permission for these
                  Indian’s of Hay Lakes to be properly registered in British
                  Columbia, which entitles them to the same privileges as other
                  British Columbia trappers. During my patrold to that district in
                  December 1932, I received Ten applications from the Hay Lake
                  Indian’s for registration of trap-lines in British Columbia under
                  most advantageous conditions and I am doing by best to give the
                  protecton from poachers . . . 75
Clark then went on to say that when he took over the Fort Nelson detachment in 1928, “not one
of the Nelson [Fort Nelson] Indian’s had made application for registration of trap-lines, and were
determined not to register.” He said that he managed, however, to explain the meaning of
registration to them and that now [1935] the Fort Nelson Aboriginals were “all well satisfied”
with their registered traplines. Clark also said that he was enclosing a copy of a map of northern
BC “showing the Fort Liard, Franceways, Nelson Forks, Snake River, Fort Nelson, Fontas,
Indian trap-lines running into the territory claimed for the Hay lakes Indian’s.” (This map does
73
   T. Van Dyk, Inspector in Charge of “D” Division Game Department, Prince George, to the Fort Nelson
Detachment of the Game Department [to the attention of J.S. Clark, Game Warden], 27 November 1934. BCA, GR
1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
74
   Van Dyk to the Fort Nelson Detachment of the Game Department, 27 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
75
   “Re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s [sic] in British Columbia.” Report by Game Warden J.S. Clark to the
Officer [T. Van Dyk] Commanding “D” Game Division, Prince George, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                      19
 not accompany this letter in the file and has not been found in the materials reviewed to date). He
continued:
                    If the territory is given to the Hay Lakes, our [Fort Nelson] Indian’s
                    that are trying to conserve their lines will not want Hay Lakes
                    Indian’s taking their territory over. There are also about Twenty
                    white trappers that have registered trap-lines, and some have had
                    them for the last ten years . . .they will have to be taken into
                    consideration. 76
                    Clark ended his report by stating: “I would respectfully ask that
                    instead of a Game reserve being made, that registered trap-lines in
                    British Columbia be given the Hay Lakes Indian’s.” 77
There is one other letter/report concerning this proposed Hunting Reserve for the Dene Tha’ that
exists from this same approximate time period. It is from T. Van Dyk, Inspector in charge of the
“D” Division Game Department Office in Prince George, is dated 19 February 1935 and
addressed to the BC Game Commissioner, and is found in the same file as the 18 January 1935
report by J.S. Clark. But it is incomplete. Only the last page exists, and it is not known how
many pages preceded it. In the first paragraph of the final page of Van Dyk’s report, he states:
                    From the enclosed sketch it is evident that the setting aside of a
                    trapping area for the Hay Lake Indians in British Columbia is out
                    of the question, as it will be impossible to dispossess the trappers,
                    whites and Indians alike, registered in the area. 78
                    Van Dyk then goes on to say that the BC Game Department is
                    accepting applications “from Hay Lakes Indians [Dene Tha’] who
                    can prove that they have trapped in B .C. over a period of years”
                    and points out a number of such applications have already been
                    registered, with others pending. In the last paragraph of his
                    letter/report, Van Dyk states:
                    I recommend that we continue to register the Hay Lake Indians
                    [Dene Tha’] who have proof that they trapped in B.C. over a period
                    of years, but the wholesale registration of all Hay Lake Indians in
                    B.C. will be impossible and not quite fair to our own Indians and
                    white trappers. 79
76
   J.S. Clark to T. Van Dyk, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
77
   J.S. Clark to T. Van Dyk, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
78
   [Incomplete] letter/report to the BC Game Commissioner re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indians in BC by T.
Van Dyk, Inspector in charge of “D” Game Division, Prince George, 19 February 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
79
   [Incomplete] letter/report by T. Van Dyk, 19 February 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians,
1932-1934.
                                                       20
 4.0      CONTINUED DOCUMENTATION OF DENE THA’ TRAPPING
         AND HUNTING IN NORTHEASTERN BC
Situated in the remote northwest of Alberta, the bands of the Fort Vermilion Agency, which had
until 1947 been part of the Lesser Slave Lake Agency that included northeastern British
Columbia, seldom received a visit from an Indian Affairs’ representative, and then it was
generally only at the time the assembled members received their Treaty annuity payment. The
known and available records that have been reviewed to date indicate little knowledge of these
Aboriginal people had been recorded prior to about 1930.
As noted also in Section 3.1 of the present report, the documentary record shows
that by 1938 there were approximately 23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC
Game Department as trapping in the Fort Nelson District, 80 and an August 1943
report stated there were 37 Dene Indians from Hay River [Dene Tha’] who had
registered traplines in northeastern BC. 81
Superintendent S.C. Knapp of the Fort Vermilion Agency compiled a report for the period 1947-
1951 in which he pointed out that the boundaries of the Agency legally stretched to the
Alberta/BC border, although the Aboriginal people in this Agency trapped in Alberta, BC and
the NWT. This report estimated that in the late 1940s, 38 families of the Upper Hay River Band
[Dene Tha’] trapped in BC. 82 This same report stated that “a large block in British Columbia”
had been registered in the name of the Hay Lake [Dene Tha’] people; this “large block,” the
boundaries of which were not provided in this particular document, was said to be “the ancestral
trapping grounds of the people of the Hay Lake area” [underlining added]. 83
On June 18th, 1952, representatives from Alberta and BC, along with representatives from the
Department of Indian Affairs, met at Hay Lakes to discuss with the Upper Hay River band what
measures could be taken to conserve the trapping resources. 84 Present were 78 Upper Hay River
band trappers with traplines in Alberta and BC,along with the Chief and a Councilor. According
to the Minutes of the meeting, a considerable amount of time was spent finding new lines for
80
   BCA, GR 1085, Box 39, File 5.
81
   “Report on Registered Trap Lines in Alberta and General Trapping Conditions” by Fur Supervisor J.L. Grew, 14
August 1943. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6743, File 420-2-2- 3.
82
   Report, Fort Vermilion (From Autumn of 1947 to the last day of March, 1951). P. 1. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File
775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02426A; Dene Tha’ document
No. 2-5613A].
83
   1947-1951 Fort Vermilion report, pp. 1 and 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File 775/23-4, pt. 1.
84
   Fort Vermilion Indian Agency: Quarterly Report Ending 30th June 1952. P. 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File
775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-300-99 as Crown document No. 2025A; Dene Tha’ document
No. 2-5625A].
                                                        21
 young men without licenses, in addition to locating an area where widows and old men without
traplines might trap to the exclusion of all others. The assembled members agreed that those
found trapping in this reserved area, who held traplines, “would be dealt with similarly to the
Alberta Game Act, under the poaching clause.” 85 For the convenience of the BC game officials at
Fort Nelson, it was also agreed that the Upper Hay River Ranger would handle beaver permits
for trappers using the BC block.
Surveyors with the Alberta – British Columbia Boundary Commission in 1951-1952 observed
that trappers using the area north of the Petitot River were “from the Upper Hay River and Hay
Lake, belonging to the Slavey tribe.” 86 Hence, the surveyors recognized the trappers as Dene
Tha’. Several years later, it was discovered that the cleared Alberta – BC boundary transected at
least two traplines, that of Paul Metchooyeah and Alexis Seniantha, both members of the Upper
Hay River Band. The problem was resolved by separating the blocks and restricting them to a
single province, so that Paul Metchooyeah and his sons would be registered in Alberta and use
portions of both traplines that were in Alberta, and Alexis Seniantha and his son would stay in
BC and use portions of both traplines that were in BC. 87 Additional meetings were held in 1955
with BC and Alberta game wardens to clarify the location of traplines with the intention of
reducing overcrowding in certain areas. 88 It was resolved that certain Dene Tha’ trappers would
be registered on a BC block, if the government was successful in purchasing the line from its
current holder. 89
85
   Minutes of Band Meeting, Records of Council Talks and Conference of Game Officials for Hay Lake, of the
Upper Hay River Slave Band, June 15th - 20th, 1952. INAC, HQ CR. File 775/3-6, Volume 1 (7/50 – 3/69), L3-167.
[entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 792].
86
   Report of the Commission Appointed to Delimit the Boundary between the Provinces of Alberta and British
Columbia: Part iv, 1950-1953. Published by the Office of the Surveyor General, Ottawa, 1955. Page 67. Surveyor
C.B.C. Donnelly, in charge of the crew marking the boundary line between Alberta and the NWT in 1951-1952
commented that two trap lines were intersected between Hay River and the BC border. It has not been possible to
determine the location of these two traplines, and Donnelly did not comment on the ethnic identity of the trappers,
but he did note that one of traplines crossed the boundary “near Mon. [survey monument] 375” and “led to a lake 8
miles distant” that was “full of Jumbo White Fish averaging 5 lbs. each.” See C.B.C. Donnelly’s Surveyor’s Reports
for the Alberta/North West Territories Boundary Commission: Phase 2, Winter Season 1951-52. Land Survey
Records, Surveyor General’s Office, Natural Resources Canada, Headquarters, Ottawa. No. 23387, p. 13.
87
   Band Minutes of the Upper Hay River Slave Band Held on the Hay Lake Reserve, June 6th, 1954. INAC, HQ File
775/3-6, Volume 1 (07/50 – 03/69). [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 827B].
88
   Minutes of Council and Band Meeting Held at Hay Lakes Community Hall by Slave Band Members June 15,
1955. INAC, HQ-CR, File 775/3-6, Volume 1 (07/50 – 03/69). [entered into Federal Court Action T-300-99 as
Crown document No. 4325A; Dene Tha’ document No. 6445A].
89
   Minutes of the Upper Hay River Slave Band. Council Meeting Held March 31st , 1955 in Hay Lake Council Hall.
INAC, HQ-CR. File775/3-6, Volume 1, L3-167 (7/50 – 3/69) [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 864A].
                                                         22
 5.0      CONCLUSIONS
This overview report has focused on the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern British Columbia
and has been based on a literature review undertaken over a four-year period between 2005 and
the present date. While this review of known and available ethnohistoric, ethnographic and
linguistic source materials has been wide-ranging and thorough, it has not been exhaustive. A
number of sources remain to be reviewed.
The literature review indicates that northeastern BC was within overall Dene Tha’ traditional
territory, although there is little in the early North West Company and Hudson’s Bay Company
documents to distinguish the Dene Tha’ from other “Slavey-speaking” groups. Moreover,
Government records from northeastern BC are very meagre until approximately 1930.
Beginning in the 1930s, the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC began to be recorded in a
number of documentary sources. Dene Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC caused problems for BC
government officials at this time because these Aboriginals were not registered trapline holders,
and there were calls to evict them from BC. However, a reconnaissance patrol by the Fort Nelson
Game Warden in early 1932 across northeast BC and over to Hay Lakes in northwest Alberta led
to a better understanding of Dene Tha’ patterns of land use. As a result, a decision was taken to
allow those Dene Tha’ who were trapping in northeast BC to register their traplines with the BC
Game Department. The actual registrations began in December 1932. By 1938, there were about
23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC Game Department as trapping in northeast BC, and in
1943, a total of 37 Dene Tha’ were said to have registered traplines in this same region.
A number of source documents identify the Dene Tha’ presence in northeast BC. One 1932
document stated that the “Hay Lakes Indians” (Dene Tha’) had trapped in northeastern BC “for
generations”; a late-1940s report described northeast BC as “the ancestral trapping grounds of
the people of the Hay Lake area” (Dene Tha’).
What has not been determined with certainty, on the basis of the historical documents reviewed
to date, is how far westward into northeast BC these trapping and hunting activities of the Dene
Tha’ extended. A 1948 document said that the Dene Tha’ “in the olden days” roamed as far west
as Fort Nelson. A 1932 document stated they trapped “West of the Shikilie River.”
In 1934, Indian Affairs officials proposed the establishment of a large transboundary “Hunting
Reserve” exclusively for the Dene Tha’, encompassing northwestern Alberta, northeastern BC
and portions of the southern North West Territories. As proposed, this Hunting Reserve extended
about 75 miles westward into BC from the Alberta/BC border, and either 105 or 137 miles
southward into BC from the NWT/BC border. However, this proposed Hunting Reserve was
never established.
                                                  23
 Figure 1 : David A. Ian Harrison 1984. Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of Site and Situation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography,
Unviersity of Alberta, Edmonton. P. 28
 Figure 2 : Diamond Jenness 1932. Tribes of the Mackenzie and Yukon Basins. In, The Indians of Canada (Sixth Edition). National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 65, Anthopological Series
No.15. Reprinted in 1963 by the Queen’s Printer, Ottawa. P. 378
 Figure 3: Michael J. Asch 1981. Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol.6, Subarctic.
Published by the Smithonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 338.
 Figure 4: Patrick Moore and Angela Wheelock 1990 (editors). Wolverine Myths and Visions:
Dene Traditions from Northern Alberta. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press. P. xv.
 Figure 5: David A. Ian Harrison 1984. Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of
Site and Situation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography, University of
Alberta, Edmonton.P.101
 Figure 6: Map of 1934 proposed transboundary “hunting reserve” set aside “exclusively for
the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River [Dene Tha’].”
Library and Archives Canada, Ottawa. RG 10,Vol.11, 947, ﬁle 147/30-1
                                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Interim Report
                                                                                             EnCana Cabin Gas Plant
Figure 7: “Area claimed for Hay Lake Indians [Dene Tha’].” British Columbia Archives, Victoria.
GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934
Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory
          – Northeastern BC
                 Prepared for
            Dene Tha First Nation
              31 October 2009
                 Prepared by
                                  207 Edgebrook Close NW
                                           Calgary, Alberta
                                         T3A 4W5 Canada
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                         List of Contributors
Technical Review,
Project Management                                  Dr. Petr Komers, P. Biol.
Data Analysis, data management                      Mr. Zoran Stanojevic, B.Sc., M.F
Review and Research Support                         Ms. Sarah Hechtenthal, M.Sc., P. Biol.
                                                                                           Page ii
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                                               PAGE
1.0      INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 1
2.0      REMOTENESS AS AN ECOSYSTEM SERVICE............................................................ 3
         2.1      Past and Current Disturbances ........................................................................................................ 3
         2.2      Projected Decrease of Natural Surface.......................................................................................... 6
3.0      MOOSE .............................................................................................................................. 7
         3.1      Evidence of Moose Habitat Use in Disturbed Areas................................................................... 7
         3.2      Moose Use Habitat Less When Fragmented and in Low Supply ............................................. 7
         3.3      Evidence of Moose Habitat Decline in the BC Focus Area....................................................... 8
4.0      RECOMMENDATIONS AND CLOSURE ...................................................................... 9
5.0      REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 11
                                                      LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Satellite Images Covering the DTFN TLU Focus Areas in AB and BC ............................................... 2
Figure 2:         Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development on Natural Surfaces in the BC
                  Focus Area............................................................................................................................................. 5
Figure 3: The projected conversion of all natural land cover to industrial surface, including areas
                  of zones of influence, in the BC Focus Area................................................................................. 6
Figure 4: Moose pellet group density (indicating intensity of habitat use) in moose habitat
                  increases as the amount of moose habitat increases in the landscape (up to
                  approximately 70%, there were no landscapes with more than 70% moose
                  habitat in them; reprinted from Stewart 2007)............................................................................ 8
Figure 5:         Possible Moose Habitat in the BC Focus Area...........................................................................10
                                                 LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A:       Change of Land Cover Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                Page iii
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
1.0           Introduction
Wildlife habitat and vegetation communities entail resources traditionally used by First Nations. The
disturbance of these resources directly affects traditional land use (Freeman 1994, NRBS 1996) and,
using satellite imagery, can be measured as the change in terrestrial land cover (Seto et al. 2002). In the
environmental management context, changes in the environment require that traditional resource use
adapts to the changes. The environment varies naturally and the societies that developed in that
environment are resilient or able to withstand the challenges of environmental variability (Folke et al.
2003). However, if the magnitude of disturbance pushes the system beyond its natural variability into a
different state and different set of controls, then social resilience may not be able to withstand that shift
(Folke et al. 2003). For ecologists, therefore, the task is to provide the information on the amount of
environmental variability including the degree of ecological disturbance that may lead to the system
shifting into a different state with a different set of controls (Gordon et al. 2008).
When undertaking this work, we were mindful that a significant concern of the Dene Tha’ First Nation
(DTFN) is the impact of industrial development (existing and future) upon the exercise of the Treaty
and Aboriginal rights (hereafter “Treaty Rights”). We have been advised by DTFN that those rights
include the right to carry on traditional resource-based activities within their traditional territory, such
as hunting, trapping, fishing and gathering.
MSES Inc (MSES) was retained to measure the changes in land cover within certain portions of the
Traditional Land Use (TLU) area of DTFN. In this study, the focus area is located in B.C. south of 60˚ N
(Figure 1). The total area that was analyzed is 31,908 km2 . For the purpose of this study we focus on
the disturbance of traditional lands which we understand to mean the loss of natural land cover resulting
from development or human activities. Natural land cover presumably includes the vegetation and the
wildlife required to exercise Treaty Rights compared with areas where there has been industrial
development, which (as explained below) do not permit the exercise of Treaty Rights or make it much
more difficult for DTFN to do so.
To calculate the rate of disturbance from the past to the present and into the future it was necessary to
determine the density of linear disturbance (such as roads, pipelines, or power lines) and the area of the
footprint disturbance (such as plant sites and well pads), asking the following overarching questions:
•    how much of each kind of activity (linear and footprint disturbance) was there previously;
•    how much of each activity is there currently; and
•    how much of each activity will there be in the future if current rates of development continue?
                                                                                                      Page 1
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                         Figure 1: Satellite Images Covering the DTFN TLU Focus Areas in AB and BC
                                                                                                                   Page 2
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.0           Remoteness as an Ecosystem Service
In this section, we focus on the “deprivation of traditional lands”. These lands include ecosystems, and
the biological diversity contained within them, that provide a stream of services which are essential for
the well being of people. There are very basic, essential life-supporting ecosystem system services such
as the provisioning of food (wildlife and vegetation), water and air. However, there are also less tangible
cultural, spiritual, and aesthetic services (Daily 1997). Through such essential services, ecosystems
sustain societal development and progress (Folke et al. 2003). Remoteness appears to be among the
essential ecosystem services as First Nations often comment on industry disturbing their experience of
remoteness which they require to exercise their traditional activities (ACFN 2003, FMA 2009,
Woodward & Company 2009).
Here, we focus on natural land surfaces that include the vegetation and the wildlife required to exercise
Treaty Rights versus surfaces disturbed by industrial activities which do not provide for the exercise of
those rights or which make it much more difficult to do so.
2.1           Past and Current Disturbances
The rate of disturbance through industrial activities was calculated based on satellite imagery. Using a
series of satellite Landsat5 images we calculated the yearly rate of converting natural surfaces to
industrial ones from 1993 to present (as captured in the satellite image of 2008). We applied a change
analysis using publically available data which were processed based on the image algebra method which
allows one to compute the change in each pixel between two images of different dates (see Appendix A
for detailed methods).
In our ecological research and evaluations we typically find that animals avoid the disturbance by humans
near industrial activities. This area in the vicinity of industrial features is typically called a “zone of
influence” (ZOI). Moreover, in our experiences working with First Nations, we have learned that local
hunters and trappers also avoid the areas near industrial activities. Consequently, in addition to analyzing
the effects of direct vegetation clearing and the simple length of linear corridors, we have applied a ZOI
around each footprint and each linear industrial feature.
A 250 m ZOI around the footprints of developments and the centerlines of linear corridors was applied
based on the potential for reduced animal activity and hunting and trapping activity near industrial
features. The distance of 250 m was chosen because, for example, moose sign (such as tracks or faecal
pellets) was found to be reduced within 200 m of roads (Rolley and Keith 1980), woodland caribou
avoid industrial features within about 250 m (but avoidance could be greater or smaller for some
features during some seasons, Dyer et al. 2001), and other mammals have been observed to avoid
industrial features within this distance (Forman et al. 2003). Birds in woodlands have also been observed
                                                                                                      Page 3
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
to avoid roads, power lines and seismic lines by up to about 300 m depending on species and ecological
context (Kroodsma 1982, Machtans 2006, Bayne et al. 2008). Our own measurements in wildlife surveys
and field courses with university students and graduate student research show similar avoidance effects
(Appendix E from Imperial Oil Resource Venture Ltd. 2005, Gavin and Komers 2006 and Parent 2008).
Finally, the authors of the recent Terrestrial Ecosystem Management Framework (in North-Eastern
Alberta) also used the 250 m zone of influence in their calculation of disturbance when planning regional
land use, adopting the understanding that animals are disturbed within this distance from industrial
features.
Clearly, the ZOI differs widely with parameters such as wildlife species, the type of industrial features
and related activities, and the ecological context (reproductive cycle, hunting or predation regimes,
habitat structure and quality). However, it appears that in the absence of detailed information on any of
these parameters the 250 m distance is a reasonable approximation for a zone within which First
Nations could not effectively exercise their Treaty Rights.
Assuming that the sensory disturbance includes a ZOI of 250 m near any industrial feature, of the
31,908 km2 land area in the BC portion of this study, 19% was disturbed in 1993, 27% in 2002, and 31%
in 2008 (Figure 2).
Combining all linear developments that we could detect on the Landsat images, by the year 2008, there
were 21,041 km of linear corridors in the BC portion of this study, representing a density of
0.66 km/km2. To put this density into context, there may be density thresholds of seismic lines of as low
as 0.3-0.8 km/km2, depending on the ecological context, at which caribou and moose populations may be
excluded from the area, or predator and hunting controls would need to be implemented (Weclaw &
Hudson 2004). At 0.66 km/km2 some thresholds may be reached or exceeded. In such a case, the
effectiveness of traditional resource use near linear corridors could be compromised.
                                                                                                   Page 4
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                        Figure 2:        Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development on Natural Surfaces in the BC Focus Area
                                                                                                                                 Page 5
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.2                                            Projected Decrease of Natural Surface
If one assumes that the yearly rate of disturbance remains constant in the future at 260 km2 per year, as
it was in the past 15 years, then the projected disturbance of all natural land cover will be 100% by
about the year 2095 (Figure 3). In other words, past the year 2095 there will be no area left where a
person could go to be farther than 250 m away from an industrial feature. However, if development
intensifies to include activities such as shale gas exploration and development, the date when all natural
cover will be disturbed could be substantially sooner than 2095.
As to the density of linear corridors, 586 km are added to the area each year. This leads to a doubling of
the linear corridor density in about 35 years. If 100% of the land cover will be disturbed by the year
2095, then the density of linear corridors will be 2.2 km/km2. These estimates only reflect major linear
corridors that can be detected by satellite images at a resolution of 25 m (our experience indicates that
satellite image analysis detects only about 36% of seismic lines). This means that most thinner
developments remain undetected in our analysis, but it is well known that seismic lines affect wildlife
distribution (Dyer et al. 2001, Weclaw & Hudson 2004, Sorensen et al. 2008). In other words, because
of the relatively low resolution of satellite images, our projection of disturbance underestimate the
actual effects.
                                            35000
                                            30000
        Undisturbed Land Area (square km)
                                            25000
                                            20000
                                            15000
                                            10000
                                            5000
                                               0
                                               1950         1970        1990       2010       2030        2050       2070       2090     2110
                                                                                              Year
                                            Figure 3: The projected conversion of all natural land cover to industrial
                                               surface, including areas of zones of influence, in the BC Focus Area.
The black diamonds and line represent actual measurements from the satellite image analysis. The first diamond, in
      1964, represents the area of the BC Focus Area and is an approximation, showing that some time before
                                                    developments, this amount of land area was available for traditional resource use.
                                                                                                                                                Page 6
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
3.0           Moose
3.1           Evidence of Moose Habitat Use in Disturbed Areas
There is a great deal of evidence that moose do not readily use disturbed areas. For example, in the Oil
Sands Region (North-Eastern Alberta), no moose sign on reclaimed or disturbed sites has been found by
Suncor Energy Inc in either their 2007 Annual Conservation & Reclamation Report for the Millennium Mine
or their Wildlife Monitoring Program March 2006 for the Firebag Project. Similarly, no moose sign has been
reported by either Shell (Shell Canada Energy Jackpine Mine Phase 1) or Albian Sands (Albian Sands
Energy Inc Muskeg River Mine) on their reclaimed areas. Moreover, no empirical documentation of
moose re-establishment has been provided by Syncrude in their 2006 Closure and Reclamation Plan.
Finally, moose used wildlife corridors significantly less near disturbed areas compared to undisturbed
control areas (Golder Associates 2008). Numerous other studies conducted by MSES researchers
showed similar relationships of moose avoiding industrial disturbance in the Kananaskis Country
(Alberta), in the Mackenzie Valley (NWT), and in Alaska (USA).
3.2           Moose Use Habitat Less When Fragmented and in Low Supply
Based on the findings above that moose avoid industrial features, one could expect that, at a regional
scale, moose would be less abundant where industrial disturbance is high. Accordingly, increased
fragmentation and decreased habitat availability result in higher isolation of moose habitat patches and
smaller patch size of moose habitat. Moose have been found to use small and isolated habitat patches
less often because it may not be worthwhile for moose to reach them (Figure 4, Stewart 2007). The
implication is that the number of moose in an area declines faster than expected from the decline in
habitat availability alone because moose are unlikely to use habitat patches that are small and far apart.
Moreover, surveys conducted by regulatory agencies or private industry between the years 1960 and
2008 in the Oil Sands Region showed that moose density is declining in that region. The declining trend
is statistically highly significant (Spearman rank order correlations rs=-0.52, N=44, p<0.001, analysis
based on Table 5-1, Attachment 1 of Suncor 2008). The declining trend of moose population density
appears to coincide well with the declining availability of moose habitat in the Oil Sands Region.
                                                                                                     Page 7
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
             Figure 4: Moose pellet group density (indicating intensity of habitat use)
   in moose habitat increases as the amount of moose habitat increases in the landscape
        (up to approximately 70%, there were no landscapes with more than 70% moose
                             habitat in them; reprinted from Stewart 2007)
There is a great deal of evidence from research in landscape ecology that fragmentation and isolation of
habitat patches affects the ability of animals using the patches (Collingham et al. 2000, Laurance et al.
2002). Research on moose in Alberta appears to support this evidence (Stewart 2007).
3.3           Evidence of Moose Habitat Decline in the BC Focus Area
The rate of decline in habitat availability was calculated based on satellite imagery. Using a series of
satellite Landsat5 images we calculated the yearly rate of disturbing moose habitat between 1993 to
present. We applied a change analysis as described in Section 2.1 and Appendix A of this report.
Moose habitat in the BC Focus Area declined from 8,134 km2 (in 2002) to 7,061 km2 (in 2008). This
represents a loss of 13% of moose habitat or a yearly loss of 77 km2 from the originally available (in
1993). Moose habitat was determined by calculating the area of vegetation communities that are
preferred by moose. The data on distribution of vegetation communities were obtained from federal
mapping sources (Canadian Forest Service, Pacific Forestry Centre, EOSD Land Cover Classification).
However, the accuracy of both the vegetation maps and the preference of moose for any given
vegetation community should be tested in the BC Focus Area, because we have currently no field data
that would allow us to verify our assumptions for this particular area.
                                                                                                  Page 8
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
We also assumed that habitat normally preferred by moose that is within 250 m of industrial features is
avoided by moose; therefore, we assumed all habitat within 250 m of industrial features as having been
disturbed. Our assumption is based on many ungulate studies in peer-reviewed literature (Rolley and
Keith 1980, Dyer et al. 2001, Forman et al. 2003, Gavin and Komers 2006) as well as our own
measurements in wildlife surveys and field courses with our students. The Alberta Sustainable Resource
Development, in its Terrestrial Ecosystem Management Framework (in North-Eastern Alberta) also used
the 250 m zone of influence in their calculation of disturbance when planning regional land use, adopting
the understanding that animals are disturbed within this distance from industrial features.
In conclusion, the declining availability of moose habitat combined with an increasing fragmentation of
the habitat has probably already resulted in local reductions of moose density. If the disturbance trend
continues, the moose population within the BC Focus Area will likely cease to be viable within a few
decades. A map depicting the declining availability of moose habitat and increasing fragmentation
between 1993 and 2008 in the BC Focus Area is provided in Figure 5.
4.0           Recommendations and Closure
Information is now needed on how much land is “sufficient land” to exercise traditional rights. In other
words, an analysis is essential to show how much land a First Nation requires to exercise its rights. Is
the remaining 69 % in the year 2008 sufficient for this purpose? If yes, how much more development can
occur until the threshold is reached when First Nations can no longer exercise their rights in the BC
focus area? Whether it is at the current state or at some future development scenario, the observed
rate of development begs the question: Will the First Nations and their culture disappear from the
landscape or will regional development planning somehow accommodate the existence of First Nations?
Our results provide a basis for discussion between the DTFN and industry and government, with the
hope that such discussion will lead to avenues by which the DTFN can be involved in regional land use
planning, setting targets and thresholds that would achieve a balance between industrial development
and effective traditional land use.
                                                                                                   Page 9
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                                     Figure 5: Possible Moose Habitat in the BC Focus Area
                                                                                                           Page 10
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
5.0           References
Bayne, E.M., L. Habib and S. Boutin. 2008. Impacts of chronic anthropogenic noise from energy-
         sector activity on abundance of songbirds in the boreal forest. Conservation Biology, 22:
         1186–1193.
Collingham, Y.C. and B. Huntley. 2000. Impacts of habitat fragmentation and patch size upon
         migration rates. Ecological Applications, 10, 131-144.
Daily, G. 1997. Nature's services: Societal dependence on natural ecosystems. Washington:
         Island Press.
Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Neill, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2001. Avoidance of industrial development by
         woodland caribou. J. Wildl. Manage., 65, 531-542.
FMA Heritage Inc. 2009. Traditional Knowledge Study, Chipewyan Prairie Déné First Nation
         Meg Energy Corporation Christina Lake Regional Project, Phase 3. FMA 147908.Tk
Folke, C., J. Colding and F. Berkes. 2003. Synthesis: building resilience and adaptive capacity in
         social-ecological systems. In: Navigating Social-Ecological Systems, Building Resilience for
         Complexity and Change, ed. by F. Berkes, C. Folke, and J. Colding, Cambridge
         University Press, Cambridge, pp. 352-387.
Forman, R.T., D. Sperling, J.A. Bissonette, A.P. Clevenger, C.D. Cutshall, V.H. Dale, L. Fahrig,
         R. France, C.R. Goldman, K. Heanue, J.A. Jones, F.J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and
         T.C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: science and solutions. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
         USA.
Freeman, M. 1994. Social and human issues associated with large scale land clearing and
         development of boreal ecosystems. Executive summary of a workshop on the impacts of
         land clearing on the hydrologic and aquatic resources of boreal forests in Alberta,
         November 18 and 19, 1994. Northern River Basin Study Project Report 63.
Gavin, S.D. and P.E. Komers. 2006. Do pronghorn (Antilocapra americana) perceive roads as a
         predation risk? Canadian journal of Zoology, 84:1775-1780.
                                                                                               Page 11
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Golder Associates Ltd. 2008. Jackpine mine - Phase 1 wildlife corridor monitoring, Year 2
         annual report 2007. Prepared for Shell Canada Limited.
Gordon, L.J., G.D. Peterson and E.M. Bennett. 2008. Agricultural modifications of hydrological
         flows create ecological surprises. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 23, 211-219.
Imperial Oil Resources Ventures Ltd. 2005. Wildlife models used in the assessment of potential
         effects of the Mackenzie Gas Project. Prepared by AMEC Americas; submitted to the
         Northern Gas Project Secretariat, Exhibit Number J-IORVL-00072.
Kroodsma, R.L. 1982. Edge effect on breeding forest birds along a power-line corridor. The
         Journal of Applied Ecology, 19, 361-370.
Laurance, W.F., T.E. Lovejoy, H.L. Vasconcelos, E.M. Bruna, R.K. Didham, P.C. Stouffer,
         C. Gascon, S.G Laurance and E. Sampaio. 2002. Ecosystem decay of Amazonian
         fragments: a 22 year investigation. Cons. Biol., 16, 605-618.
Machtans, C.S. 2006. Songbird response to seismic lines in the western boreal forest: a
         manipulative experiment. Can. J. Zool., 84, 1421-1430.
Northern River Basin Study 1996. Report to the Ministers; Section 3.4 Traditional Knowledge.
         Canada, Alberta, Northwest Territories. ISBN 0-662-24356-0
Parent, A. 2008. Monitoring protected areas: habitat use of ungulates in the Evan Thomas
         provincial recreation area. April 18th 2008, Environmental Science 505, University of
         Calgary.
Rolley, R.E. and L.B. Keith. 1980. Moose population dynamics and winter habitat use at
         Rochester, Alberta, 1965-1979. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 94, 9-18.
Seto, K. C., C. E. Woodcock, C. Song, X. Huang, J. Lu, and R. K. Kaufmann. 2002. Monitoring
         land-use change in the Pearl River Delta using Landsat TM. International Journal of Remote
         Sensing 23:1985-2004.
Sorensen, T., P.D. McLoughlin, D. Hervieux, E. Dzus, J. Nolan, B. Wynes, and S. Boutin. 2008.
         Determining sustainable levels of cumulative effects for boreal caribou. Journal of Wildlife
         Management 72:900-905.
                                                                                              Page 12
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Stewart, A. 2007. The effects of habitat amount and fragmentation on ungulates in the Alberta
         foothills: mosaic versus binary perspectives. A thesis submitted to the faculty of
         graduate studies in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
         Science, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Alberta.
Suncor. 2008. Suncor Energy Ltd., application for approval of the Suncor Energy MD9 Mine
         Waste Dump; Supplemental Information Requests, Attachment 1; submitted to the
         Alberta ERCB.
Weclaw, P. and R.J. Hudson. 2004. Simulation of conservation and management of woodland
         caribou. Ecological Modelling, 177, 75-94.
Woodward & Company Barristers and Solicitors Law Corporation. 2009. Interviews conducted
         with ACFN Community Members in December 2008 and January 2009.
                                                                                         Page 13
         Appendix A
Change of Land Cover Analysis
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
1.0           Change of Land Cover Analysis
We estimated the change in the landscape based on the:
1) digitized linear disturbances that are visible on the Landsat5 images at a 1:50,000 scale;
2) change analysis of the Landsat images which extracts areas that have been changed between two
     consecutive images; and
3) footprints digitized from regulatory applications for the planned and approved projects that are not
     yet visible on the most current image.
Linear disturbances that were visible on the Landsat images were digitized and used as a separate layer
of lines. We did not have any reliable information on the width of linear disturbances because they do
not have a footprint per se, unless they were buffered by 250 m (see below), so as a result, the change
analysis only addresses footprints of non-linear developments such as clearings, facilities, mining
operations, etc.
The Landsat images used for the analysis were taken in 1992, 2002 and 2008. The image resolution was
30 x 30 m and they were orthorectified using geodetic and elevation control data to correct for
positional accuracy and relief displacement. Large blocks of Landsat data were adjusted through a
patented procedure that uses pixel correlation to acquire tie-points within the overlap area between
adjacent Landsat images (USGS 2008). Ground control points were fixed, and images were projected to
the Universal Transverse Mercator map projection. All bands were individually re-sampled, using a
nearest neighbour algorithm. The result is a final product with a Root Mean Square Error of better than
50m in positional accuracy (USGS 2008). To estimate the disturbances other than linear, we performed
a change analysis using data processing based on the image algebra method (Wickware and Howarth
1981, Singh 1989 and Stanojevic et al. 2006).
The image algebra method is based on a mathematical manipulation of the values of two input images.
Methods within the image algebra method include: simple differencing, image regression, and image
rationing. Rationing and regression are useful when considering more than two dates because a common
relationship is established between the images in an effort to normalize areas of non-change. We have
used the simple differencing method, which employs a simple equation for the differencing of a common
band of imagery for two image dates as shown below:
                                           Dijk = BVijk(1) – BVijk(2) + c
                                                                                                Page A-1
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
where: Dijk = change in pixel value
         BVijk(1) = brightness value at time 1
         BVijk(2) = brightness value at time 2
         c = constant
         i = line number
         j = column number
         k = band number
The image algebra method allows the analysts to define the level of change that they are interested in
describing. In our analysis, we specified that the change in pixel value had to be at least 10%. We
compared the satellite image from 1992 to the images from 2002, and the image from 2002 to the image
from 2007 in the south and 2008 in the north, in order to detect changes caused by anthropogenic
disturbances between these periods of time.
The 4th or 5th image bands were used for differencing within the image pairs. These were used to
minimize the atmospheric effects on the spectral signature of any given land cover type. A raster file was
created based on the output of this image differencing. The output raster file depicted all pixel changes
greater than (approximately) 10% between the two dates. In some cases, the bands being compared
were evaluated for minor differences in reflectance unrelated to changes in cover type. Discrepancies
were treated by evaluating and matching the histograms of the bands used in the analysis. This process
aided in the reduction of in-between scene variability as a result of potential differences in atmospheric
conditions.
All of the raster files depicting change were compared with the image pairs to ensure that the
appropriate data were captured. In order to reduce the data “noise” that resulted from the processing
routine, the initial processed data set was re-processed using a filter to eliminate the smaller, scattered
clusters of pixels that were less than 0.27 ha in size (3 pixels). Upon visual inspection of the image pairs,
the vast majority of these small, scattered clusters of pixels appeared to indicate “natural” and/or
phenological changes, such as varying water levels in wetlands and lakes, or varying leaf colour and
cover. In some cases, the filter eliminated linear disturbances such as roads, seismic line, etc., but these
were manually re-inserted into our “anthropogenically-disturbed” data layer during the visual checking
stage.
An unsupervised isodata clustering process was also applied to the image files in order to provide an
additional dataset to assist in determining whether specific identified changes were anthropogenically-
caused disturbances. Clusters which fell into both classes were identified as “crossovers” and these
pixels were subjected to another round of isodata clustering (with a greater number of specified classes)
                                                                                                    Page A-2
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
and then classified accordingly. This complementary data layer was especially useful in identifying areas
affected by wildfire.
In addition to the classification of pixel clusters in the differencing output raster files, the analyst
manually “cleaned” the borders of some of the detected changes. Some of the changes that were
eliminated by the “noise” filter that was performed were manually recovered and added back into the
data set of anthropogenically-disturbed clusters. The pixels classified as “anthropogenically-disturbed”
were used to create a digital disturbance layer.
1.1           Disturbance Buffer (Zone of Influence)
A disturbance buffer or zone of influence of 250 m around the footprints of developments and the
centerlines of linear corridors was arbitrarily applied based on the potential for reduced animal activity
and hunting and trapping activity near industrial features. The distance of 250 m was chosen because, for
example, moose sign was found to be reduced within 200 m of roads (Rolley and Keith 1980), caribou
avoid industrial features within about 250 m (but avoidance could be greater or smaller for some feature
during some seasons, Dyer et al. 2001), and other mammals have been observed to avoid industrial
features within this distance (Forman et al. 2003). Birds in woodlands have also been observed to avoid
roads, power lines and seismic lines by up to about 300 m depending on species and ecological context
(Kroodsma 1982, Belisle et al. 2001 and Machtans 2006).
Clearly, the zone of influence differs widely between the species, the type of industrial features and
related activities, and the ecological context (reproductive cycle, hunting or predation regimes, habitat
structure and quality). However, it appears that, in absence of detailed information on any of the
situations, the 250 m distance is a reasonable approximation for a zone within which First Nations could
not effectively exercise their rights.
1.2           Atmospheric Correction
The solar spectrum electromagnetic radiation signals that satellites collect are affected by aerosols and
gases in the atmosphere. Performing atmospheric correction on the satellite images can account for this
modification and lead to improvements in classification and detection, and therefore, atmospheric
correction problems have received considerable attention from researchers in remote sensing who have
devised a number of solution approaches. Sophisticated approaches are computationally demanding and
have only been validated on a very small scale (Tucker and Sellers 1986), and, in fact, some researchers
have determined that atmospheric correction is unnecessary in many cases (Tucker et al. 2004).
                                                                                                 Page A-3
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
We addressed the issue of atmospheric influence in our study by first creating a cloud-water mask and
then performing differencing using only spectral band 4 or 5, because these are less influenced by
atmospheric conditions. Other studies also dropped the bands most influenced by atmospheric effects
from their analyses (Skole and Tucker1993, Collins and Woodcock 1994, and Foody et al. 1996).
1.3           Accuracy Analyses
Accuracy assessments determine the quality of the information derived from remotely sensed data
(Congalton and Green 1999). We include both qualitative-positional and quantitative-classification
assessments.
In previous assessments we tested the accuracy of our disturbance mapping over a large area. In
qualitative assessments, we determine if we correctly assigned disturbed versus undisturbed classes by
comparing the class extracted from the imagery with what we see on the ground. In other words, we
tried to answer the simple question: does the map correctly show what is on the ground? We visited a
number of sites and we travelled along major roads to verify the existence of disturbances that we
detected on the Landsat images.
Quantitative assessments attempt to identify and measure remote sensing-based error such as
misclassification. There are two main types of common errors including omission (underestimation) and
commission (overestimation). Processes that use medium and low resolution images produce larger
errors than high resolution images. In this part of assessment, we compared our data derived from
Landsat images with reference data. As a reference, we used AltaLis 1:20,000 transportation data sets.
Data were obtained from four randomly selected sheets from the National Topographic System (NTS).
Each NTS sheet covered 215 km2.
The main reasons for the selection of the data from AltaLis were data accuracy, availability and cost.
According to AltaLis, “The 1:20,000 Base Feature dataset is the most accurate and detailed of the Base
products, and was created to populate GIS applications” (AltaLis 2008). Base Features is a GIS-ready
dataset that has been compiled internally within the Provincial Government since 1996, and is now
available to the private sector through its distributor, AltaLIS Ltd. The Base Feature Project merged,
connected, updated, restructured, revised, and attributed several topographic themes covering our
study area, using various resources such as provincial 1:20 000 Provincial Digital Mapping Program
(accuracy ± 5 m), Indian Remote Sensing satellite imagery (accuracy ±25 m) and other data sources
including Orthophoto imagery, Aerial photography, and Spot imagery (accuracy ±10 m).
                                                                                               Page A-4
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.0           References
AltaLis. 2008. Bring data to life; base overview. Website accessed 8 October 2008:
         http://www.altalis.com/products_base.html).
Belisle, M. and C.C.S. Clair. 2001. Cumulative effects of barriers on the movement of forest
         birds. Conservation Ecology, 5.
Collins, J.B. and C.E. Woodcock. 1994. Change detection using the Gramm-Schmidt
         transformation applied to mapping forest mortality. Remote Sensing of Environment 50,
         267-279.
Congalton, R. and K. Green. 1999. Assessing the accuracy of remotely sensed data: principles
         and practices. CRC/Lewis Press, Boca Raton, FL. 137 pp.
Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Neill, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2001. Avoidance of industrial development by
         woodland caribou. J. Wildl. Manage., 65, 531-542.
Foody, G.M., G. Palubinska, R.M. Lucas, P.M. Curran, and M. Honzak. 1996. Identifying
         terrestrial carbon sinks: classification of successional stages in regenerating tropical
         forest from Landsat TM data. Remote Sens. Environ. 55, 205-216.
Forman, R.T., D. Sperling, J.A. Bissonette, A.P. Clevenger, C.D. Cutshall, V.H. Dale, L. Fahrig,
         R. France, C.R. Goldman, K. Heanue, J.A. Jones, F.J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and
         T.C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: science and solutions. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
         USA.
Kroodsma, R.L. 1982. Edge effect on breeding forest birds along a power-line corridor. The
         Journal of Applied Ecology, 19, 361-370.
Machtans, C.S. 2006. Songbird response to seismic lines in the western boreal forest: a
         manipulative experiment. Can. J. Zool., 84, 1421-1430.
Rolley, R.E. and L.B. Keith. 1980. Moose population dynamics and winter habitat use at
         Rochester, Alberta, 1965-1979. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 94, 9-18.
                                                                                         Page A-5
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Singh, A. 1989. Digital change detection techniques using remotely-sensed data. International
         Journal of Remote Sensing, 10(6):989-1003.
Skole, D. and C. Tucker. 1993. Tropical deforestation and habitat fragmentation in the Amazon:
         satellite data from 1978 to 1988. Science 260: 1905-1910.
Stanojevic, Z, P. Lee and D.G. Gysbers. 2006. Recent anthropogenic changes within the
         Northern Boreal, Southern Taiga and Hudson Plains Ecozones of Quebec. Global Forest
         Watch            Canada.            Website    accessed      8     October         2008:
         http://www.globalforestwatch.ca/change_analysis/downloadQC.htm. Report needs more
         info for access.
Tucker, C.J. and P.J. Sellers. 1986. Satellite remote sensing of primary production. International
         Journal of Remote Sensing 7, 1395-1416.
Tucker, C.J., D.M. Grant and J.D. Dykstra. 2004. NASA’s global orthorectification Landsat data
         set. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 70(3): 313-322.
USGS. 2008. Landsat orthorectified TM imagery (Landsat_Ortho_TM); Product Readme. USGS
         Earth Resources Observation and Science Centre (EROS) Website Accessed September
         2008: http://Edcsns17.Cr.Usgs.Gov/Nsdp/Tm_Readme.htm.
Wickware, G.M. and P.J. Howarth. 1981. Change detection in the Peace-Athabasca delta using
         digital Landsat data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 11, 9-25.
                                                                                          Page A-6
         Ramshorn Canada Investments Limited
                                                                                        2010 JAN 13 A       : 59
 January 12, 2010
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
Calgary, Alberta
T2P 0X8
Attention:         Ms. Anne-Marie Erickson
                   Acting Secretary of the Board
Dear Madam:
Re:       Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission (Westcoast),
          Section 58 National Energy Act Application for Fort Nelson North Processing Facility              -
          Comments on Process
Following are the comments of Ramshorn Canada Investments Ltd (Ramshorn) in response to the letter
from the National Energy Board (“Board’) dated December 9, 2009.
Ramshorn has a requirement for incremental processing service in the Fort Nelson resource area and has
executed an expansion agreement with Westcoast for such service. We understand that, to meet the
target in-service date commencing May 1, 2012, Westcoast will need to start site work on the Fort Nelson
North Processing Facility as soon as possible. Time is therefore of the essence in processing the
Westcoast application.
It is also our understanding that currently the only party that appears to have raised concerns about the
Project is the Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN”). Ramshorn believes that the specific concerns of the
DTFN can be addressed and adjudicated by the Board as part of the current review process. Hence, a
public hearing at this time will likely not add much value..
Ramshorn therefore suggests the Board could successfully complete the current process by establishing
timelines for any further comments from the DTFN and for reply comments by Westcoast, so that the
Board will be in a position to thereafter issue its decision in a timely manner.
Please advise if you have any questions or comments.
Regards,
 iA
Michael A. Read
VP, Operations
Ramshorn Canada Investments Ltd
           2800, 500 4th Avenue SW., Calgary, Alberta T2P 2V6 Telephone: (403) 263-6777
                    -                                                                   Fax: (403) 269-7352
0112812010        15:27D1FHSectra                                                                          P002(003
                         SJ  •4
                                                               SQ&t 340-1122 Mnkcd Sirw
                                                               Va.)couyeç BC ‘/68 5L!
                                                               Phan 6O467O549 F.x 6C44S7.25fl
                                                               “wwJ UCI SW.
                                                                                                   r-  (/)
   Janu a,)’ 28 2010                                           RonnneM.KyIc                            >
                ‘                                              Direct Line: 604627.0549, ext 107
                                                               E-jrnñ: rkyI&Iawx.
   DeliveredbyFax
   National Energy Boasd                                       File No. 1003-041                 o
   444 SeventhAve. SW                                                                               >
   Calgary, AB T2P OXR
                                                                                                    C)
   Attention;        Anne-Marie Erickson
                     Acting secretary of the Board
   Dear Ms. Erickson:
  Re:       Prelimbary Juthdlcdonal Questions - Weitcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as
            Spectra Enrr Trainminlon (“Spectra”) - fort Neban North Processing Facility (“the
           Application” or “the Praje&”)
  Thank you for your letter of January 14, 2010 advising that an oral hearing will be conducted in relation
  to the above-noted Application.
  As stated in our previous correspondence, the Project will be located within the Traditional Terrftoiy of
  the Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN”) and has the potential to adversely affect and infringe the DTFN’s
  Aboriginal and Treaty rights. Given the Mverse impacts already identified in the Envirozunetital and
  Socio-Economic Assessment for the Project filed by Spectra, and the other potential adverse impacts
  from the proposed Project, DTFN would like to participate in the bearing. However, as noted in our
  letter of January 5, 2010, DTFN requires adequate financial capacity to meaninilJy participate in the
 hearing. We again ask that you advise if any capacity funding is accessible to DTFN in relation to the
 hearing, either from the NEB or from other federal departments or agencies. We would also ask that the
 hearing be held in close proximity to DTFN communities so as to minimize Iravel expenses incured by
 DTPN participants.
 In our October 28, 2009 letter, we asked the NEB how the assessment of the Project wifl take into
 consideration the constitutionally-protected s, 35 rights of DTFN. Although the NEB has advised that
 the Appflcaiion will proceed by way of an oral hearing, we do not have a direct an3wer on the question
 of how DTFN’s s. 35 rights will be considered in the process. Accordingly, we ask for answers to the
 following preliminary questions related to the jurisdiction of the WEB on this Application:
           (1) Will the NEB have jurisdiction to hear evidence of DTFN
                                                                   3 s Aboriginal and Treaty rights and
               to determine the question of whether approval of the Project, on its owui, and in combination
 0112812010        15:27D1FIpecfra                                                                        P0031003
                                                                                                             2
                  with other existing, planned aud reasonably foreseeable developmeat within the vicinity of
                  the Project, hasthave the potential to adversely impact and/or unjustifiably infringe the
                  DTFN’s section 35 rights?
             (2) Will the NEB have the jurisdiction to assess the adequacy of Crown consultation in relation
                 to the Application? If so, is the NEB required by the PIER AcE or s. 35 of the Conslitutiun
                 AS, 1982 to refuse or defer the Application upon concluding that the Crown has iled to
                 discharge its duty of consultation or, conversely, does the NE3 have the mandate or the
                 authority ic approve the Project notwithstanding deficiencies in Cnwn consultation with the
                 DTFN if the NEB deems approval of the Project to be consistent with its mandate?
    Given the known and potential adverse impacts from the Project to DTFN’s constitmionally-protected
    rights, PTFN needs to know whether these issues wi]l be dealt with by the NEB and if so, how they will
    be dealt with from a procedural standpoint. If those questions are not going to be dealt with by the NEB,
    the DTFN wouhl like to know:
            (a) Will these issues be dealt with at some other stage of the regulatory and environmentaL
                 review process for the Application? If so, when and how will this occur?
            (b) Will these issues be dealt with through Crown consultation? If so, bow would the results of
                 any such consultation be integrated into the regulatory and environmental review process?
   In our previous conespondelice to the NEB, we raised a namber of concerns about the Applicatioc and
   about the :ack of consultatioa with DTFN. In your December 26, 2009 letter to us, you indicated tha
   the NED’s Guidelines were “by no means the only thformation that the NEB will require a pioponent to
   file”. PJease advise whether the NUB will be requesting further information from Spectra on its
   Application.
   In addition, we have serious concerns about the NEWs Filing Guidelines, particularly in relation to how
   they purport to deal with consuitation issues. Please advise whether the NEB or any other government
   department or agency has undertaken, or will undertake, consultation with DTFN in relation to these
   Guidelines and bow the Guidelines will be applied to the review of the Project. In addition to the issues
  we raised in our earlier eonespoudence about Spectra’s non-compliance with the Guideliujes, we also
  have serious concerns about the Guidelines themselves and the adequacy of proponent consultation to
  filtH! the Crown’s constitutional obligation to consult. DUN will be providing further comntents to the
  NEB on the NEB’s Filing Guidelines and the Draft Soope of Environmenta] Assessment in the near
  future.
  We look forward to hearing from you on these matters.
  Yours truly,
  lanes Fretdman Kyle Law Corporation
 Per zI I( (2
 Ros&n £IIt
 R)SK’ejr
 Ce:       DTFN chief and Council
           VMe,ie Bonnes, Manager, DTFN Lands Depmtment
           Traty Campbell, C&liou Group
           Robert Freedman, Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
           Westcost Energy Inc., Atm,: Peter Spicker
 0112812010     15:26 DlFHSpcctra                                                                      P.0011003
        I       FTC
           W COIPO•ATION
                                     Tw
                                                                  Suite 49 — :122 airsnd San:
                                                                  Vtncouver, BC V6U 5L1
                                                                  ?hoiw: S04687.0$49 Faa. 604687.2696
                                                                  WJ &Iaw.c&
        FAX TRANSMISSION COVER
       To:         Anne-Marie Ejickson                     Fax:      1.877.288.8803
                   National Energy Board
                    1. 800.899. t265
       From:       Rosanne M. Kyle                        FIle:      1003-041
                   rky1e(jfldawca
       Date:        January 28, 2010                      Page. (including this cover):          3
       If you have any problems with this transmission, please contact our office,
                                                MESSAGE
     Please see attached.
                                                                            DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
1 Introduction
1.1    Purpose
The following Report, Dene Tha’ First Nation Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
for the proposed Westcoast Energy Inc. operating as Spectra Energy Transmission
(Westcoast) Fort Nelson North Processing Facility (the Project), was commissioned by
the Dene Tha’ First Nation in order to provide representative information on historic and
current use by the DTFN in the vicinity of the Project. This study is intended to collect
and document information for consideration in the regulatory review process for the
Project.
1.2    Fort Nelson North Processing Facility Project Setting
The Fort Nelson North Processing Facility is proposed to process gas from the Horn
River Basin area of northeast BC and will have the capacity to process approximately
7,043,000 m3/day of sour natural gas. The project will be located approximately 75km
northwest of Fort Nelson in the Northern Rockies Regional Municipality. The purpose of
the Project is stated by the proponent as enabling “the timely processing of incremental
raw gas production from the eastern side of the HRB in accordance with the needs of
Westcoast’s customers” (TERA 2009).
       1.2.1 Environmental Setting
       The Plant will be located in the Northern Alberta Ecoregion of the Taiga Plains
       Ecozone (TERA 2009). Approximately 50 – 70% of this eco-region is
       characterized by wetlands/muskeg, with low lying areas supporting black spruce
       and upland slopes supporting white spruce, balsam fir, aspen and mixwood
       forest (TERA 2009). The most common trees found throughout this area are
       black spruce and tamarack. The wetlands in the project area are labelled
       peatland, which is a generic term including all types of peat-covered terrain. This
       area is characterized by long, cold winters and a short growing season.
       The Ecoregion is characterized by various wildlife including: woodland caribou,
       moose, black bear, wolf, beaver, snowshoe hare, red squirrel, raven and
       waterfowl.
                                            10
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
       The project also lies within the Sahtaneh River watershed and falls within the
       Snake-Sahtaneh Caribou Range.
       1.2.2 Land Use Planning and Regulatory Framework
       The proposed Project is located within the Etsho Enhanced Resource
       Development Resource Management Zone (RMZ) of the Fort Nelson Land and
       Resource Management Plan (BC ILMB 1997). The identified objectives of the
       RMZ are to maintain and enhance opportunities and access for oil and gas
       exploration, development and transportation.
       The Project proponent is applying to the National Energy Board (NEB) under
       section 58 of the NEB Act for authorization to construct and operate the Project.
       In recent months, this area, known as the Horn River Basin, has seen a marked
       increase in industry activity based on previously unrecoverable natural gas
       reserves. There are currently several major projects proposed for the immediate
       area, including two gas plants (including Fort Nelson North and EnCana Cabin
       Gas Plant), a large-scale pipeline (TCPL Horn River Mainline), exploration and
       production wells, booster stations, associated pipelines and all-weather road
       upgrades.
       The above-mentioned projects proposed for this area are currently under
       consideration by different regulatory authorities including the National Energy
       Board (NEB), British Columbia Environmental Assessment Office (BC EAO) and
       the BC Oil and Gas Commission (BC OGC).
1.3    Traditional Land Use Studies
Traditional Land Use Study (TLUS) information collection and documentation can be
described as the formal exercise of supporting anecdotal testimony of Aboriginal people
to “prove” or demonstrate use of land to support the exercise of Aboriginal and treaty
rights over time.
              “Despite the tremendous diversity among First Nations, they
              all share one thing — the harvesting of fish, wildlife, and
              plant materials has been the historical basis of economic life.
                                            11
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
              In pursuit of the resources that continue to be the
              foundation of their cultures, people leave traces over the
              landscape, evidence that they have been there.
              “Aboriginal peoples in Canada have been mapping aspects of
              their cultures for more than a generation. Think of it as the
              geography of oral tradition, or as the mapping of cultural
              and resource geography.” (Tobias 2000)
There are two types of Traditional Land Use studies: project-specific and
comprehensive. Project-specific TLUS collect and document Aboriginal knowledge in
the context of single application or project-specific regulatory processes. These studies
generally focus on the narrow spatial and temporal parameters dictated by the
proposed project in question. Documented TLUS information arising out of project-
specific studies tends to broadly focus on the question, “what Aboriginal knowledge of
use exists in the area potentially impacted by the project?” Project-specific TLUS, by
design, do not attempt to identify on their own (either qualitatively or quantitatively)
project effects on the TLUS information collected. This is a separate process facilitated
by the larger Environmental and Socio-economic assessment (ESA) process, and results
from the integration of the collected information into that larger environmental
assessment.
The process of identifying potential effects to traditional or Aboriginal use of the land
within the project area requires integration of Aboriginal people at several points
throughout the environmental assessment. First, Aboriginal people should be consulted
to ensure the design of bio-physical studies includes parameters which reflect their use
of specific species and habitat. Second, Aboriginal people should be involved in the
execution of bio-physical studies to ensure field or place-specific information is
incorporated and reflected by each discipline study. Third, a project-specific Traditional
Land Use Study is completed using temporal and spatial parameters specific to the
project in question. Finally, the integration of the project-specific TLU study findings
into each bio-physical discipline assessment of effects is required to identify what
potential effects may result from the project on Traditional Land Use information.
Without specific and quantitative measurements, facilitated by integrating TLUS
information into the conduct of an environmental assessment, a TLUS on its own does
not analyze or identify to what extent the proposed project potentially impacts the
exercise of Aboriginal and treaty rights. This is due to the lack of connection and
                                            12
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
incorporation of TLUS information in the analysis of the environmental assessment,
which is meant to identify overall effects. Without integration of TLUS into the design
and execution of the environmental assessment, and into the determination of
significance of effects, a project-specific TLU study is limited in its applications.
Comprehensive TLUS are primarily community or Nation-driven studies meant to collect
and document comprehensive land use information throughout a Nation’s traditional
territory. These studies are not project-specific, and do not identify potential impacts
from any specific or individual projects. They are useful in documenting cumulative
knowledge on a larger-scale and preserving that information as part of the Nation’s
heritage. However the ability to quantitatively measure the extent of effects to
traditional use is absent. Comprehensive TLUS are extremely useful in establishing the
trigger for Aboriginal consultation, by documenting general TLUS information
unrelated to any specific projected project effects.
Oftentimes, the collection and documentation of TLUS information and the identification
of potential project effects related to that information is grossly incomplete. As a result,
the known (either qualitative or quantitative) impacts of industrial development on the
exercise of Aboriginal and treaty rights are largely undocumented.
1.4     Incorporating TLUS into EA to Determine Effects
It is assumed that the DTFN Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study will be
incorporated into the broader environmental assessment of the Westcoast Fort Nelson
North Processing Facility conducted by Westcoast and TERA Environmental to identify
the extent the proposed Project will specifically impact the exercise of DTFN Aboriginal
and treaty rights within the project area.
                                              13
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
2       Methodology
2.1     Report Design
The execution of this TLUS follows methodology outlined in several documents
describing best practices for the conduct of Traditional Land Use studies, including:
    •   Chief Kerry’s Moose: A Guidebook to Land Use and Occupancy Mapping. Terry
        Tobias. Joint Publication, Union of BC Indian Chiefs and Eco Trust, 2000
    •   A Guide to Conducting Traditional Knowledge and Land Use Study. Terry Garvin,
        Northern Forestry Centre Staff. Northern Forestry Centre, 2001
    •   Mapping How We Use Our Land. Mike Robinson, Terry Garvin and Gordon
        Hodgson. Arctic Institute of North America, 1994
The Study Team also used their collective experience in conducting previous TLU
studies, and their knowledge of the DTFN community to guide the execution and
development of this Report.
The spatial boundary that was used to identify DTFN TLU information potentially
affected by the Project is the Regional Assessment Area (RAA) defined in the ESA as a
10km buffer around the Project footprint (See Figure 2-1). TLU information collected
during this study that intersected or overlapped the RAA was included in this Report.
Nineteen (19) TLU interviews were conducted with DTFN Harvesters from November 2 -
4, 2009. Although TLUS are usually conducted in an atmosphere of insufficient time
and resources to gather information, the scheduling and completion of the interviews
for this Report occurred under an extremely compressed and aggressive timeline. This
was due to lack of DTFN involvement in the development of the Project application
submitted to the NEB.
The Study Team endeavored find a representative sample (or subset) of the DTFN
population that would broadly represent the DTFN knowledge and information about
the study area.
The interview protocol for this study was developed by the Study Team. This protocol
outlined themes for the conduct of interviews, as opposed to formulated or rigid
questions, which are sometimes used for the conduct of TLUS. This was consciously
done to ensure DTFN participants were more comfortable and allow for better flow of
                                            14
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
information, as stories or topics often lead to different areas for discussion. Many of the
DTFN participants adapt more readily to this style of interview as it reflects their normal
conversational manner.
Following the completion of the Report, a community verification meeting is generally
held to verify contents of this Report. However, due to time constraints, a community
verification meeting was not held prior to submission of this Report. If substantive
changes to the TLU report are required as a result of the community verification or
meeting with Project representatives, the results of these will be submitted as a
supplementary report to the NEB and Westcoast Energy.
In addition, a meeting is anticipated with Westcoast representatives, NEB
representatives and DTFN participants to discuss specific project effects, which are
identified through Westcoast’s Environmental and Socio-economic Assessment process.
A group discussion will be conducted and possible suggestions for mitigation to those
impacts will be identified.
                                             15
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
    2.2    Interviews
As previously stated, nineteen (19) interviews were conducted with DTFN members by
the Study Team from November 2 to November 4, 2009. Interviews were conducted at
the Chateh Administration offices. Interviews were primarily conducted as group
sessions where 2 - 3 DTFN Harvesters were interviewed together, with the exception of
one individual interview. DTFN Harvesters include Elders, trappers, hunters, gatherers
or other land users.
The following individuals were interviewed for the study: Allen Didzena, David Wasp
Colin, David Ahkimnache, Helen Ahkimnachie, Ernest Chonkolay, Jessie Providence,
Jane Providence, Robert Metchooyeah, Diana Kolay, Don Metchooyeah, Janice
Providence, Robert Tsonchoke, Steven Tsonchoke, Gabriel Ahkimnachie, June Penner,
Alex Wasp Colin, Thomas Ahkimnache, Ricky Pastion and Ronnie Semansha. Individual
summaries and maps from the interviews can be found in Appendix A.
Each interview was an average of two hours and was voice recorded, video recorded
(where permission was granted) and noted by the Study Team. The interviews were
conducted in both English and Dene. Where necessary or preferred by the participant,
a Dene translator was provided by the DTFN Lands Department.
The discussion themes for interviews included:
           •  Specific-use sites (including locations of camps, cabins,                       graves,
              trails/travel routes, birth places, Dene place names, etc.);
           •  Areas where participants have historically practiced or currently practice
              their Aboriginal and treaty rights, including hunting, trapping, fishing and
              gathering; and
           •  Project Specific/General Concerns.
If there was an identified or discernable change in the areas of use, participants were
asked to provide an explanation for that change. If the participants had not been to
the area in question, they were asked to elaborate on this theme.
Mark-up maps were created by the Study Team for use in the interview process; one
overview map (1:569,186) and one focused Project map (1:250,000).
Coordinates for the overview map boundaries are:
                                               17
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
           •  North: within the North West Territories; mid-way through Greater Slave
              Lake (NTS Reference point 085B)
           •  East: within Alberta, including Wood Buffalo National Park and the Caribou
              Mountains; encompassing the Peace River (NTS Reference point 084J)
           •  West: within British Columbia, west of Fort Nelson and Maxhamish Lake
              (NTS Reference point 094J)
           •  South: Within British Columbia and Alberta, including Fort St. John and
              Peace river (NTS Reference point 084D)
Coordinates for the focused Project map are:
           •  NTS Map sheet 94P, with the Project RAA as the central point of the map
Mark-up maps are used to document traditional land use sites (e.g. cabins, graves,
birthplaces, trails/travel routes, camps, etc.) as well as areas where DTFN members
practice their treaty rights (either in the past or currently) as discussed during study
interviews. Areas identified by participants are given a corresponding numerical code
on the map, and assigned to a number in the interview notes. If the participant or
interviewer was unsure of locations, those sites were given an asterisk and verified at a
later date.
    2.3    Site Visits
DTFN representatives, Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah, attended a one
day site assessment of the proposed Project on November 18th, 2009.
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah accompanied Landsong Heritage
Consulting Ltd. staff during the site assessment. Notes from this site visit can be found
in Appendix A.
                                             18
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                 Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
2.4     TLUS Limitations
The unique culture of the Dene Tha’ First Nation provides challenges for the
interpretation and representation of information gathered during TLUS interviews. This
challenge also includes information not gathered or represented during TLUS.
Numerous anthropologists have documented that the Dene Tha’ manner of imparting
knowledge is primarily through observation and first-hand experience. Termed “non-
interference,” knowledge is generally not shared through questioning or direct
instruction. As TLUS are based on the premise of interviewing Aboriginal people on
their land use practices and underpinned by the concept of voluntary imparting of
knowledge, it is often difficult to overcome the Dene Tha’ tendency of “allowing you to
find out for yourself” (Goulet, 1998).
        “Given the Dene [Tha’] approach to communication, it is clear that interviews are
        a poor means of investigation among the Dene (Goulet, 1998).”
DTFN participants were also reluctant to identify areas used for the exercise of treaty
rights (either historically or currently) outside of the provincially-regulated trap lines in
British Columbia (held by DTFN members) for fear of perceived government
repercussions. Many interview participants expressed to the Study Team outside of the
interview process for other traditional land use studies that ‘it was against the law’ for
DTFN to travel outside of DTFN provincially-regulated trap lines.
An additional limitation to a TLUS is the inability to spatially represent many aspects of
information collected during interviews with a sufficient degree of accuracy (i.e. through
two dimensional mapping). Representative scales on maps used during interviews are
often too large to ensure ‘pin-point’ accuracy necessary in a project-specific study.
Further, two-dimensional maps pose challenges for some Elders or persons unfamiliar
with cartographic interpretation. To fully and accurately represent collected TLUS
information in the interview process, a full and robust field component to verify and
locate specific sites is required. This is usually not permitted by either time or resource
constraints on a project-specific study.
The Aboriginal connection to traditional territory lies at the foundation of Aboriginal
culture, language and way of life (Roberts & Williamson, 2004). Centuries of nomadic
travel throughout a land base, over time translates into an inter-woven fabric of land
and resources, species and habitat, activity and travel. Site-specific places should not
be divorced from the context of the broader environment (Valaskakis, 2005). The
                                              19
                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                           Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                       Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
specificity of TLUS mapping often over-shadows the broader environmental context with
“specific” sites that can be singularly represented on a map. As a result, a common
response for many interview queries of ‘where do you hunt?’ is met with a somewhat
bewildered response of, ‘we go everywhere!’
As mentioned, this particular study was also limited by time and resources, which in
turn impacts the size and scope, and accuracy of the study. There is no practical way
to gather complete TLUS information from the entire DTFN community for the purposes
of a project-specific TLUS. Therefore, gaps in study information may result, as only a
representative number of DTFN interviews are permitted. Therefore, the selection of
interviews can only be seen as a broad sampling of the use and issues the community
as a whole may or may not have.
                                            20
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3       Community Information
3.1     Introduction to DTFN
There are currently two thousand, six hundred and sixty-four (2,664) registered DTFN
members (Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, 2009). The Dene Tha’ First Nation have
three separate main communities located on reserves: Meander River, Bushe River and
Chateh located in northeastern Alberta (Figure 3-1). DTFN is governed by a Chief and
an eight (8) member council that are elected in a custom electoral process.
Since the early-to-mid 1960’s the Dene Tha’ have had to rapidly adapt to the
conventions of western society. Prior to that time, DTFN lived a primarily nomadic
lifestyle, travelling throughout large tracts of Alberta, British Columbia and Northwest
Territories. People travelled in seasonal rounds, following available resources, including
fur resources, which was the primary source of income for the majority of families.
DTFN speak of familial ties with surrounding Nations, including those located in
northeast BC, southern NWT and throughout northern Alberta. Those ties remain
strong today.
Since the establishment of the main communities of Chateh, Meander River and Bushe
River, DTFN now hold permanent homes as a primary residence and children attend
local schools. Essential services such as nursing stations, gas stations and police
stations have been instituted in/around the three DTFN communities.
However, even with this acclimatization to western culture, DTFN still maintain their
strong ties to the traditional lifestyle of their ancestors. The Dene language is still
spoken by the majority of community members and is taught in the community schools.
A large portion of the DTFN diet is obtained from wild foods such as moose, ducks,
eggs and berries. Traditional artwork is widely created by many different age groups
throughout the community. Most importantly, travel outside their reserves throughout
their traditional territory to obtain resources is the centerpiece of the DTFN lifestyle that
remains strong today.
Although there is recognition within the community that their way of life is changing
rapidly for the DTFN youth, there is a strong desire to maintain a connection to their
ancestry and pass that along to the future generations.
                                              21
                                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                 Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3.2     DTFN Traditional Territory
As mentioned, Dene Tha’ First Nation is a signatory to Treaty 8. Treaty 8 encompasses
northwestern Saskatchewan, northern and central Alberta, northeastern BC and a
southern portion of the North West Territories. In 1899, the Government of Canada
began the negotiation of Treaty 8 with the final text of the Treaty drafted that year.
The following summer, in 1900, a smaller Commissioner’s delegation travelled to the
remaining Nations who could not be reached in the first year and negotiated with those
Nations to sign adhesions to the treaty. Dene Tha’ signed an adhesion to Treaty 8 in
1900 (DTFN, 1997).
DTFN present-day leadership characterizes the signing of Treaty 8 as one that promised
peace and friendship with the incoming non-Aboriginal people to the region (Goulet,
1998). Discussions held at the time of treaty making with DTFN leadership included the
outline of DTFN territory encompassing “the Four Hills” – including, Cameron Hills
(north), Caribou Mountains (east), Clear Hills (south) and the Etsho Plateau (west). 1
The description of the “Four Hills,” including Etsho Plateau is important for several
reasons. DTFN leadership at the time of treaty making with the Crown understood their
territory for the purposes of exercising their traditional lifestyle extended far beyond the
boundaries of their assigned reserves. This identified area was based on natural
landforms that were, and still are, well known to DTFN. Also, this area was understood
and identified by DTFN prior to the establishment of provincial and territorial political
jurisdictions.
DTFN’s present-day traditional territory is approximately 176,000 square kilometers
spanning Alberta, BC and the NWT (Figure 3-1). In BC, the territory ranges as far
south as Fort St. John, west to Fort Nelson and Maxhamish Lake and North to Trout
Lake in the NWT. In Alberta the territory ranges south of Manning and north of
Grimshaw and follows the Peace River north to High Level where it extends east,
bisecting Caribou Mountain. The territory continues north into the NWT as far as
Tathlina Lake.
1
  These are the present-day names and do not reflect Dene Tha’ place names.
                                                  22
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
The boundaries of the DTFN traditional territory was compiled by DTFN based on
meticulous historical research and traditional land use information collected from DTFN
members. The boundaries of the territory are not fixed, and are subject to change as
DTFN collects additional historical information and traditional land use and Aboriginal
knowledge from the DTFN community. In fact, some DTFN members and political
leaders believe that DTFN territory should be delineated only by the boundaries of
Treaty 8 to reflect the areas in which they have the right to exercise their Aboriginal
and treaty rights.
DTFN leadership does not consider the DTFN traditional territory as “exclusive use” by
only DTFN members, or claim proprietary ownership to the land contained with those
boundaries. DTFN recognizes that many portions of that land were, are and will be used
by other Nations in the exercise of their Aboriginal and treaty rights. As Chief James
Ahnassay explained to the Study Team, the land is “shared.”
                                            23
                                                                                 DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3.3     Aboriginal Consultation
Aboriginal consultation is largely triggered by the need for a regulatory approval by the
Crown for activities occurring within the boundary of a Nations’ asserted traditional
territory. Over the past five years, there has been a conscious effort by DTFN
leadership to accurately document the extent of the DTFN traditional territory. This
strive for accuracy is based on the premise that negative environmental effects will in
turn affect the DTFN ability to exercise their treaty and Aboriginal rights. Protecting
that ability for future generations of Dene Tha’ is one of the priorities for DTFN
leadership.
Correct documentation was necessitated because of confusion resulting from
consultation efforts of provincial and federal Crown regulatory authorities in the past,
where DTFN traditional territory was confused with provincially-regulated trap lines held
by band members. There is a lack of understanding regarding the distinction between
traditional territories, provincially-regulated trapping areas, treaty lands and reserves.
Traditional territory refers to the land that was and still may be used by the Aboriginal
community to practice a subsistence way of life. Each Aboriginal community travelled
and lived in its own traditional territory, delineated most often on a self-regulated basis.
As mentioned, boundaries of traditional territories of neighbouring communities often
overlapped one another. Boundaries changed over time, as availability of resources
changed, or as a result of the effects of government policy.
Provincially-regulated areas for the purposes of commercial harvesting of fur resources
by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people are often called ‘trap lines’. The use of
trap lines (or fur management areas) requires an annual license from the provincial
regulator. Trapping licenses can be held by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people.
Licenses can be transferred, bought and sold by the license holder or recalled by the
regulator. Licenses are held individually.
Treaty lands are identified within the terms of a treaty agreement with the Crown,
promised to Aboriginal Nations for the purposes of hunting, trapping, fishing and other
traditional activities.     In British Columbia, Treaty 8 rights include the right to
commercially trap. Members of signatory Treaty 8 Nations do not require provincial
licenses for the exercise of the treaty right to trap, including for commercial purposes in
British Columbia. Treaty rights to hunt, trap and fish are held collectively by the entire
Nation.
                                               25
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
At the time of treaty making, the provision of reserve lands was identified within the
written terms of the Treaties. Reserves were intended as training grounds for
agricultural pursuits, where Aboriginal people would be provided farm implements,
financial resources and land to ‘settle’ as other non-Aboriginal people were doing
throughout Western Canada. Even though the promises made at treaty-making by
Crown representatives that traditional vocations of hunting, trapping and fishing could
continue throughout the treaty territory, it was anticipated by the Crown that the
Aboriginal lifestyle would eventually stop. For many years, Aboriginal people were also
confined to reserves and could not leave without a pass or permission from Federal
Indian Agents assigned to manage them. This effectively curtailed the use of traditional
lands for the purposes of the exercise of treaty rights. However, despite these
attempts by the government, this transformation (or assimilation) from nomadic hunter
to farmer did not occur.
3.4     Historical Documentation of DTFN Land Use in Project Area
Corroborating Aboriginal oral accounts of historical use of land in the non-Aboriginal
archival record is an unfortunate, but required, component in the conduct of Traditional
Land Use studies. This Report summarizes and draws from conclusions contained
within a historical report prepared for the study area by Bouchard and Kennedy, entitled
“Dene Tha’ Presence in North Eastern BC.” This historical report corroborates study
participants oral accounts of DTFN historic use of the Project area. This report has
been previously provided to both Westcoast Energy and the National Energy Board.
Historically, Dene Tha’ use of the land extended far from their present-day
communities. For example, DTFN interview participants describe DTFN historical travel
from Great Slave Lake to Lesser Slave Lake and beyond. Centuries of Dene people
utilized the boreal forest, unbounded by non-Aboriginal political jurisdictions. Those
travels are well documented in the oral traditions of the Dene Tha’. However, those
oral traditions are not given the same credibility that historical references are.
It is often difficult to identify accurate and precise historical and ethnographical
references specifically for the Dene Tha’ First Nation in the written historical record,
because outside of a few select sources, written information about the Dene Tha’ is
virtually non-existent. Different non-Aboriginal travelers used different names for the
Dene Tha’, often misidentifying them, or generalizing them with other surrounding
                                             26
                                                                                  DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                  Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                              Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Aboriginal groups. As a result, DTFN use of the land captured in the historical record
may be incomplete.
For example, early North West Company and Hudson’s Bay Company sources reference
“Slavey-speaking” Aboriginal peoples in northeastern BC; however, there is little in
these documents that distinguish Dene Tha’ and other Aboriginal groups that spoke a
Slavey-Hare language. By the 1930’s, the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC is
recorded in several sources; the Dene Tha’ have been referred to by a number of
names, including: “Upper Hay River Band of Slaves”; “Hay River Indians”; “Hay Lakes
Indians”; “Chateh/Assumption Indians”; “Slavey Indians at Hay Lake(s)”; “Upper Hay
River Post Indians”; and “Bistcho Lake Tribe” (Bouchard and Kennedy, 2009).
Specifically:
        Traders seldom attempted to seek out knowledge of ethnonyms—the names by which
        groups of people self-identified—and instead applied murky generic terms such as
        “Slave” or ‘Slavey” to people of the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District; sometimes
        this identity included people known otherwise as “Beaver.” Similarly, the term “Beaver”
        occasionally included groups more often identified as “Slavey” and very likely included in
        some instances the ancestors of those identified today as Dene Tha’ (Bouchard and
        Kennedy, 2009).
Notwithstanding the difficultly of identifying specific references to Dene Tha’ in the
historical record, the Bouchard and Kennedy Report concluded a strong historical
presence of DTFN in northeast BC exists in the historical record. Further the Report
goes on to describe a heart-breaking account of DTFN use of north-east BC restricted
by government policy.
According to DTFN interview participants and supported by the historical record, DTFN
land use in northeastern British Columbia was largely undisturbed by non-Aboriginal
presence in the area until 20 to 30 years after treaty making. It was only after
competition for fur by non-Aboriginal people prompted the governments of Alberta and
British Columbia to institute restrictions on trapping that DTFN land use fundamentally
changed (Bouchard and Kennedy 2009).
        Williams instructed Van Dyk “to keep these Indians [Dene Tha’] out [of BC] until it is
        absolutely proved that we have not the power to do so.” (Emphasis added,
        Bouchard and Kennedy 2009).
                                                27
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Provincial and federal government officials understood that DTFN use of northeast
British Columbia for hunting and trapping purposes was extensive. At one point in
1934, government representatives outlined a trans-boundary hunting reserve for the
“Hay Lakes Treaty Indians”. Unfortunately, that option was not executed, and the trap
line registration system was instead chosen and implemented (Bouchard and Kennedy
2009).
This proposed hunting reserve was recognition by the federal and provincial Crown that
DTFN historically (pre-1930) used northeastern British Columbia to exercise their treaty
and Aboriginal rights (Figure 3-2).
The imposition of provincially regulated fur management areas was pivotal in the
evolution of how DTFN used their land. DTFN use of land in northeastern British
Columbia and Alberta was curtailed. Entire generations of DTFN Harvesters were
brought up to believe that activity outside the regulated areas was ‘against the law’ and
not allowed. DTFN interview participants tell of sanctions on Dene Tha’ imposed by
Game Wardens or RCMP that included imprisonment, hard labour or warnings if they
were caught ‘breaking the law’ by using land outside of their assigned trapping areas.
DTFN who were caught outside their assigned areas had fur confiscated, which at the
time could mean extreme financial hardship for the offender. With no access to legal
representation, there was no recourse open to those caught. The resulting impact on
the treaty right to trap (including the commercial right) within northeast BC resulting
from those actions was never analyzed.
As a result, DTFN use of areas outside of DTFN registered trap lines was done outside
of existing regulations. The perception that this situation still exists today is so strong,
that several DTFN interview participants were reluctant to admit continued land use in
BC outside of the regulated trapping areas for fear of legal repercussions.
However, even with the imposition of government restrictions on DTFN movement on
the land outside of DTFN registered trap lines, DTFN continued to use northeast British
Columbia for traditional use purposes, including hunting, gathering and fishing.
                                            28
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3.5    Previously Collected TLUS Information
In recent years, Dene Tha’ First Nation has completed a number of project-specific and
comprehensive studies which documented their Aboriginal Knowledge and Traditional
Land Use. These studies were most often executed in response to government or
industry proposed initiatives and generally reflects the area specifically related to that
project/decision. Additionally, these undertakings often were limited by their budget
that restricted the study to the immediate area of interest.
       Dene Tha’ Traditional Land Use and Occupancy Study (1997)
       This study was undertaken to record and illustrate the presence DTFN had, and
       continues to have on the land in their traditional territory (DTFN, 1997). The
       study was not intended as a comprehensive documentation of all DTFN
       traditional land use, but primarily as an educational tool for both internal and
       external audiences.
       The methodology used for this study, although contemporary at the time, was
       one of the first of several studies to be completed in Alberta. This study area
       used as the focus for this report included land use within Alberta and a small
       portion of north-east British Columbia. This report is not considered an
       exhaustive inventory of DTFN use of their traditional territory.
       Mackenzie Gas Pipeline (2005/2006)
       This study was an undertaking by DTFN to illustrate past and current use within
       the specific project area for the Mackenzie Gas Pipeline. The report focused on
       the Bistcho Plateau and the southern portion of the NWT. DTFN compiled this
       report in hopes that it would facilitate open and productive discussions with the
       project proponent regarding their Aboriginal and treaty rights and how the
       project may affect them and the resultant accommodation from potential
       impacts.
       DTFN faced significant financial and time constraints throughout this project and
       these limitations are noted in the original document. This report also noted that
       the interviews and maps did not represent the entirety of DTFN use within their
       traditional territory.
                                             30
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
       BC MEMPR Land Sales Interviews (2008)
       Crown reserve petroleum and natural gas rights are disposed of under section 71
       of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Act. Dispositions, by public tender, are made
       once each month (Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources, 2009).
       The BC Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources (MEMPR) sends out
       public notice to interested parties prior to those postings.
       As a response to these notices, DTFN has prepared a number of interviews and
       maps to assert their rights and interests in the area of a number of the land
       sales. DTFN hopes to engage in further consultation with MEMPR about DTFN
       rights and interests.
       EnCana Cabin Gas Plant TLUS (2009)
       This project-specific TLUS was conducted concurrently with the TCPL Horn River
       Mainline Pipeline Project study during the Spring and Summer 2009. The
       completed report was submitted to the BC EAO for consideration in the
       environmental assessment process.
       TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline TLUS (2009)
       This project-specific TLUS was conducted concurrently with the EnCana Cabin
       Gas Plant study during the Spring and Summer 2009. The completed report was
       submitted to the NEB for consideration in the environmental assessment process.
For a composite map with DTFN TLU information collected for this Project and other
Projects, see Figure 3-3. This composite map focused on north-eastern BC and
demonstrates added DTFN traditional land use in the Project area in addition to the
information collected for this Project and represented in this Report.
                                             31
                                                                                 DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                 Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                             Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4 Project-Specific TLUS Information
“We are just like the animals that we live and depend on. We are not from this land; we
    are a part of this land; just like the water is a part of the land, that is who we are”
                                                                             - Robert Metchooyeah
4.1     DTFN Knowledge
As part of the study methodology, DTFN interview participants were asked to provide
Aboriginal Knowledge and Traditional Land Use Information in relation to the Study
Area.
During the interviews, participants often related information about areas that did not
overlap, intersect or fall within the vicinity of the Project RAA. This information was
expected by DTFN participants to be applied to other areas, such as the Project site.
DTFN feel Aboriginal knowledge is not tied to a specific place; rather their experience
on the land can be applied to multiple areas with comparable ecological conditions. For
example, when a Harvester indicated that increased industrial noise on their trapline
displaces wildlife, the Harvester expects that information to be applied to industrial
noise in similar areas/developments throughout the territory. This method of relating
traditional knowledge can be noted throughout the interview transcripts.
In addition, the Aboriginal knowledge shared with the Study Team generally included
first-hand, personal experiences on the land. Participants also would recount historical
oral accounts that were passed on by their parents, grandparents, community Elders
and other DTFN community members. Both of these ways of sharing information are
accepted in DTFN culture. In fact, if a Harvester is questioned and they do not have
either first-hand knowledge or knowledge through a recognized or credible source they
will often respond with “I don’t know” or “I can’t say”.
4.2     TLU Information Organization
For the purposes of analysis, this section of the Report has categorized this information
into the following sections:
    •   Hunting Areas
    •   Trapping Areas
    •   Fishing Areas
    •   Gathering Areas
                                               33
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
    •   Travel Routes
    •   Sacred Sites
    •   Cabins, Settlements and Camps
4.3     Hunting Areas
DTFN interview participants identified extensive hunting areas throughout their
traditional territory including northeast BC (see Figure 4-1). One participant explained
that Dene Tha’ hunters rarely set a date for hunting, rather, if they see an animal while
out on the land and they require food they will kill it (R. Pastion). Ricky Pastion stated
that most Dene Tha’ would go hunting “all the time if they [could].”
Participants indicated that wild meat is used by DTFN as a source of food and when an
animal is killed it is shared amongst the community (Jane Providence, D. Kolay, R.
Pastion, D. Ahkimnachie, R. Metchooyeah). Numerous participants stated that food
from the land is preferred by most Dene Tha’ over food purchased from a store (D.
Kolay, R. Metchooyeah). Robert Metchooyeah explained that the Dene Tha’ do not go
to a “Safeway” and fill their fridge, they go to the land. The animals typically hunted for
food by DTFN include wild chickens, moose, ducks (including eggs), lynx, caribou and
bear (A. Didzena).
The area surrounding the proposed Project was described as relatively remote; that is,
not easily or directly accessible by all season roads from DTFN communities. Interview
participants indicated that they access this area for hunting via winter access roads.
Alex Wasp Colin explained that he uses the winter roads which connect to the Sierra
Yoyo Desan road. This allows him to access Cabin Lake and Kotcho Lake for moose
hunting. Participants also reported hunting on DTFN member-held registered traplines
in BC during the winter when access was possible.
Ernest Chonkolay explained that the Etsho Plateau is excellent habitat for wildlife and
has seen many animal tracks specifically in the area west of Cabin Lake, including
moose, lynx and caribou. Robert Metchooyeah also reported that the area around Cabin
Lake “is not even touched yet, there is no disturbance, just the way it is naturally”.
Robert noted many animals in that area including caribou, moose, mink, squirrel,
muskrat and beaver. Alex Wasp Colin also stated that the area near the proposed
Project [Etsho Plateau] has a lot of moose. The biodiversity present in this area was
restated by many participants who noted numerous species while there on hunting
trips.
                                             34
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Participants also indicated that the area surrounding the Plant site was an important
area for caribou, consisting of calving areas and migration routes. Jessie Providence
explained that this area is used by caribou as they migrate along the Alaska Highway
(#97) on their way south. This was echoed by Robert Metchooyeah who elaborated
that this area is used cyclically during their annual migration. Ernest Chonkolay
indicated that caribou require specific lichen, traditionally known as “caribou feet”, as a
food source and explained that it is plentiful in this area. While working in the area,
Robert Metchooyeah located two caribou faun antlers around Cabin Lake which
indicated to him that the lake was used by caribou for calving.
Kotcho Lake was also noted as an important lake for caribou because they will often
stop there in the spring and summer to eat the berries and calve in the willows that
surround the lake. Allen Didzena explained that Kotcho Lake is an area rich in wildlife
including caribou, moose, otter, muskrat, beaver and migratory birds (ducks, loons,
geese and swans). In the past, DTFN members would hunt caribou throughout this
area. However, currently many do not hunt caribou because they perceive caribou as a
protected species and some do not enjoy the flavor of the meat.
The area surrounding the Project was also identified as an important area for moose
migration. Ronnie Semansha noted that from July to September moose head for high
ground as part of their seasonal migration. Diana Kolay also noted that the black spruce
present on the Project footprint also indicates that it is important for moose because
they prefer treed areas.
A number of participants indicated that they avoid hunting or trapping near gas plant
sites because of safety issues. For example they expressed concern about perceived
hazardous gas or “vapors” (R. Metchooyeah) and the area being dangerous in general
(D. Ahkimnachie, A. Didzena, D. Metchooyeah). June Penner explained that the ground
around industrial features such as wells and pump jacks often does not freeze because
of salt deposits and can be hazardous to hunters.
Current and historic hunting areas in northeastern BC reported by study participants
include:
    o Area around Kotcho Lake (A. Wasp Colin, D. Metchooyeah, R. Semansha, G.
        Ahkimnachie)
    o Sierra Yoyo Desan Road (A. Wasp Colin, J. Penner, R. Semansha, R. Tsonchoke)
    o Near Kwokullie Lake (R. Semansha, A. Didzena)
                                             35
                                                                            DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                            Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                        Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
   o Along the winter access road that connects Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (D.
       Metchooyeah, D. Kolay, Janice Providence, Jessie Providence, J. Penner, R.
       Semansha)
   o On and around DTFN member-held traplines, including #755T013, #755T014,
       #755T015, #756T014, #756T015, #756T016 (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie,
       G. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp Colin, S. Tsonchoke, T. Ahkimnachie)
   o Around July Lake (A. Didzena)
   o The Etsho Plateau (A. Wasp Colin)
   o Area around Outaandetday Lake, Tooga Lake and Desan Lake (A. Didzena)
Specific areas reported as current and historic hunting areas that are intersected by the
Project RAA include:
   o Area around Cabin Lake (A. Wasp Colin, R. Semansha, A. Didzena)
   o Area east of the Texaco Lakes including Kwokullie Lake and north of Kotcho river
       up to the Petitot River (A. Didzena)
   o Area east of Komie Lake, just north of the Etsho Escarpment, east of Kwokullie
       Lake and south of the Fort Nelson river (D. Metchooyeah, Janice Providence)
   o Etsho Plateau southeast of the Etsho escarpment (Jane Providence)
   o Area between the Texaco Lakes and Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
   o Between Cabin Lake and Kotcho Lake (R. Metchooyeah, A. Wasp Colin)
   o Etsho Plateau, east of Komie Lake, Southwest of Etset Lake and including
       Kwokullie, Kotcho and Kimea Lakes (E. Chonkolay)
   o Area east of Komie Lake and west of Kotcho Lake that extends north to the
       Etsho escarpment and just south of Courvoisier Creek (R. Semansha)
                                            36
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.4     Trapping Areas
DTFN study participants indicated trapping furbearers both currently and historically in
northeastern BC, including instances within the project RAA (Figure 4-2). Furbearers
discussed include beaver, lynx, mink, rabbits, marten, otter, muskrat, squirrel, rabbit
and porcupine.
Participants indicated that they generally trapped in groups, often travelling out on the
land with elder family members (A. Didzena, D. Ahkimnachie). Participants would
typically complete two trapping trips per winter season and use the furs for an income
and the meat for food. Many interviewees noted that the majority of their current diet is
still derived from the land.
It was also reported that animals can be used for more than food and pelts. Robert
Metchooyeah and Jane Providence indicated that porcupine quills are used by some
community members for art.
Ernest Chonkolay and David Ahkimnachie both stated that it was no longer profitable to
trap for a livelihood. Both participants felt that they could not recoup the cost of the trip
because of the decrease in fur prices. This does not prevent them from going out to
trap, but it limits the trips. Many participants echoed the sentiment that financial
reasons have resulted in a decrease in trapping.
Allen Didzena reported that some community members use industrial developments as
trapping areas because the sounds and salt produced by these installations can attract
animals. Additionally, participants indicated that they use cutlines to set traps because
of the ease of access.
Current and historic areas in northeastern BC where DTFN study participants report
trapping are:
            o Around July Lake (A. Didzena, D. Ahkimnachie)
            o On and around DTFN member-held traplines, including #755T013,
                #755T014,     #755T015,       #756T014,      #756T015,           #756T016           (R.
                Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp Colin, S.
                Tsonchoke, T. Ahkimnachie)
            o Area around Kotcho Lake (S. Tsonchoke, G. Ahkimnachie, A. Didzena)
                                               38
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Trapping areas identified that intersect the Project RAA include:
          o Area east of the Texaco Lakes including Kwokullie Lake and north of
             Kotcho river up to the Petitot River (A. Didzena)
          o Area extending west of Texaco Lakes, east of Kwokullie Lake, north of the
             Fort Nelson River and south of the Petitot River (D. Ahkimnachie)
          o Around Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
While working in the area (unrelated to the Project) participants also noted that the
project RAA and the surrounding Etsho Plateau is good habitat for and/or signs of
animals routinely trapped including: mink, lynx, squirrel, muskrat and beaver (R.
Metchooyeah, E. Chonkolay).
                                             39
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.5     Fishing Areas
DTFN participants indicated they fish for jackfish, suckers, pickerel, whitefish, finescale
dace, trout, walleye, longnose suckers, and northern pike throughout the BC portion of
their traditional territory (Figure 4-3).
Jane Providence and Ricky Pastion emphasized the importance of fish for the DTFN way
of life and indicated that they depend on fish as an essential part of their diet.
Allen Didzena explained that Courvoisier Creek and other creeks in the Project area are
fish spawning areas and that the lakes around the site have an abundance of fish.
Ricky Pastion indicated that beavers will often dam these lakes and creeks which results
in flooding around the Project area. If the water is high enough and there is sufficient
oxygen, these areas can support fish for the season.
Kotcho Lake was indicated by numerous participants as important fish habitat and a
central lake for fish migration (E. Chonkolay, D. Ahkimnachie). Gabriel Ahkimnachie
pointed out that he catches fish in the Hay River after they have migrated from Kotcho
Lake. Robert Metchooyeah also indicated that his father would fish in this lake for
numerous species.
Many participants noted that, while BC contains various fish species and is rich in fish
habitat, that accessing the area in the summer is difficult because it is mainly comprised
of muskeg and peat.
Current and historic areas where interview participants’ fish or where they indicated
there was fishing habitat within northeast British Columbia include:
    o   Courvoisier Creek (A. Didzena)
    o   Thinahtea Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
    o   Kwokullie Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
    o   Kotcho Lake (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, A. Wasp Colin, G. Ahkimnachie,
        Jane Providence, D. Wasp Colin, R. Semansha, E. Chonkolay)
    o July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie)
    o Shekilie River (G. Ahkimnachie)
    o Hay River (G. Ahkimnachie)
                                            41
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Current and historic fishing areas or reported fish habitat that overlaps the Project RAA:
   o Lakes and creeks south of the proposed Project [Etsho Plateau] (A. Didzena)
                                            42
                                                                                 DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.6     Gathering Areas
Aboriginal knowledge includes information about many types of plants, herbs and trees
that are used for food and medicinal purposes. These same plants and vegetation are
also used by many animals that the DTFN hunt and trap throughout their traditional
territory. Gathering areas in northeast BC are identified in Figure 4-4.
While DTFN participants indicated specific berry and medicinal plants during interviews,
June Penner also noted the importance of muskeg more broadly. She explained that in
addition to muskeg being excellent habitat for berries and medicines, it also acts as a
natural filter for water in the region and constitutes an important source of potable
water for DTFN Harvesters out on the land.
        Berries
        Throughout the BC portion of the DTFN traditional territory there are many types
        of berries. Interview participants identified blueberries, chokecherries, low and
        high bush cranberries, strawberries, raspberries, wild rhubarb, gooseberries,
        muskeg berries, cloudberries, and some berries where the Dene name was not
        readily known in English.
        Interview participants specifically noted the Project RAA as good habitat for
        berries including muskeg berries, gooseberries and low bush cranberries. This is
        because the Project is in an area dominated by muskeg and close to numerous
        rivers. Robert Metchooyeah explained that these types of berries characterize
        this type of habitat and are present on both high and low ground. Helen
        Ahkimnachie also explained that anywhere muskeg is present, berries can be
        found.
        The Etsho Plateau was also noted by interview participants as supporting an
        abundance of berries including low bush cranberries, raspberries and
        cloudberries.
        Additionally, participants reported that berries grow along the access roads
        between Rainbow Lake and Fort Nelson. However, it was noted that accessing
        these berries is difficult as this area is predominately muskeg which limits access
        in the spring and summer months (D. Metchooyeah, Jessie Providence).
                                                44
                                                                       DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                       Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                   Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Numerous participants noted that the berries were an important part of the
DTFN diet, as well as food for animals. For example, Thomas Ahkimnachie
explained that the root or stem of raspberries can be eaten in addition to the
berries; this stem does not need to be cooked and has a flavor similar to carrots.
It was also noted that berries do not grow as well where the land is disturbed.
(D. Ahkimnachie, D. Kolay, J. Penner)
In northeastern BC, participants reported berry gathering areas:
    o Along the access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (D.
        Metchooyeah, Jessie Providence)
Berry gathering areas intersected by the Project RAA were reported at:
    o Etsho Plateau, east of Komie Lake, southwest of Etset Lake and including
        Kwokullie, Kotcho and Kimea Lakes. (R. Metchooyeah, E. Chonkolay, D.
        Kolay)
    o Area between the Texaco Lakes and Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
Medicinal Plants
In addition to the numerous edible plants identified during the interviews, DTFN
participants also indicated various plants used for medicinal purposes. Plants
that were specified include juniper, poplar trees, black spruce (cones, bark, sap),
tamarack, blueberries, “mooseberries”, rat root, wild mint, strawberry root and
various herbs.      Study participants explained that when some community
members harvest medicinal plants from the land they give an offering back, such
as tobacco. Janice Providence noted “that if you take something you have to pay
it… but you have to believe in it.”
“Mooseberries”, a white and orange berry, was indicated by Diana Kolay as a
remedy for liver and stomach ailments. She also reported that boiling strawberry
root can help with diarrhea. Also, black spruce cones and bark, when boiled, are
good for colds and stomach aches (D. Kolay, R. Metchooyeah). Participants also
indicated that rat root, juniper (berries), aspen bark and black spruce (berries)
are helpful with colds and chest congestion (R. Metchooyeah, D. Metchooyeah).
                                     45
                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                 Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Robert Metchooyeah reported that the Sahtaneh River is a good place to collect
mint. Additionally, Ernest Chonkolay indicated that the Etsho Plateau supports
an abundance of traditional medicines. These medicines were specifically
identified by Diana Kolay along the Sierra Yoyo Desan road that is located on the
Plateau. She and Janice Providence also indicated that juniper can be found
along the road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson and that it can be used to cure
many ailments.
Many of medicinal plants grow in muskeg areas that are typical in northeastern
BC. Helen Ahkimnachie indicated that anywhere there is muskeg, there are
berries and plants used for medicines. For example, Diana Kolay and Janice
Providence indicated that rat root grows in swampy areas. Participants expressed
concerns that if muskeg areas are developed or contaminated, it will destroy the
vegetation (R. Semansha, G. Ahkimnachie, D. Kolay, J. Penner).
Don Metchooyeah reported that rat root collected near Assumption (Chateh)
tastes of oil. As a result, people no longer collect it there, but near Habay
instead. He said he was concerned that vegetation near the proposed Project
could experience similar effects.
It was noted that the proposed Project area has an abundance of black spruce
and that the habitat present on the site is favorable for medicinal plants. June
Penner noted that the site is characterized by muskeg which is where many
herbs for coughs and colds can be found.
Participants reported a number of specific areas where medicines can be found
in northeast BC, including:
    o Area around Kotcho Lake (A. Didzena, D. Kolay)
    o Along the Sahtaneh River (R. Metchooyeah)
    o Along the winter access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (D.
        Metchooyeah, Janice Providence)
    o Sierra Yoyo Desan Road (D. Kolay)
                                     46
                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                 Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Participants also described medicinal plant gathering areas which overlapped or
intersected the Project RAA. These include:
    o Etsho Plateau, east of Komie Lake, southwest of Etset Lake and including
        Kwokullie, Kotcho and Kimea Lakes (Jane Providence, E. Chonkolay, Jessie
        Providence)
    o Area between the Texaco Lakes and Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
                                    47
 Appendix A:
 1.   David and Helen Ahkimnachie
 2.   Gabriel Ahkimnachie
 3.   Ernest Chonkolay
 4.   Allen Didzena
 5.   Diana Kolay
 6.   Don Metchooyeah
 7.   Robert Metchooyeah
 8.   June Penner
 9.   Jane Providence
 10.  Janice Providence
 11.  Jessie Providence
 12.  Thomas Ahkimnachie and Ricky Pastion
 13.  Ronnie Semansha
 14.  Steven Tsonchoke and Robert Tsonchoke
 15.  Alex Wasp Colin
 16.  David Wasp Colin
 17.  Field Survey: Baptiste Metchooyeah and Robert
      Metchooyeah
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          David Ahkimnachie, Helen Ahkimnachie
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Translator:           Ernest Chonkolay
Interviewer:          Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
David began trapping in British Columbia (BC) in 1959 on trapline #755T014. His
brother, Louison Ahkimnachie, was the “headman” on this line and David accompanied
him there many times. The last time David trapped on the line was approximately ten
years ago because the price of furs is so low that the cost of going trapping is higher
than what can be recouped from selling pelts.
David stated that every winter he would travel to his trapline twice. He would initially
head out the first week of November and return home for Christmas; the second trip
would begin in February. During his time on the trapline, David would hunt moose for
dry meat and trap furbearers for their pelts. David explained that the meat from one
moose would supply food for his family and his brothers’ family.
When David would return from these trips Helen, his wife, would dry the meat.
David noted that there are many members of his family that hunt and trap on the
trapline, and he and his brother used to store several food caches by their cabins for
communal use.
David also recalled travelling to July Lake, with one dog, to harvest beaver pelts in the
past.
David stated that caribou will cross uninhabited disturbed areas looking for food, but
will not go to a place with human activity because they do not like the increased noise.
David does not like to hunt or trap near Plant sites because he does not feel safe and
does not know if there could be gas (H2S) or if it is dangerous.
David would like to go back out on the land around the trapline, but finds it too
expensive to travel. David feels that it would be easier if he had a skidoo, but he does
not own one. Helen stated that if David had the means to go out on the land, she
would go as well.
Transcript 1
 Fishing
David explained that he fishes in Kotcho Lake for suckers.
David has also fished in July Lake, and explained that July Lake is excellent habitat for
fish.
Medicine and Berries
Helen explained that she gathers blueberries and a specific plant with a long stem and
a white flower that she does not know the English translation for. Helen stated that
anywhere there is muskeg there are berries and plants used for medicines.
David stated that berries will not grow where the land has been disturbed or polluted.
Sites
David explained that July Lake is a very important place because there is a story of two
women surviving there alone for a year. The lake is known in Dene as “a Woman’s
Place” or “Tsuk-aye” [phonetically].
David noted that one uncle is buried within his trapline boundary, but is unsure of the
exact location. David explained that his brother knows the location of this burial.
David noted that there is more than one cabin on his trapline, and explained there are
two cabins near July Lake. These cabins have a foundation that makes them warmer
and are the best ones to use.
David also noted that he frequently camps with only a canvas tent near Kotcho Lake
because there is very little evidence left on the land when he camps this way.
Travel Routes
David uses a trail along the Hay River, then heads north using old trails to get to his
trapline. This trip would take approximately seven days to complete.
Another route David would use heads north to Bistcho Lake from Chateh, then west
along the Petitot River to his trapline. David explained the high ground along rivers are
used by the Dene Tha’ for travel because the low ground is muskeg and makes
travelling difficult.
David also travels to July Lake or “Tsuk-aye” [phonetically].
Transcript 1
 David also remembered using a trail that begins at the confluence of the Hay and
Shekilie rivers and continues north to July Lake, running parallel to the Alberta/BC
border.
Observed Changes
David has seen many changes in the way that trails are used; transitioning from pack
dogs and pack horses to skidoos and ATVs. David was taught how to live in the bush
by his father and would use pack dogs, pack horses or would walk everywhere. David
pointed out that the trails are still the same, but the way to travel has changed.
Additionally, winter access roads, cutlines and seismic lines have become routine travel
routes. He explained that in the past there were no cutlines or seismic, and now people
use them to travel. David feels that the cutlines and seismic destroy a great deal of
habitat.
David has observed industry on the land and notes that the animals stay away from
these areas. There is too much noise and too many people and the animals stay away.
David noted that before there was any development on his trapline, it was a good area
for wildlife because it was rich boreal forest habitat.
The Etsho Plateau is also a suitable area for many animals. For example, David
previously noted an abundance of lynx, marten and mink. However, now the land has
been changed by logging and oil companies, many of the animals have left. He
explained that there are only a few marten and mink in this area currently because the
habitat has changed so drastically.
David stated that the quantity of animals in the overall area has also declined. In the
winter, he would often observe many moose and caribou tracks but now notes these
less frequently. David believes this reduction in tracks means the number of these
animals has decreased.
Transcript 1
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Gabriel Ahkimnachie
Date:                 November 4, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Translator:           Robert Tsonchoke
Interviewer:          Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
Gabriel hunts for food in northeastern British Columbia (BC); he generally hunts moose
but sometimes hunts caribou.
Gabriel also traps in northeastern BC on trapline #755T014, which is in the northeast
corner of BC bordering Alberta to the east, and the Northwest Territories (NWT) to the
north.
In the past, Gabriel would complete two hunting/trapping trips each winter; the trips
would be approximately a month and a half long. The second of these trips would often
extend until March, at which point he would pull his traps and travel home.
These trips were used as a means of income and food, with the furs from trapping
being sold for money and the moose hunted for subsistence. Gabriel noted that when
they were on the land they would try to kill a moose at the beginning of the trip to
supply adequate food and would bring the leftover meat home for their families.
Generally, he and his family prefer food from the “bush” rather than from the store; he
explained that “everybody still lives on wild meat”.
Gabriel rarely hunts for caribou but explained that when he does hunt them, he only
kills one, which is enough to live on; he never kills more than what he needs for food.
Currently, Gabriel only hunts in areas with vehicle access, which was not the case in the
past; he would go everywhere when he was younger.
Fishing
Gabriel pointed out that the water from Kotcho Lake flows into Kotcho River, which
flows through the Shekilie River and into the Hay River. He explained that these rivers
are used by many Dene Tha’ for fishing.
Transcript 2
 Gabriel does not go fishing in the winter.
Gabriel explained that access is limited to northeastern BC in the summer and has never
fished at any of the lakes in that area as a consequence. However, he did note that July
Lake has a lot of fish, especially suckers and jackfish.
Gabriel indicated that Kotcho Lake contains a lot of jackfish, pickerel and suckers. He
pointed out that he catches these fish in the Hay River when they migrate from the
Lake.
Sites
Gabriel explained that the Dene Tha’ have many burials and ceremonial sites around
lakes. For example, there are a number of burial sites around July Lake and Thinahtea
Lake.
He also pointed out a Historic settlement and cabin site at the confluence of the Shekilie
and Hay Rivers. Gabriel explained that there are six burial sites located there and noted
that Dene Tha’ people still go to this location today.
Gabriel also identified a cabin near Kotcho Lake and two cabins located on his trapline.
Traditional Knowledge
Gabriel indicated that caribou are plentiful in the area surrounding the proposed Plant
site. He noted that the caribou generally travel in groups/herds of about forty animals
and generally migrate in swampy areas. He explained that caribou head north in the fall
as far as they can go and migrate south in April.
During the caribou calving season the caribou prefer the warmer areas in BC and stay
close to swamps and muskeg in May.
Travel Routes
In the past Gabriel would walk from Assumption/Chateh to Kotcho Lake through the
bush. He explained that he would construct a birch bark canoe at Kotcho Lake and use
the river for his return trip.
Gabriel currently uses his vehicle on the “Powerline Road” from Rainbow Lake to get
into BC.
Transcript 2
 Observed Changes
Gabriel has observed many changes to the food that he hunts, traps or fishes. He noted
that the food he harvests from the land does not taste the same and he feels that oil
and gas activity is responsible for this change. Gabriel feels there are too many oil and
gas developments on the land, especially within his trapline.
Gabriel explained that the oil and gas development on his trapline have led to an
increase in noise. This has resulting in a decrease in the animals that frequent his line.
For example, he could previously hunt or trap an animal for food each day but it is no
longer this dependable. Gabriel indicated that within his line it is often difficult to hunt
or trap anything.
Gabriel explained that before the trapline licensing system existed, there were no
boundaries and Dene Tha’ went hunting and trapping anywhere in BC. He noted that
this is not possible anymore as people are restricted to traplines.
Future Generations
Gabriel has seven children (five daughters, two sons); his sons go out on the land and
hunt/trap as well.
Concerns
Gabriel indicated that the location of the proposed Plant site is not ideal. He explained
that the rivers and creeks that cross the Plant site eventually flow towards his trapline
via the Shekilie and Hay River. He explained that the Plant site will have a negative
effect on fish and beaver in these rivers and believes the plant is a bad idea.
Gabriel is opposed to the Plant being constructed because he fears that it will result in
the same negative changes to that area that he has observed on his trapline. He is sure
that once the plant is built and operating there will be no more animals in that area due
to the increase in noise; there will be nothing left to hunt or trap in that area.
Gabriel related two examples of noise driving the animals away from an area, the first
when the Dene Tha’ moved to Assumption and the second when the road to Zama was
constructed. Prior to the Dene Tha’ moving to Assumption, the area contained a variety
of animals including rabbits, moose and beavers. However, once the Dene Tha’ moved
into the area there was a significant increase in noise and activity and the animals
moved away. This happened again when the road was built to Zama City driving away
the geese and ducks.
Gabriel is also concerned that the proposed Plant will have a negative effect on berries
and other vegetation in the area.
Transcript 2
 Gabriel is frustrated that oil and gas companies make a lot of money from the resources
within the Dene Tha’ traditional territory, but the Dene Tha’ do not see any benefit.
Instead they lose all the animals and resources they depend on to live.
Gabriel indicated that an oil and gas company recently drilled a well on his trapline. He
felt the well was too close to July Lake and was supposed to be compensated for the
drilling, but he never got anything.
Transcript 2
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Ernest Chonkolay
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewer:          Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Ernest explained that the Etsho Plateau in British Columbia (BC) is excellent habitat for
wildlife. He has noted numerous tracks for moose, lynx and caribou throughout the
plateau, specifically the area west of Cabin Lake.
Ernest indicated that he uses Alberta trapline #1063 and generally traps for beaver in
the spring because they are fat this time of year. Since the price of a beaver pelt has
decreased, Ernest feels that it is no longer worthwhile to trap beaver commercially. He
noted the cash return on a beaver pelt is not worth the gas it takes to go out trapping.
Medicine and Berry Gathering
Ernest noted that the Etsho Plateau supports an abundance of traditional medicines and
berries.
Ernest harvests low bush cranberries, raspberries and cloudberries.
Fishing
Ernest explained that he was recently flown to Kotcho Lake to participate in
environmental field studies and observed that the lake is very large with good habitat
for fish.
Travel Routes
During Ernest’s most recent trip to BC, he noted a trail following the Hay River that
branches out in two directions. One branch loops back towards Alberta following the
Hay River, and the other branch is a historic wagon trail that continues on to Fort
Nelson. He explained that the second branch of the trail follows the high ground
because the low ground is muskeg and is difficult to travel.
Ernest explained that he uses the winter access road that extends from Rainbow Lake
along the 28th baseline and continues on to Fort Nelson.
Transcript 3
 Ernest also noted using the seismic lines and pipeline right-of-ways to travel.
Traditional Knowledge
Caribou require lichen or “caribou feet” as a food source; this is very plentiful on the
Etsho Plateau.
Ernest pointed out that the Kotcho Lake is the main body of water for all the creeks
around it; some creeks flow into Kotcho Lake while others flow out of the Lake.
Ernest indicated that the water and creeks to the west of Cabin Lake flow into the area
of the proposed plant.
Sites
Ernest explained that there is a gathering area by the confluence of the Hay River and
Shekilie River where people would meet and dry meat.
Ernest indicated there are two cabins on his trapline (#1063).
Concerns
Ernest is concerned about the rate of development within the Dene Tha’ Traditional
Territory. There are exploration drilling rigs in so many places, and there is so much
noise from these rigs, that the animals stay away. He also feels that there is so much
garbage from the rigs and camps that the bears are attracted to these places for food.
Ernest noted that there are two Plants on trapline #1063 and he does not go there
often because there is too much traffic and the terrain is muddy.
Transcript 3
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Allen Didzena
Date:                November 2, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Translator:          Thomas Ahkimnachie, Ricky Pastion
Interviewer:         Tracy Campbell, Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Background
Allen is currently 43 years old. His father was Pierre Natannah (deceased) and his
mother was Alice Didzena (deceased); Allen also has one sister Peggy Didzena.
Hunting and Trapping
Allen did not hold a trapper’s license when he trapped in the past. Instead, he would
accompany Paulis and Elder Louison Ahkimnachie (his brother in law). Paulis and
Louison were in their sixties when they took Allen trapping, and when they could no
longer go out on the land, Allen continued on his own.
Allen explained that the three of them would head out to trap in mid November, as
soon as the ice was thick, and head home in March. During the first two weeks of the
trip they would set up camp and lay their traps. Then they would spend approximately
two weeks checking the traps before heading to another site where they would repeat
the process. During this time they would sleep under tarps with blankets by an open
fire. They would use one skidoo between the three of them and take two dogs to pull
the sled with their supplies. Allen noted that he enjoyed this time out on the land very
much.
He specified that he trapped in the area around the proposed Plant site.
Allen also noted travelling to July Lake with Louison and Paulis from November to March
to trap otter, beaver and muskrat and explained that he still hunts in this area.
Allen noted that he also traps for marten, lynx and mink.
Allen explained that, from fall to December, there are about twenty or thirty herds of
caribou in northeastern British Columbia (BC) from fall to December which is when
Louison and Paulis would generally hunt them. Allen noted that Louison and Paulis did
not hunt caribou during spring because the caribou often carried fleas during this
season.
Transcript 4
 Allen indicated the majority of his diet is from the land including ducks, moose, bear
and eggs. He often travels upstream on the Hay River to hunt for those animals.
In order for Allen continue going out on the land he requires a vehicle, adequate
supplies and money to purchase fuel. Unfortunately, Allen does not have a vehicle and
notes that this is his biggest obstacle. He noted that financial assistance would help
more people get out on the land and hunt. He also stated that assistance in form of
adequate supplies (“supplies in a box”) would encourage more people to go out on the
land.
Allen explained that he usually does not go close to a Plant site for hunting and
trapping. However, some people will often hunt near well pads because the moose are
attracted to the sound of the pump jack.
Fishing
Allen explained that the lakes around the proposed Plant site have an abundance of fish
such as jackfish, finescale dace, trout, pickerel, walleye and longnose suckers.
Allen also noted that Courvoisir Creek and other creeks in the area of the proposed
Plant site are used by fish for spawning.
Medicine and Berries
Allen explained that he travelled around Kotcho Lake approximately four years ago
while firefighting. During that time he observed numerous species of trees such as
poplar, black spruce and tamarack; he noted that tamarack generally grows on high
ground.
Traditional Knowledge
Allen explained that the area surrounding the proposed Plant site is part of a caribou
migration route. Caribou either migrate north or south from that area depending on the
time of year. For example, during the summer they stay around Kotcho Lake and other
lakes in the vicinity to consume berries.
According to Allen, the caribou do not remain around Kotcho Lake in the winter. This is
because they migrate south for the season. However, in the summer Allen observed an
abundance of wildlife, such as moose and caribou, around Kotcho Lake and the
adjacent smaller lakes. He also pointed out that this area is important for migratory
birds including ducks, loons, geese and swans.
Transcript 4
 Kotcho Lake is also habitat for many small furbearers such as otter, muskrat and
beaver.
In general he considers the lake and surrounding lakes as a sensitive ecological area.
Travel Routes
Allen uses two winter access road to travel to BC. One access road crosses Alberta
trapline #99 the other crosses through BC trapline #756T001. These two winter access
roads are connected by the Sierra Yoyo Desan Road which also leads into Fort Nelson.
Allen explained that he would travel the entire area between Kotcho Lake and the
border to the Northwest Territories (NWT) during his trapping and hunting trips each
winter.
In the past, when Allen would accompany Louison and Paulis trapping, there were no
access roads that they could use. Instead, they would travel on an old horse and dog
team trail from the 1950s/1960s. This historic trail followed the Hay River from Habay
and continued on to Fort Nelson. Allen used to break this trail using snowshoes for
about 40km so the skidoo could follow.
Allen noted that currently, people require access roads and vehicles/ATVs to go hunting
and no longer use horse or dog teams.
Allen currently travels with other trappers because he does not have a car and has to
rely on others to get out on the land. He says it is difficult to get out on the land
without a vehicle.
Observed Changes
In the early 1980s, Allen noted an increase in cutlines, pipelines and roads. Even
though Allen believes these activities are great for job opportunities, he explained that
they are not good for the wildlife. He noted that while caribou are often found in
cleared areas, moose and deer prefer the bush.
Allen explained that a long time ago there was not as much sickness as there is today.
He noted that the Dene Tha’ prophet [spiritual leader] had prophesied that illnesses and
disease would kill many people.
Allen indicated that in the past there were “moose everywhere” but now the population
is down. Allen believes this is due to increased hunting and the high number of
predators such as wolves.
Transcript 4
 Future Generations
Allen explained that many of the old trappers have retired from trapping and the
current “headmen” are now working to train their “juniors” to carry on with trapping
and hunting.
Allen is concerned that the communities’ young people are slowly losing their culture.
He believes that it is important to start teaching the youth to preserve the Dene Tha’
culture.
Concerns
Allen is concerned about the effects of oil and gas activities on wildlife. He pointed out
that caribou, moose and lynx drink the water from well sites because of its salty taste.
He has witnessed animals that have ingested this water getting sick and dying within a
year or two. He is concerned that this will continue with the development of more sites.
Allen is also concerned that an increase in oil and gas activities will damage the overall
area and all the animals will eventually disappear.
He is worried that pipeline leaks could seep into the water causing contamination and
disturbing the ecosystem; this would affect fish, birds and insects. Allen explained that
the creeks flowing through the Plant site in turn flow into Kotcho Lake, flow out at the
south end into Kotcho River and later into the Hay River.
Allen noted that activities, such as building a road, have a negative effect on wildlife.
Wolves, for example, have an increased advantage killing moose in the cleared areas
that are created as a result.
Allen would like to see some compensation flow to the Dene Tha’ for the damages oil
and gas activities have caused to the land.
Transcript 4
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Diana Kolay
Date:                 November 4, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Diana hunts for moose in British Columbia (BC) using the winter access roads from
Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson. Sometimes she drives all the way to Fort Nelson before
turning back; this trip takes about 4-5 hours. She usually hunts with her sister because
her sister has a vehicle.
During her hunting trips, Diana will often use the cutlines to travel further from the road
and prefers to use them for the ease of access.
During a recent hunting trip to Sulphur Lake, Diana and her family killed three moose.
The moose were shared among the families and they made sure to bring enough back
for the people that couldn’t come. Diana noted that they always share meat between
families.
Diana explained that woodland caribou are protected and she does not hunt them
Diana also traps on occasion for rabbits, muskrat and beaver.
Diana explained that most of her diet comes from hunting and trapping and she only
uses store bought meat on special occasions.
Fishing
Diana fishes for pickerel in the spring at Sousa Creek. She also fishes for suckers and
jackfish at Habay and Rainbow Lake. In the winter, she fishes at Bistcho Lake for
whitefish.
Diana does not fish in BC because there is no access to that area in the summer
because the entire area is muskeg.
Medicines and Berries
Diana specified that the area around the Plant is mostly muskeg, and that wild
cranberries grow in these conditions.
Transcript 5
 Diana also noted that there are cones on spruce trees that can be boiled and used for
colds and stomach aches. These trees are present on the Plant site. Spruce trees are
generally found in muskeg and the cones are best when harvested from smaller trees.
She also mentioned that there are patches of medicines along the Sierra Yoyo Desan
road but did not know the English translation for them. She noted that certain types of
these medicines do not ripen till late July or August.
Diana indicated that juniper can be found along the road from Rainbow Lake near the
water fall on the Hay River. Juniper can be used to cure many ailments and she
explained that juniper can be found near Kotcho Lake.
Diana stated that rat root grows by ponds or in swampy areas. For example, Habay
generally has a lot of rat root. It grows like a vine and must be cut with a small knife
because the stalk can be very tough.
Diana also harvests “moose berries” which are small white and orange berries that help
with liver and stomach ailments. She also collects wild mint and strawberry roots when
they are available; strawberry roots can be boiled and used as a cure for diarrhea.
Sacred Sites
Diana noted a number of grave sites near Bistcho Lake. These graves are flagged with
pink survey tape from a community research initiative.
Traditional Knowledge
Diana indicated that moose prefer the habitat found on the Plant site because they
prefer treed areas. Diana specified that once the Plant site is cleared the moose will no
longer frequent the area because they will be exposed and they do not like that.
She also noted that bear prefer the type of habitat present on the Plant site.
Travel Routes
Diana uses the winter roads to travel and hunt in BC; she noted that there are two
winter roads from Fort Nelson; One road heads to Rainbow Lake and the other one
goes to the Zama area.
Observed Changes
Diana noted that the buffalo in BC and Alberta have become overpopulated. She feels
that the government should control the population as buffalo chase the moose away.
Transcript 5
 Diana does not like to eat buffalo meat; she feels it has a particular odour because their
urine is strongly scented.
Concerns
While Diana prefers the cutlines for their ease of access, she notes that they do affect
the animals. She feels that there are too many cutlines and the land is overcrowded.
Diana is concerned about chemicals travelling from the Plant to Hay-Zama. She feels
that all the creeks are connected and the water or fish could transport the chemicals to
the Dene Tha’ community.
Diana is also concerned that moose frequenting the Plant site may become
contaminated and if she, or her family, eats moose from that area they will become
sick. She would not want to hunt, trap, fish or gather near the Plant because she has
no information about the side effects to her health. She pointed out that the animals
still go near Plants because there are often salty deposits and this could be very bad
depending on the chemicals that create that salty flavour.
Diana is concerned that the clearing of the Plant site will destroy a lot of vegetation.
She feels that the Plant is located in a very beautiful area and that it will be destroyed.
Diana explained that cleared areas are not good for berries because it destroys where
the berries would naturally occur.
Transcript 5
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Don Metchooyeah
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Don hunts moose in British Columbia (BC) using the winter access road that begins in
Rainbow Lake and ends in Fort Nelson. This road takes him near Kotcho Lake which is a
good area for moose.
Don has hunted moose using cutlines near Kotcho Lake.
Don does not hunt for caribou because they are a protected species and he does not
like the flavour of the meat. He noted however, that some community members do
hunt for caribou.
Don traps for beaver, marten and lynx in Alberta on trapline #84 in both the summer
and the winter. He has trapped since he was 17 years old and is now 56.
He noted that he still traps the same amount as he always has, even with the increased
development on his line.
Medicines and Berries
Don noted that there are patches of berries and medicines along the road to Fort
Nelson, but he only travels that way in the winter and does not have the opportunity to
harvest them.
Don explained that juniper can be used for coughs and colds and noted that his
daughter, Janice Providence, knows of places it can be collected.
Don noted that there used to be a place to collect rat root on the 29th baseline near
Assumption. However, since a pipeline was placed under this area, the root tastes like
oil. People now avoid that area and collect rat root in Habay instead. He noted that rat
root is generally found in swamps or very wet places.
Travel Routes
Don uses the cutlines on his trapline as a mode of travel; it is much easier than
breaking a new trail each time.
Transcript 6
 Don uses the winter access roads to travel to BC, he noted that there is one road from
Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson and another that goes to the Zama City area. The road
from Rainbow Lake passes by Kotcho Lake.
Don mainly uses his truck to travel the winter roads.
Traditional Knowledge
Don stated that the Plant site is good habitat for moose.
Observed Changes
Don noted that there are numerous pipelines and pump jacks on his trapline now. While
he does not like the industrial developments, he finds the roads that come along with
them convenient because they are often graded and makes travelling to his trapline
much easier.
Don explained that there used to be a great place to get rat root but since a pipeline
was placed under that spot the rat root tastes oily and people avoid collecting in that
spot. He related this to the Plant site, stating that the Plant site is mainly comprised of
muskeg, where rat root generally grows, and if you collected it there he speculated that
its taste would be affected like the rat root above the pipeline.
Concerns
Don feels like his concerns go unheeded because when a company says they are going
to put a Plant in a certain place, the Plant will go there no matter what he says.
Don explained that he would still go to the area no matter what; he would just avoid
the Plant site itself.
Transcript 6
                                    Interview Summary
Interviewee:           Robert Metchooyeah
Date:                  November 3, 2009
Location:              Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:          Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
 “We are just like the animals that we live and depend on. We are not from this land we
   are a part of this land; just like the water is a part of the land, that is who we are.”
                                                                        -Robert Metchooyeah
Background
Robert was born May 11, 1965 in Fort Vermillion. His father Paulis Metchooyeah was
from Habay and his mother Sophie Chambaud was from Meander River. His
Grandfather’s name was Paul Metchooyeah, also known as “Big Paul.”
Hunting and Trapping
Robert’s family holds trapline #755T013 in northeastern British Columbia (BC). He
would spend time on this trapline with his father trapping furbearers such as lynx, mink
and marten.
When Robert and his father were on the land and required food they would hunt for
moose. If the moose were scarce, then Robert and his father would hunt caribou
instead.
When Robert was in the Cabin Lake area for work he saw many caribou, moose, mink,
squirrel, muskrat and beaver. He noted that the area “is not even touched yet, there is
no disturbance, just the way it is naturally”.
During Robert’s time working in BC he found two baby caribou antlers in the area
around Cabin Lake. The company he was working for at the time was proposing to take
water from that lake to freeze the road as it was deemed a ‘dead lake’ by the
surveyors. Robert disagreed with this determination because he found the antlers in the
vicinity of the lake. This tells him that the area around the lake is used for calving by
caribou.
Robert noted that the area between Kotcho Lake and Cabin Lake is used by caribou
when they are migrating north from Prophet River. They complete this cyclical
migration annually and travel south along the Alaska highway. Robert recently spoke
Transcript 7
 with a member of Prophet River that indicated there are not many caribou left anymore
because many are killed on the highway during this migration.
Robert indicated there are porcupines in northeastern BC and some people in the Dene
Tha’ community hunt/trap porcupine for food and their quills for art.
Robert explained that the Dene Tha’ always share the meat from hunting with
community members that need it. For example, when he killed a moose recently he
brought the hind leg from Chateh to Child Lake for his son and family there. He
explained that the Dene Tha’ share the kill with everyone who needs it.
Robert prefers wild meat to meat from the grocery store. He explained that the Dene
Tha’ do not just go to a ‘Safeway’ and fill their fridge, they go to the land.
Fishing
Robert has fished in Thinahtea or Ah-tin-net-teen [phonetically] Lake, Kwokullie Lake
and Kotcho Lake.
His father would often fish in Kotcho lake for pickerel, jackfish and whitefish. Robert
noted that whitefish must be caught by net.
Robert explained that some Dene Tha’ community members still travel to Bistcho Lake
in February to fish for whitefish by net.
Medicines and Berries
Robert noted that the Plant site is a good area for muskeg berries, gooseberries, low
bush cranberries and black spruce. This is because it is close to rivers and is in an area
that is dominated by muskeg. Robert explained that these types of plants can grow in
both high ground and low lying muskeg.
The black spruce berries from the Plant site are useful for chest colds and congestion.
Robert has gathered mint by the Sahtanah River, which is known as bear creek in
Dene.
Travel Routes
Robert travels to BC using a winter road that goes from Rainbow Lake to Kotcho Lake
and connects with the Sierra Yoyo Desan Road. This road is known as the “Powerline
road”. He noted that this road passes Kotcho Lake and connects to North Helmet Camp;
it also continues west to Fort Nelson.
Transcript 7
 When Robert travels in BC he often heads north past the Petitot River where his family
trapline is located. He often spends time at July Lake, February Lake and Mid-winter
Lake.
Robert mentioned that the Dene Tha’ used the Shekilie River for travel and that the
Kotcho River flows south from the Lake and connects with the Shekilie. He also noted
that the Kotcho River connects to the Hay River which in turn flows to Chateh, then on
to the NWT.
Robert travels to the southern end of the Northwest Territories and throughout
northeastern BC.
Robert explained that there is a trail located by Pago Plant and North Helmet Camp that
is used for winter access. This trail cuts across the Shekilie River through the Bootis
Hills.
He also noted that some Dene Tha’ travel to BC using the 31st baseline by skidoo. This
route leads to the Petitot River and is the remnant of an old dog sled trail. When the
Dene Tha’ would historically use this route, they would often meet with other Dene Tha’
travelers at Kotcho or Kwokullie Lake. Everyone would travel there using different
routes, meet for a short time and then go their separate ways.
Robert explains that the Dene Tha’ will travel even when the roads are not plowed. For
example in 2004/2005 the winter road from Rainbow Lake into BC was not plowed and
to go another route to Fort Nelson would have taken 14 hours. So instead of taking the
long route, Robert had his brother drop him off at the end of the plowed road and he
travelled by dog sled and skidoo to the 101 camp. Robert noted that dog teams are not
widely used anymore as this is a different era and the Dene Tha’ First Nation is an
evolving Nation. He notes that most people currently travel by quad or skidoo.
Traditional Knowledge
Kotcho Lake is known as Go-tcho-ge-keh [phonetically] in Dene. Robert stated that this
Lake produces a lot of water for the region as most of the rivers in that area flow east
into the lake, then into Alberta.
Thinahtea Lake is known as Ah-tin-net-teen [phonetically] in Dene. This is where the
last Dene Tha’ prophet [spiritual leader] is buried. The name translates to “the first
prophet”.
Robert noted a story of two women surviving alone at July Lake over a winter season.
In the fall they melted spruce gum and used it to glaze the rocks so that when the
Transcript 7
 geese landed by the lake, during their migration, they would stick to the rocks, making
them an easy kill. They dried the meat from the geese and this provided them with
food for the winter. They plucked the geese feathers and used them to fashion blankets
to keep warm. Robert explained that the girls also pulled up plant roots from around
the lake and wove them into nets which they used to fish. When spring arrived, their
brother came searching for them and found the girls still at the lake and thriving. This
lake is a sacred place to DTFN and is known as “Woman’s Place” or “A Woman’s Place”.
Robert noted that black spruce was plentiful on the Plant site. He explained that black
spruce berries are used for chest colds and congestion.
The Dene Tha’ often cache or store food and supplies on the land for their personal use
and the use of other people out on the land. These caches are often stored in the trees
for winter and are placed out there in the fall. Everyone is invited to use these supply
caches as long as the supplies are replaced the next time the person travels through
that area. These caches often contain dry meat, fish and some basic supplies for
survival.
Observed Changes
Robert stated that before there were gas plants we [Dene Tha’] would go “all over” but
now that there are Plants why would we still continue to go there? “If animals are not
going to go there, there is no food for us”.
He explained that many years ago there were no provincial borders and the Dene
people would go all over to hunt; if the fish migrated somewhere they would follow, if
the moose migrated, they would follow. He stated that the Dene Tha’ still travel to
hunt, trap, fish and gather today but now there are borders and with those borders
comes different rules and regulations. He said if the borders were not in place the Dene
Tha’ would still go where they went before. He feels they are limited by traplines,
borders and designated areas. Robert explained that moose come and go and do not
have to ask for permission but if a Dene Tha’ wants to follow them they have to adhere
to the rules and regulations.
Robert explained that the traplines regulations are a recent development, only existing
since the 1930s.
Robert explained that some areas over there [in BC] have no disturbances but “the
more people come, the more disturbance they make”. Robert said that people come
from away and bring their big trucks and the animals move away; they do not stay
Transcript 7
 where this activity is occurring. Robert is concerned with this occurring in the Dene
Tha’ backyard; “that is our home and our backyard”.
He has noticed that industry is beginning to develop northeastern BC more and more by
putting in plants, pipelines, powerlines and roads. He noted the example of the Sierra
Yoyo Desan Road that is now being paved. Every year they [government] pave more
and more to North Helmet Camp. He speculated that they would be paving about 30 –
60km of this road each year.
Concerns
Robert felt that the vapors that come out of Gas Plants might contaminate the
vegetation, food and water that the animals in the area depend on. He felt that if the
animals, which the Dene Tha’ use for food, were contaminated that the community
would become sick. He felt these contaminants were the reason numerous community
members were dying of cancer.
Robert felt there is not enough consideration given to water. He felt that it is easy for
industry to say ‘put a plant there’ but wonders how this will affect the creeks and the
water in the lakes. Robert is concerned that the Plant could affect the water system in
the region. He feels that because the water in that area flows to Hay-Zama that his
community could be affected by runoff from the Plant.
Robert notes that all the little creeks near the plant site flow into Kotcho Lake, which in
turn flows into Hay Zama. This water then flows into the NWT and joins with the
McKenzie delta and flows into the Arctic. He states that eventually the water flows back
south through the Petitot and Liard, “it is all a cycle”.
Robert wishes that industry and government would “look after” the water because
everything depends on the water; “water is life”. He feels that if a pipeline breaks or the
plant causes contaminants to flow with the water, and the Dene Tha’ live by the rivers,
they will be affected. He also states that Dene Tha’ are not the only people that live by
the river, and all those people will be affected as well. Robert feels that if these
contaminants get into the water the fish will be destroyed. He is also concerned that if
the moose drink the water and then the Dene Tha’ eat the moose they will pass on the
contaminants. He feels that is does not matter how close you live to the plant, the
effects are all connected by water.
Transcript 7
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:         June Penner
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
June hunts for moose in British Columbia (BC) along the winter access roads and the
Sierra Yoyo Desan road. She travels to the area near Kotcho Lake via these roads.
When June hunts in BC, she often hunts for the day and heads home in the evening. If
she is nearby Fort Nelson, she spends the night there and heads home the next
morning.
She hunts in the vicinity of small wells and pump jacks because the ground does not
freeze completely due to salt deposits and this attracts moose who travel there to lick
the salt.
Medicines and Berries
June noted that two types of cranberries grow in muskeg, in addition to herbs that can
be used for coughs and colds.
Sites
June’s father-in-law has a cabin near Kotcho Lake.
She noted that there are graves throughout most of BC and Alberta and explained that
her grandfather is buried somewhere in BC.
Traditional Knowledge
June explained that moose travel all over northeastern BC and if a moose is in the area
of a Gas Plant it doesn’t just stay by that Plant, but travels all over.
She explained that moose prefer the low ground because they require willows and
meadows for calving. The high ground is often too dry and moose generally only use
the high ground for migration.
June does not hunt for caribou because they are protected and she does not like the
taste of the meat. She stated that the flavour is different than moose meat.
Transcript 8
 June noted the importance of muskeg as it holds freshwater underground. She
explained that it is also important for medicines and berries. She explained that most of
northeastern BC is very swampy and cannot be accessed in the summer for this reason.
June explained that her uncle has told her many things about muskeg. For example,
last month (October) when they were out hunting and he specified that muskeg water
is better than bottled water because the muskeg has filtered it. She explained that her
uncle only uses muskeg water for his tea when he is out on the land. Based on her
uncle’s advice June also still uses water from the muskeg when she is out on the land.
Travel Routes
June noted that there are two winter access roads that head into BC; one access road
begins in the Zama area, crosses the Shekilie and cuts across to Kotcho Lake. The other
road begins in Rainbow Lake and cuts straight west to Fort Nelson.
June noted that the good thing about another Plant being built is that there will be
better quality roads and makes it easier for her to access the area for hunting.
Observed Changes
June has noted a change in moose meat recently in the form of a white powdery
residue that is present on dried meat. She speculates that the residue could be an acid
or salt and she notes that she has never seen this before.
June explained that in recent years when she goes hunting near smaller industrial
developments she has noted that it looks as though the ground is frozen with a cover of
snow but when travelling on this snow the ground is not frozen and you or your vehicle
sinks in. This is due to salt being produced by industry and she speculates that this
could happen near the Plant as well.
June has noted in recent years a change in the berries available in northeastern BC.
Now the berries seem to be smaller than they were before and the patches are
scattered further apart.
June explained that when she is out on the land she sees lots of signs posted that
indicated the area by Kotcho Lake is a protected area for caribou. Even though this is a
protected area she explained that there are hardly any left.
She also noted that in recent years some of the roads in BC have been blocked with
gates that she does not have permission to cross through. This makes it difficult for
June to hunt in the areas near those roads.
Transcript 8
 Concerns
June is concerned by development within DTFN traditional territory; specifically the
impact of development on animals. For example, developments often result in a salty
residue that deer and moose lick. June previously noted a white residue on dried moose
meat and attributes this to a gas Plant in the valley where she normally hunts.
She is concerned that wildlife will be affected by the increase in development. She
notes that animals don’t just stay in one spot. One little thing in BC can affect the whole
area. She noted that “If there is a gas plant somewhere, a big one, you don’t see
nothing close to it. No fresh tracks, nothing”.
June is also concerned that fish will be affected by the Plant, although she feels that
fish will not only be affected, but everything will be affected.
June explained that when industry is working in northern Alberta they are not supposed
to damage muskeg or mosses on the sites. She is concerned that the proposed Plant
will damage both muskeg and mosses as it is located in an area where these types of
habitat and vegetation are plentiful. She feels that if the site is fully cleared of muskeg
there will be damage to the overall area.
June asked why the Plant was being built on the high ground as she felt the location
would increase the risk of runoff from the Plant contaminating the streams and lakes
below. She is concerned about the risk of contaminated runoff.
June and her daughter are concerned about mercury and wonder if it could be a by-
product of the Plant. They have heard about the side effects that can occur from
mercury and noted that it could get back to Hay-Zama via the lakes and rivers and
could lead to community sickness.
Future Generations
June specified that she intends on taking her children and grandchildren out on the land
to teach them the DTFN traditional ways.
Transcript 8
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Jane Providence
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Jane hunts in British Columbia (BC) during winter in the general vicinity of the proposed
Plant site. She travels to this area via the winter access road which is generally open by
mid-December.
Jane mainly hunts for moose in this area until spring break-up and mentioned that she,
her sister, her children and her grandchildren eat moose almost every day.
Throughout the year, Jane and her sister kill approximately eight moose. They usually
kill one moose per trip and share it with their entire family. Last fall, Jane, her aunt and
two sisters went hunting at Sulphur Lake (Alberta) and killed three moose which lasted
the families until December. When that meat was gone, they went out and hunted for
more. Jane notes that they do not only share the meat with family members, but with
anyone from Assumption that needs it.
Jane notes that she very rarely hunts for caribou because it tastes “too wild”.
Jane’s husband, Eric Kolay, traps in BC and on registered trapline #756T016.
She notes that porcupine are increasing in number in BC. Porcupine are trapped for
food by some Dene Tha’ and their quills are used by some people in their art.
Fishing
Jane specified that the Dene Tha’ depend on fish as part of their diet. She noted that
her family mostly eats northern pike which she catches at Habay with her father.
Jane has also fished with her father-in-law for jackfish at Kotcho Lake.
Medicines and Berries
Jane noted that the plant site contains black spruce. She explained that the bark from
these trees, and the pine cones they drop, can be boiled and used to treat chest colds.
She noted that black spruce also contain purple berries that can be used for colds.
Transcript 9
 Jane explained that black spruce is not the only tree that can be used medicinally. Bark
from aspen can be used for the stomach flu and she collects this bark in the fall.
Travel Routes
Jane travels to BC via the winter road from Rainbow Lake. This road crosses the Hay
River and is also known as the “Powerline road”. She noted it is about 254 km from
Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson using that road; she generally drives out and back in the
same day.
Observed Changes
Jane noted that before the traplines were instituted, the Dene Tha’ would “go
everywhere”.
She explained that without a vehicle it is very hard to go out on the land. She feels that
if she did not have a vehicle she would still find some way to go out, whether by quad
or skidoo. Jane believes that it takes determination to go out and practice the
traditional ways.
Jane explained that the Dene Tha’ have to go hunting further and further away in order
to supply their diet. This means they have to spend more on fuel and it becomes more
of an expense. Jane finds the expense to be a hardship but specifies that she would still
go hunting even with the expense. This is because she prefers wild meat to the meat
bought in a store. She does not like the meat she can purchase from the grocery store
and estimates that 90% of her diet is from wild meat.
Concerns
Jane is concerned that vegetation and animals can be contaminated from Gas Plants.
She heard the Chief of Fort Nelson First Nation speak on this issue and noted that the
Chief said there are lots of wells in BC and she interpreted that if moose eat vegetation
from a plant site they may get sick.
Jane noted that she would not go near the Plant to hunt. She explained that her
husband has done a lot of firefighting in BC and while there he learned that one flare
stack from a gas Plant can often emit upwards of one hundred chemicals. Jane believes
that all the vegetation around Plants “are dead” and if a moose eats this contaminated
vegetation it will be passed on to the Dene Tha’ when they eat the moose.
Jane believes that the government paving the Sierra Yoyo Desan Road is bad because
currently there is no one out using area and Jane would like it to be left the way it is.
She feels that the paving will eventually lead to easier and increased access.
Transcript 9
 She feels that an increase in development is bad for her personally, but would still go to
the area even if development increased. She feels it is very beautiful country and
wishes it could be left the way it is.
Jane noted that the Dene Tha’ depend on the land for the majority of their diet. She
explained that a lot of people have left the traditional life, but just as many still go.
Transcript 9
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Janice Providence
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Background
Janice is the daughter of Don Metchooyeah and very interested in the environment. She
is currently completing a forestry course and has an interest in trees.
Janice has three sons.
Hunting and Trapping
Janice hunts with her father in British Columbia (BC) via the winter access road. She
specified that the road starts in Rainbow Lake and goes all the way to Fort Nelson.
Janice tries to go hunting with her father every winter because she has three sons and
would like them exposed to the traditional ways of life; Janice and her father generally
hunt for moose. If her father is not going, she will sometimes borrow his truck to go out
hunting or to his trapline. She will often head out just for the sake of being outdoors.
She noted that most people hunt for moose in the fall.
Janice uses the cutlines for trapping rabbits and sets her snares along them.
Fishing
Janice fishes in Habay and Rainbow Lake for pickerel in the spring and net
suckers/jackfish throughout the summer.
Medicines and Berries
Janice noted that medicinal plants grow in patches along the access road to Fort
Nelson. These medicines can be used to treat colds. Janice explained that these
medicines are seasonal and there are specific months when the leaves can be
harvested.
Janice also collects rat root; she explained that rat root generally grows around ponds
or in wetter areas and must be dug up to be harvested.
Transcript 10
 Janice also indicated that there is a type of juniper that can be found near the water fall
on the Hay River. It has tiny blue berries that can be boiled and used to treat coughs
and colds.
Janice also noted that the cones of a spruce tree can be boiled to help with stomach
aches. These trees are generally found in muskeg and the cones can be found on
smaller trees.
Janice explained that when the Dene Tha’ take medicinal plants from the land they give
something back in the form of an offering such as tobacco. She explained “that if you
take something you have to pay it… but you have to believe in it”.
Sacred Sites
Janice noted that she had observed graves near Amber River when she was completing
a survival camp. The graves were marked with pink survey ribbons from previous
community research.
Travel Routes
Janice travels with her father or other family members to BC via the winter access roads
for hunting and trapping. Janice noted that her father prefers the roads going into BC
as they are partially graded and makes it easier to access this area.
Observed Changes
Janice noticed when she was out on the land, that there were more trees cut down
compared with previous years. She explained that it takes between 60-100 years for the
trees to re-establish once they have been cut down and that by cutting the trees
industry is reducing the overall oxygen. Janice feels that it is not good to clear cut the
Plant site; she stated that everywhere she goes there is clear cutting and trees being
knocked down.
Janice pointed out that, in certain areas of BC and Alberta, there are now more buffalo
than there are moose. She explained that buffalo has a strongly scented urine and most
Dene Tha’ do not eat them. She stated that the urine scent if very strong and the smell
can flavour the meat. She also noted that where the buffalo are plentiful, there are
holes in the ground from their hooves. This limits camping locations and makes
travelling in those areas difficult.
Transcript 10
 Concerns
Janice is concerned with the increase in tree clearing she has observed in recent years.
She stated that when the forest is full of trees, there are lots of animals but when “you
cut down trees, where will the animals go”?
She is also concerned that the Plant will affect the things the Dene Tha’ eat. She
explained that the Dene Tha’ eat ducks and fish from the lakes and rivers near the Plant
and is concerned that these animals may be affected, in turn affect the Dene Tha’. She
feels that if the animals become contaminated that this will result in cancers in the
community. She feels frustrated that the Dene Tha’ have to “wait and see” what the
effects from the Plant will be on their bodies and that no one can provide answers on
what the effects might be.
Janice is also concerned that the contaminants resulting from the Plant could spread to
the community through the creeks and rivers even though Hay-Zama is not
geographically close to the actual Plant site.
Janice stated that she would not hunt, trap, fish or gather where she could hear or see
a Plant. She would be concerned about the chemicals and contaminants that may have
affected the animals and vegetation.
Janice explained that a lot of Dene Tha’ community members and elders are concerned
because Dene Tha’ rely on wild meat and they feel that industry is affecting this. They
want the moose meat to be healthy so that they are healthy. Most Dene Tha’ families
store moose meat and depend on this for their diet throughout the winter months. The
majority of all Dene Tha’ diet is wild meat and they only use store bought meat on
special occasions such as Christmas. Janice is concerned about how industry will affect
this way of life.
Transcript 10
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Jessie Providence
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Jessie hunts for moose and uses her truck as the means to get to the area. She hunts
with her sister Jane, but they travel in separate vehicles.
During her hunting trips in BC, Jessie has observed caribou throughout the area.
Recently she noted three caribou in BC.
Additionally she saw fourteen moose and dozens of elk on a trip to the Liard Hot
Springs in August of 2009. Jessie notes that there are lots of elk, moose and caribou
along the Alaska Highway.
Jessie explains that the last time her husband went trapping in BC was over 20 years
ago before his father passed away. Now he has a full-time job and does not have time
to go out on the land. She notes that he always talks about going back out on the land
“some winter”.
Fishing
Jessie does most of her fishing in Habay for northern pike. Her children love dried pike
and they eat it frequently.
Travel Routes
Jessie hunts in British Columbia (BC) using the winter access roads. She generally uses
one of two routes to get there, either the road originating in Rainbow Lake that follows
the Hay River or the road originating in the Zama area that crosses the Shekilie. She
goes to this area because, with the winter access roads, BC is much closer for hunting
than Manning (Alberta).
Medicines and Berries
Jessie noted that because she only travels to BC in the winter, she does not collect
medicines or berries in the region. She does note that the Plant site has an abundance
of black spruce and the berries from these trees can be used as medicine. These trees
often grow in areas where there is muskeg.
Transcript 11
 Concerns
Jessie feels that a Plant will affect everything in the area, especially the moose. She
feels that once the plant goes in there will no longer be moose in that area as animals
tend to stay away from Plant sites.
She is concerned that the Plant site will affect the vegetation surrounding it and could
lead to contamination of the medicines and berries that grow there.
Transcript 11
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Thomas Ahkimnachie and Ricky Pastion
Date:                 November 2, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewer:          Tracy Campbell, Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
Ricky explained that people will often hunt while they are out on the land trapping. He
noted that Dene Tha’ hunters rarely set a date to go out hunting, rather, when they see
an animal while out trapping they kill it.
He further stated that the Dene Tha’ all help each other and share the food they hunt
just as they did in the past.
Thomas explained that he does not hunt in Alberta near Zama City because there are
too many buffalo. Instead, he hunts and traps in Alberta on trapline #88 and in BC on
traplines #756T015 and #756T016.
Ricky explained that he goes hunting whenever he can; on long weekends, weekends
and holidays. Most Dene Tha’ go all the time if they do not have to work.
Fishing
Thomas explained that the area surrounding the proposed Plant is mostly muskeg.
Ricky noted that beaver dams usually flood the area surrounding the proposed Plant
and small fish can be found in these flooded areas when the water is high enough to
have sufficient oxygen supply.
Ricky emphasized the importance of fish to the Dene Tha’ because they require fish to
survive. Ricky stated that he does not know what people would do if there was no
longer fish available because people depend on this, along with hunting and trapping,
as their source of food.
Medicine and Berries
Ricky and Thomas noted the types of berries they eat from the land which include
chokecherries, cranberries, strawberries, blueberries, raspberries and wild rhubarb.
Transcript 12
 They specified that rat root is often used as medicine.
Thomas also explained that the root or stem of raspberry can be eaten if the outer part
is peeled off. It does not need to be cooked or boiled and it tastes like carrots.
Ricky indicated that the roots of many plants are edible.
Concerns
Ricky is concerned that the proposed Plant will push the animals away. He explained
that in Alberta he has observed that cutlines, roads and the sound of vehicles push the
animals away.
Thomas explained that animals would either go further west or north to avoid the Plant
site.
Ricky is also concerned that more facilities or roads that are associated with the Plant
will push away animals. He already sees this occurring in the area around Rainbow
Lake, where moose and other animals are killed by traffic.
Transcript 12
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Ronnie Semansha
Date:                 November 4, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
                             “This [BC] is our traditional lands”
                                                                     -Ronnie Semansha
Hunting and Trapping
Ronnie hunts for moose in British Columbia (BC) near Kotcho Lake along the winter
access road that spans from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson. He once shot a moose
adjacent to Cabin Lake.
He also uses the Sierra Yoyo Desan road and the winter access road that loops around
Kotcho Lake for hunting. He takes this route once a week beginning on Friday
afternoons when he is finished work.
Ronnie also hunts in the area near Kwokullie Lake; he travels there via the winter
access on the 31st baseline.
Ronnie strictly hunts for moose in BC, and noted that there are hardly any caribou left.
He explained that there used to be lots of caribou in BC but there has been a drop in
recent times.
Fishing
Ronnie noted that there are pickerel in Kotcho Lake and explained that there are all
different kinds of fish out there [BC].
Travel Routes
Ronnie travels to BC using the winter access roads. He noted that there were two roads
that he generally used, one from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson and one that cuts North
to the Zama area (along the 31st baseline). When he does go out, other community
members will often accompany him and everyone chips in a little for gas and supplies.
However, he generally goes out for just one day and does not require supplies beyond
fuel.
Transcript 13
 If he cannot travel to a certain area via the winter roads then Ronnie will often use a
skidoo and the cutlines to access those areas.
Ronnie also travels to the Petitot River on occasion.
Sites
Ronnie pointed out the location of a cabin at Kwokullie Lake. He explained that this is
an old cabin that he saw while hunting in that area. He travelled there via the winter
road that is located along the 31st baseline.
Sacred Sites
Ronnie explained that in the old days there was no way for the people travelling out on
the land to transport the bodies of those that passed away back to Hay-Zama, so there
are graves everywhere.
Ronnie has only seen one grave on a hill in BC. This grave was located on a pipeline
right of way and the route was changed and the grave marked.
Traditional Knowledge
Ronnie indicated that moose calve around Kotcho Lake in the spring. This is because
there are willows surrounding the lake and that is the preferred calving habitat. They
also like to stay near a water source during this time.
Ronnie also noted that there is a moose migration through the area surrounding the
Plant site in late July, August and September. During this part of their migration the
moose head to the high ground that characterizes the Plant site.
Ronnie explained that moose are generally more active in the morning just prior to
daybreak and that is the best time to hunt.
Ronnie stated that muskeg acts as a filter for water and explained that it soaks in all the
contaminants. He noted that muskeg is good habitat for fox, lynx and marten.
Observed Changes
Ronnie has noted a drop in the number of caribou in recent years, he explained that
there used to be a lot, but now there are hardly any left.
Ronnie also noted that near wells and Plants there are often “salt spots” in the winter.
These areas look like they are snow when actually the ground is not frozen and quads
Transcript 13
 can easily sink and get stuck. Ronnie explained that he avoids areas immediately
surrounding industrial developments to avoid these ‘salt spots’.
Ronnie explained that he used to trap but now finds it too far to go; he has a job with
the Nation and does not have the time required for trapping regularly.
Concerns
Ronnie knows of a creek that flows from the Cabin Lake area into Kotcho Lake. He is
concerned that the chemicals from the Plant could flow from that creek into Kotcho
Lake and may eventually affect the Dene Tha’ downstream. He also notes that the
creeks and lakes are used by fish for spawning and migration to the Hay River in the
spring which could affect the DTFN food supply. He feels that this concern is especially
relevant to the proposed Plant because it is in an area characterized as high ground,
allowing chemicals to flow to the lower lying areas. Ronnie does not want freshwater
issues for the Dene Tha’ downstream.
Ronnie is also concerned that the chemicals from the Plant could kill the beavers.
Ronnie feels that there is potential for bears to be affected by the Plant. He worries
about bears being contaminated because some Dene Tha’ still eat bears and hunt them
while travelling on the winter roads.
He is also concerned that any berries in the vicinity of the plant site would become too
dusty to eat. Ronnie has previously noted, while quading, berries near a Plant site being
covered in dust from the roads that accompany this type of development and is
concerned that this will be the case with the proposed Plant as well.
Ronnie is also concerned that if the muskeg and trees that characterize the Plant site
were removed, the animals would have no place to go.
Ronnie also finds the increasingly restricted access in BC to be of concern. He noted
that most places have signs indicating no trespassing, gates, and warnings about H2S.
He understands the signs are necessary to warn people out on the land, but feels the
Dene Tha’ need more access to their traditional territory; “There needs to be balance”.
He is concerned that with more and more development there will be less and less
access.
Transcript 13
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Steven Tsonchoke and Robert Tsonchoke
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Translator:          Robert Tsonchoke
Interviewer:         Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
Steven is a registered trapper on British Columbia (BC) trapline #756T014, where he
traps beaver and hunts moose.
Steven explained that he used to trap with his brother and one other person but he is
too old now to trap regularly and also only has winter access by vehicle.
He trapped beaver at Kotcho Lake.
He has previously trapped in northeastern BC for beaver, lynx and mink.
Robert noted that he still goes out to BC every winter and hunts for moose most
weekends. He travels there via the Sierra Yoyo Desan road to the Spruce Road, which
takes him 5-6 hours one way. If he kills a moose before he gets there he turns back
and heads home.
Sites
Steven identified a settlement site at the confluence of the Shekilie and the Hay Rivers.
He noted that there are six burials at this location.
Steven pointed out that burials and ceremonial sites are often located along rivers or
adjacent to lakes.
He noted that there is a burial around July Lake and another at Thinahtea Lake.
Steven also identified the previous location of two cabins on his trapline; both of these
cabins burned down.
Transcript 14
 Traditional Knowledge
Robert indicated that there that there are a lot of caribou in the area near the proposed
Plant site. Steven added that caribou roam in the swampy areas of northeastern BC and
head north in the fall.
Travel Routes
Steven noted that in the past he would canoe along the Hay River and Kotcho River on
the way to and from his trapline; the canoe was made from birch bark. The would
generally head home from the trapline in the spring and would use the Hay River.
Now Steven travels by vehicle using the “Powerline Road” which begins in Rainbow
Lake.
Observed Changes
Robert explained that their trapline is still good for hunting, but things are changing
because there are too many oil companies on the trapline.
Concerns
Steven has noted changes on the land. For example, there used to be a lot of moose in
northeastern BC but now they need to go further south to hunt.
Steven would like the logging to stop on the traplines.
Steven explained that when a company drills the animals disappear and do not come
back because they do not like the noise. He feels the Plant will lead to an increase in
drilling.
Transcript 14
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Alex Wasp Colin
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Alex hunts for moose in the area by Kotcho Lake via the winter access road that
extends into British Columbia (BC) from Rainbow Lake. Alex always uses the access
road to reach this area. He generally travels to BC with Ronnie Semansha approximately
once a week.
Alex has also hunted near Cabin Lake in the summer using the Sierra Yoyo Desan road
and small access roads around Kotcho Lake.
Alex noted that the area near the Plant site has a lot of moose.
Fishing
Alex noted that there are a lot of fish in Kotcho Lake, specifically jackfish.
Travel Routes
Alex generally travels to BC using the winter access road that originates in Rainbow
Lake. However, he knows of another access road that cuts north from this road and
loops around Kwokullie and Kotcho Lake.
Alex always travels with other Nation members because he does not have a vehicle of
his own. He noted that there are a lot of community members that travel to BC that he
can go with.
Concerns
Alex is concerned that chemicals from the plant will travel through the creeks and end
up in Kotcho Lake. He explained that there are a lot of fish in Kotcho Lake and feels
that if the chemicals were to end up in the lake that it could kill the fish.
Transcript 15
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:          David Wasp Colin
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewer:          Tracy Campbell, Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
David explained that he has travelled and hunted with his father since he was 13 years
old. Through his family and the community, David’s father learned how to trap, hunt
and fish on the British Columbia (BC) trapline #755T015.
David prefers hunting for moose in BC using the winter access roads as a means to
travel to the area.
David explained that his father used to take him moose hunting at Amber River. They
would travel there via horse team. They would hunt enough moose meat to dry and
store for the winter. David reminisced about those days because “it was really nice”.
David also traps for beaver and noted that back when his father would take him moose
hunting at Amber River there were not as many beavers as there are today.
He explained that the majority of his diet comes from the land and that given a choice
between food from the store or from the land, he always prefers food from the land.
David also hunts wild chickens in the fall and collects as many as he can explaining that
it tastes better than duck.
David made special note that Dene Tha’ rarely hunt alone because ‘Fish and Wildlife’
release grizzly bears into the wild in many parts of their traditional territory. He
personally encountered this on his Uncle, Louison Ahkimnachie’s, trapline (#755T014).
David had been hunting for days and when he arrived at his uncle’s cabin he was told
about signs in the area indicating the release of a grizzly in the area. David felt that the
release of this large predator contributed to his inability to locate moose in this area.
Fishing
David uses a skidoo on the winter access roads to go ice fishing at Kotcho Lake.
Transcript 16
 Medicines and Berries
David explained that his mother was knowledgeable about medicinal plants. She would
know where to pick them and what they could be used for. He noted that she would
collect medicinal plants near the bottom of the Zama Tower.
Sites
David knows of two burials located at the Fort Nelson First Nation Reserve, Fontas. He
explained there are also buildings still standing at this location, but they are not
occupied. Also, Charlie McCarthy had a cabin at Fontas that doubled as a small store
and he remembers going there numerous times on his own and with his father.
David noted the location of a cabin just south of Kotcho Lake which he last saw this
summer (2009) when he was flown over the area during a field assessment for a
pipeline.
David explained that his family also used to have a cabin near the Bushe River Reserve.
Travel Routes
David uses the winter access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson.
David explained that he also uses the highway going from Fort Nelson to Fort St. John
and remembers when it was still gravel.
David noted that he travels to work in BC using the both the main highways and the
winter access roads. The main highway goes to Manning and then he continues west
from Manning using a winter access road called “Forestry Road”. This winter access
road separates into two forks near the AB/BC border. The south fork is called ‘Lady
Fern Road’ and leads to Doig River while the north fork is called ‘Fontas Road’ and leads
to the Fontas Reserve.
David has travelled to Fontas using both horse teams and, more recently, vehicles. In
the past, when David would travel by horse team, his father would always say that
Fontas was “just over the hill” and was not far. David stated that he has “travelled all
over”.
David says in 1971 he travelled by dog team to his uncle’s BC trapline #755T014 via
the Shekilie River. During this trip they walked north to July Lake which is known as
“Tsuk-aye” [phonetically] or “Women’s Place”.
David also recalled his mother indicating a trail near Rainbow Lake and a horse trail
located near Zama Lake. He explained that she remembered former Chief Talley using
Transcript 16
 “a trail going over a hill” to travel from Alberta to BC. David noted that his father would
travel using pack horses on this very same trail when he travelled to BC.
David explained that when he and his father travelled they would stay on the high
ground because the low ground was muskeg which made travel difficult.
Observed Changes
David noted the price of furs has changed over the years and currently the price of
beaver pelts is so low that not many people bother to trap them; it is a lot of work for
very little money.
David related a trip to Bistcho Lake in 1971 where he constructed a canvas boat and
paddled across the lake, then west along the Petitot River. David noted “it’s a really
nice place to camp”. David indicated back then there was not too much oil & gas and
the land was good. David did, however, note that there were a lot of bears at that
time.
Concerns
David is concerned about a Plant being constructed near Kotcho Lake stating “it would
not be nice”. He felt if there was a spill or some kind of accident, that contaminants
would get into the water and pollute both fish and wildlife. David explained that Kotcho
Lake is large lake and that the Dene Tha’ continue to use as a fishing area.
David noted that the community is afraid to construct cabins in areas near sour gas
wells. He explained that people think it is “risky where there is poisonous gas” because
they are afraid of the gas being carried toward the cabin on the wind.
David is worried about the continued development because wildlife will avoid
development and all that will be left in the area is fish.
David noted that some animals stay away from seismic lines, so he worries if more
seismic is done.
David is also concerned about how information about new developments is
communicated to the Elders of the community. David indicated that there are some
Elders that do not have technical knowledge about oil and gas and do not understand
why more development is continually occurring in their traditional territories.
Transcript 16
                                     Field Summary
Participant(s):      Robert Metchooyeah, Baptiste Metchooyeah
Date:                November 18, 2009
Location:            Westcoast Energy Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Field Survey:        Site Assessment
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah attended a one day site assessment of
the Westcoast Energy Fort Nelson North Processing Facility on November 18, 2009.
During this assessment Baptiste and Robert noted numerous concerns that could
potentially impact DTFN Aboriginal and treaty rights.
Consultation Process
Baptiste and Robert indicated their concerns with the consultation process because an
archaeological impact assessment report had been filed for the Project in July 2009 that
lacked DTFN input. They felt that this, coupled with the November 18th site visit was an
unsatisfactory consultation process and did not capture DTFN concerns and knowledge
about the Project area. This was highlighted by the site being covered by approximately
1 foot of snow which made it impossible for Robert and Baptiste to accurately assess
the archaeological site or identify any traditional use areas. Both Robert and Baptiste
expressed a desire to return to the Plant site when there was no snow cover.
Baptiste and Robert were also concerned with the construction that appeared to be
underway on the Project footprint. They noted heavy equipment tracks on the ground
and felled trees. They felt this activity was inappropriate because the ground was not
yet frozen and the project was still pending approval.
Environmental Observations
During the site visit Baptiste and Robert noted that the Project could result in
destruction to woodland caribou migration trails, wolverine habitat, fresh water sources,
medicinal plants, edible plants and animal habitat. They were particularly concerned
with the disruption to caribou migration trails and wolverine habitat as these are species
at risk.
Robert and Baptiste expressed concern about the Project’s cumulative affects to the
environment and felt that there was a proliferation of gas plants in the area.
Transcript 17
gggﬁéﬁﬁﬁwﬁvé 22 “'7’” .3. ‘31”
weeeﬁmww 2» ===- 5&6; “i“ i
ﬁﬁwe§%““t m, 22 , " . 2. é m .
at ...:KWe-ww-
ﬁﬁﬁgﬁ“ «2.351923
% ...».
We?» ﬁvéﬁ“
Suite 340 — I 122 Mainland Street
Vancouver, BC V6B 5L1
Phone: 604.687.0549 Fax: 604.687.2696
Date: August 26 2009
File No: 1003-040
T0:
Fax 403-292-5503
National Energy Board -- Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry, Secretary of the Board
C.C.:
Dene Tha’ Chief and Council by email James.Ahnassax@denetha.ca
Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group TragX.Camgbell@CalliouGr0ug.com 3
’ Paul Hartzheim, Spectra Energy ghartzheimggspectraenerg.com
Shelly Cairns, TCPL JW G Shelly cairns@transcanada.com
Line Lacasse line lacasse@transcanada.com
Number of pages including this cover page .
Please see attached letter. -
Thank you
Nicole (250-405—3460 — nfobert@jﬂdaw.ca)
This communication is intended only for the use by the individual or entity to Which it is addressed and may contain information that is
privileged, conﬁdential and protected from disclosure under law. If you are not the intended addressee, or a person authorized to deliver
this document to the addressee, any review, disclosure, copying or other action based on the content of this communication is strictly
prohibited. If you receive this communication in error, please notify the sender immediately by telephone or email. Thank you.

ta@f%§%%w..§ '
§§ﬁ§§§$si .0 .. . ..
?gséaaatﬂ 2. é -
??%gﬁmsf a . saws . a . “.3
aaatst "
Eagvt
“84%?

Suite 340 — 1122 Mainland Street

Vancouver, BC V6B 5L1

Phone: 604.687.0549 Fax: 604.687.2696
Au U. 26 2009 Rosanne M.Kyle

g St Direct Line: 604.687.0549, ext. 107

E—mail: rkyle@jﬂ<law.ca
Delivered by F ax 403-292-5503

File No. 1003—040
National Energy Board
444 — 7th Avenue SW
Calgary, Alberta T2P 0X8
Attention: Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry, Secretary of

the Board
Dear Ms. DutiI-Berry: -
Re: Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission (“Spectra”)

Dene Tha’ First Nation (“Dene Tha’”) is submitting this letter as notice to the National Energy Board
(“NEE”) that consultation with the Dene Tha’ is grossly inadequate in relation to the above-mentioned
project (the “Project”). The Project is located within Dene Tha’s Traditional Territory, in areas where
Dene Tha’ members historically and currently exercise Aboriginal and Treaty rights.
Prior to our meeting with the NEB on August 18, 2009, we were not aware that Spectra had ﬁled its
application With the NEB in relation to the Project (the “‘Application”) or that the Application is
available 0n~1ine. We were also unaware until that time that the Project scope had changed to include
connection to the TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline project. We were also completely unaware of the
Project scope, that the Project is a sour gas processing facility with proposed ﬂaring, or that Spectra has
indicated that Dene Tha’ has no concerns about the Project.
Spectra sent a 0ne~page “update letter” and map in relation to the Project to Dene Tha’ on April 30,
2009. Dene Tha’ responded to the letter and indicated that it wanted to continue to receive information
from Spectra 0n the proposed Project, but that Dene Tha’ had capacity challenges at that time. At no
time did Dene Tha’ advise Spectra that it did not wish to be consulted or receive information on the
Project, or that it had no concerns about potential impacts from the Proj ect. '
In its April 30, 2009 letter, Spectra referred to the Project as the North Maxhamish Loop and Northern
Complex Projects. This is not the current name used in the Application, Which has created some

confusion for Dene Tha’. There was no mention made in the letter to the fact that the Project would be
connected to the TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline Project. Spectra also did not indicate in its letter
what the Project scope would be. Dene Tha’ is quite concerned that the Project Will have residual
cumulative effects together with the TCPL Horn River Mainline project and the Encana Cabin Gas Plant
project. Based on our preliminary review of the Spectra Application, it appears to be extremely likely
that these three proj ects will have combined effects on wildlife, vegetation, sound and wetlands that will
require a comprehensive cumulative effects assessment on the impacts to Dene Tha’s Aboriginal and
' Treaty rights.
Dene Tha’ was not involved in the environmental review process for the Proj ect. Dene Tha’ input is not
reﬂected in any of the biophysical or socio-eeonomic investigations that were done to support the
Application to the NEB. Further, there appears to be no consideration or identiﬁcation in the
Application of the potential Proj ect impacts to the exercise of 'Dene Tha’s Aboriginal and Treaty rights.
Can the NEB advise as to what consultation has occurred with Dene Tha’ to date in relation to this
proposed Project, including in relation to notiﬁcation of the Application?
We note that the Project is in close proximity to the EnCana Cabin Gas Plant and that Dene Tha’ is
being consulted by the BC E'AO and the proponent in relation to that project, With some funding being
provided for Dene Tha’ to undertake some Traditional Use Study and Environmental Assessment review
work. In addition, the proposed Project is integrally connected to the TCPL pipeline project, another
proj ect on which Dene Tha’ is also being consulted. Clearly, regulators and other companies recognize
that projects in this area of Dene Tha’s Traditional Territory have the potential to adversely impact Dene
Tha’s rights and interests and are engaging in consultation processes to reﬂect that fact.
To date, as noted above, there has been woefully inadequate consultation with Dene Tha’ with respect to
the Project. Dene Tha’ insists that a meaningful consultation process be undertaken before any further
steps are taken in relation to the Application. Dene Tha’ requires early consultation, including in
relation to scoping for the Project, EA triggers, and the level of environmental and other assessments
that are required. We ask that the NEB advise as to which federal department or agency will be
responsible for conducting Crown consultation in respect of the Proj ect.
Please also advise What federal and provincial regulatory authorizations Spectra is required to obtain in
relation to the Proj ect.
We understand that Spectra has made the Application pursuant to s. 58 of the National Energy Board
Act. In our View, no decision should be made in relation to whether the Project should be exempted
from any of sections 29 to 33 or 47 of the National Energy Board until meaningful consultation has
taken place with Dene Tha’. It may be that, in order to adequately assess impacts to Dene Tha’s rights
and interests and to determine appropriate accommodation measures in respect of the Project, a NEB
hearing will be required.
Dene Tha’ will be contacting Spectra for capacity funding to review the Application. Dene Tha’ is also
in the process of reviewing the Application in more detail and plans to submit preliminary comments on
the Project Application to the NEB as soon as possible. We would appreciate if you could provide us
with a complete copy of the Application at your earliest convenience.
In the meantime, we ask that NEB conﬁrm that no ﬁarther steps will be taken by the NEB in respect of
consideration of the Application until meaningful consultation has taken place with Dene Tha’.

We look forward to hearing from you on these matters.
Yours truly,
James Freed: an K 93% 5 ‘u-ion
Peri ‘ r
E '2.
j Rosanne M. Kyle ..
' AWK/rmk/nf
{ 5 cc: Dene Tha’ Chief and Council by email James.Ahnassaygwﬁenethaﬁa
J Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group Tracy.Campbell@CaHjouG'roup.C-0m
Paul Hartzheim, Spectra Energy Qhartzheimgtgspectraenemycom
Shelly Cairns, TCPL J WG Shellymcaimsgcatranscanada.com
Line Lacasse Iinemlacasse@,transcanada.com

Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory
          – Northeastern BC
                 Prepared for
            Dene Tha First Nation
              31 October 2009
                 Prepared by
                                  207 Edgebrook Close NW
                                           Calgary, Alberta
                                         T3A 4W5 Canada
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                         List of Contributors
Technical Review,
Project Management                                  Dr. Petr Komers, P. Biol.
Data Analysis, data management                      Mr. Zoran Stanojevic, B.Sc., M.F
Review and Research Support                         Ms. Sarah Hechtenthal, M.Sc., P. Biol.
                                                                                           Page ii
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                                               PAGE
1.0      INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 1
2.0      REMOTENESS AS AN ECOSYSTEM SERVICE............................................................ 3
         2.1      Past and Current Disturbances ........................................................................................................ 3
         2.2      Projected Decrease of Natural Surface.......................................................................................... 6
3.0      MOOSE .............................................................................................................................. 7
         3.1      Evidence of Moose Habitat Use in Disturbed Areas................................................................... 7
         3.2      Moose Use Habitat Less When Fragmented and in Low Supply ............................................. 7
         3.3      Evidence of Moose Habitat Decline in the BC Focus Area....................................................... 8
4.0      RECOMMENDATIONS AND CLOSURE ...................................................................... 9
5.0      REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 11
                                                      LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Satellite Images Covering the DTFN TLU Focus Areas in AB and BC ............................................... 2
Figure 2:         Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development on Natural Surfaces in the BC
                  Focus Area............................................................................................................................................. 5
Figure 3: The projected conversion of all natural land cover to industrial surface, including areas
                  of zones of influence, in the BC Focus Area................................................................................. 6
Figure 4: Moose pellet group density (indicating intensity of habitat use) in moose habitat
                  increases as the amount of moose habitat increases in the landscape (up to
                  approximately 70%, there were no landscapes with more than 70% moose
                  habitat in them; reprinted from Stewart 2007)............................................................................ 8
Figure 5:         Possible Moose Habitat in the BC Focus Area...........................................................................10
                                                 LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A:       Change of Land Cover Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                Page iii
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
1.0           Introduction
Wildlife habitat and vegetation communities entail resources traditionally used by First Nations. The
disturbance of these resources directly affects traditional land use (Freeman 1994, NRBS 1996) and,
using satellite imagery, can be measured as the change in terrestrial land cover (Seto et al. 2002). In the
environmental management context, changes in the environment require that traditional resource use
adapts to the changes. The environment varies naturally and the societies that developed in that
environment are resilient or able to withstand the challenges of environmental variability (Folke et al.
2003). However, if the magnitude of disturbance pushes the system beyond its natural variability into a
different state and different set of controls, then social resilience may not be able to withstand that shift
(Folke et al. 2003). For ecologists, therefore, the task is to provide the information on the amount of
environmental variability including the degree of ecological disturbance that may lead to the system
shifting into a different state with a different set of controls (Gordon et al. 2008).
When undertaking this work, we were mindful that a significant concern of the Dene Tha’ First Nation
(DTFN) is the impact of industrial development (existing and future) upon the exercise of the Treaty
and Aboriginal rights (hereafter “Treaty Rights”). We have been advised by DTFN that those rights
include the right to carry on traditional resource-based activities within their traditional territory, such
as hunting, trapping, fishing and gathering.
MSES Inc (MSES) was retained to measure the changes in land cover within certain portions of the
Traditional Land Use (TLU) area of DTFN. In this study, the focus area is located in B.C. south of 60˚ N
(Figure 1). The total area that was analyzed is 31,908 km2 . For the purpose of this study we focus on
the disturbance of traditional lands which we understand to mean the loss of natural land cover resulting
from development or human activities. Natural land cover presumably includes the vegetation and the
wildlife required to exercise Treaty Rights compared with areas where there has been industrial
development, which (as explained below) do not permit the exercise of Treaty Rights or make it much
more difficult for DTFN to do so.
To calculate the rate of disturbance from the past to the present and into the future it was necessary to
determine the density of linear disturbance (such as roads, pipelines, or power lines) and the area of the
footprint disturbance (such as plant sites and well pads), asking the following overarching questions:
•    how much of each kind of activity (linear and footprint disturbance) was there previously;
•    how much of each activity is there currently; and
•    how much of each activity will there be in the future if current rates of development continue?
                                                                                                      Page 1
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                         Figure 1: Satellite Images Covering the DTFN TLU Focus Areas in AB and BC
                                                                                                                   Page 2
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.0           Remoteness as an Ecosystem Service
In this section, we focus on the “deprivation of traditional lands”. These lands include ecosystems, and
the biological diversity contained within them, that provide a stream of services which are essential for
the well being of people. There are very basic, essential life-supporting ecosystem system services such
as the provisioning of food (wildlife and vegetation), water and air. However, there are also less tangible
cultural, spiritual, and aesthetic services (Daily 1997). Through such essential services, ecosystems
sustain societal development and progress (Folke et al. 2003). Remoteness appears to be among the
essential ecosystem services as First Nations often comment on industry disturbing their experience of
remoteness which they require to exercise their traditional activities (ACFN 2003, FMA 2009,
Woodward & Company 2009).
Here, we focus on natural land surfaces that include the vegetation and the wildlife required to exercise
Treaty Rights versus surfaces disturbed by industrial activities which do not provide for the exercise of
those rights or which make it much more difficult to do so.
2.1           Past and Current Disturbances
The rate of disturbance through industrial activities was calculated based on satellite imagery. Using a
series of satellite Landsat5 images we calculated the yearly rate of converting natural surfaces to
industrial ones from 1993 to present (as captured in the satellite image of 2008). We applied a change
analysis using publically available data which were processed based on the image algebra method which
allows one to compute the change in each pixel between two images of different dates (see Appendix A
for detailed methods).
In our ecological research and evaluations we typically find that animals avoid the disturbance by humans
near industrial activities. This area in the vicinity of industrial features is typically called a “zone of
influence” (ZOI). Moreover, in our experiences working with First Nations, we have learned that local
hunters and trappers also avoid the areas near industrial activities. Consequently, in addition to analyzing
the effects of direct vegetation clearing and the simple length of linear corridors, we have applied a ZOI
around each footprint and each linear industrial feature.
A 250 m ZOI around the footprints of developments and the centerlines of linear corridors was applied
based on the potential for reduced animal activity and hunting and trapping activity near industrial
features. The distance of 250 m was chosen because, for example, moose sign (such as tracks or faecal
pellets) was found to be reduced within 200 m of roads (Rolley and Keith 1980), woodland caribou
avoid industrial features within about 250 m (but avoidance could be greater or smaller for some
features during some seasons, Dyer et al. 2001), and other mammals have been observed to avoid
industrial features within this distance (Forman et al. 2003). Birds in woodlands have also been observed
                                                                                                      Page 3
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
to avoid roads, power lines and seismic lines by up to about 300 m depending on species and ecological
context (Kroodsma 1982, Machtans 2006, Bayne et al. 2008). Our own measurements in wildlife surveys
and field courses with university students and graduate student research show similar avoidance effects
(Appendix E from Imperial Oil Resource Venture Ltd. 2005, Gavin and Komers 2006 and Parent 2008).
Finally, the authors of the recent Terrestrial Ecosystem Management Framework (in North-Eastern
Alberta) also used the 250 m zone of influence in their calculation of disturbance when planning regional
land use, adopting the understanding that animals are disturbed within this distance from industrial
features.
Clearly, the ZOI differs widely with parameters such as wildlife species, the type of industrial features
and related activities, and the ecological context (reproductive cycle, hunting or predation regimes,
habitat structure and quality). However, it appears that in the absence of detailed information on any of
these parameters the 250 m distance is a reasonable approximation for a zone within which First
Nations could not effectively exercise their Treaty Rights.
Assuming that the sensory disturbance includes a ZOI of 250 m near any industrial feature, of the
31,908 km2 land area in the BC portion of this study, 19% was disturbed in 1993, 27% in 2002, and 31%
in 2008 (Figure 2).
Combining all linear developments that we could detect on the Landsat images, by the year 2008, there
were 21,041 km of linear corridors in the BC portion of this study, representing a density of
0.66 km/km2. To put this density into context, there may be density thresholds of seismic lines of as low
as 0.3-0.8 km/km2, depending on the ecological context, at which caribou and moose populations may be
excluded from the area, or predator and hunting controls would need to be implemented (Weclaw &
Hudson 2004). At 0.66 km/km2 some thresholds may be reached or exceeded. In such a case, the
effectiveness of traditional resource use near linear corridors could be compromised.
                                                                                                   Page 4
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                        Figure 2:        Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development on Natural Surfaces in the BC Focus Area
                                                                                                                                 Page 5
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.2                                            Projected Decrease of Natural Surface
If one assumes that the yearly rate of disturbance remains constant in the future at 260 km2 per year, as
it was in the past 15 years, then the projected disturbance of all natural land cover will be 100% by
about the year 2095 (Figure 3). In other words, past the year 2095 there will be no area left where a
person could go to be farther than 250 m away from an industrial feature. However, if development
intensifies to include activities such as shale gas exploration and development, the date when all natural
cover will be disturbed could be substantially sooner than 2095.
As to the density of linear corridors, 586 km are added to the area each year. This leads to a doubling of
the linear corridor density in about 35 years. If 100% of the land cover will be disturbed by the year
2095, then the density of linear corridors will be 2.2 km/km2. These estimates only reflect major linear
corridors that can be detected by satellite images at a resolution of 25 m (our experience indicates that
satellite image analysis detects only about 36% of seismic lines). This means that most thinner
developments remain undetected in our analysis, but it is well known that seismic lines affect wildlife
distribution (Dyer et al. 2001, Weclaw & Hudson 2004, Sorensen et al. 2008). In other words, because
of the relatively low resolution of satellite images, our projection of disturbance underestimate the
actual effects.
                                            35000
                                            30000
        Undisturbed Land Area (square km)
                                            25000
                                            20000
                                            15000
                                            10000
                                            5000
                                               0
                                               1950         1970        1990       2010       2030        2050       2070       2090     2110
                                                                                              Year
                                            Figure 3: The projected conversion of all natural land cover to industrial
                                               surface, including areas of zones of influence, in the BC Focus Area.
The black diamonds and line represent actual measurements from the satellite image analysis. The first diamond, in
      1964, represents the area of the BC Focus Area and is an approximation, showing that some time before
                                                    developments, this amount of land area was available for traditional resource use.
                                                                                                                                                Page 6
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
3.0           Moose
3.1           Evidence of Moose Habitat Use in Disturbed Areas
There is a great deal of evidence that moose do not readily use disturbed areas. For example, in the Oil
Sands Region (North-Eastern Alberta), no moose sign on reclaimed or disturbed sites has been found by
Suncor Energy Inc in either their 2007 Annual Conservation & Reclamation Report for the Millennium Mine
or their Wildlife Monitoring Program March 2006 for the Firebag Project. Similarly, no moose sign has been
reported by either Shell (Shell Canada Energy Jackpine Mine Phase 1) or Albian Sands (Albian Sands
Energy Inc Muskeg River Mine) on their reclaimed areas. Moreover, no empirical documentation of
moose re-establishment has been provided by Syncrude in their 2006 Closure and Reclamation Plan.
Finally, moose used wildlife corridors significantly less near disturbed areas compared to undisturbed
control areas (Golder Associates 2008). Numerous other studies conducted by MSES researchers
showed similar relationships of moose avoiding industrial disturbance in the Kananaskis Country
(Alberta), in the Mackenzie Valley (NWT), and in Alaska (USA).
3.2           Moose Use Habitat Less When Fragmented and in Low Supply
Based on the findings above that moose avoid industrial features, one could expect that, at a regional
scale, moose would be less abundant where industrial disturbance is high. Accordingly, increased
fragmentation and decreased habitat availability result in higher isolation of moose habitat patches and
smaller patch size of moose habitat. Moose have been found to use small and isolated habitat patches
less often because it may not be worthwhile for moose to reach them (Figure 4, Stewart 2007). The
implication is that the number of moose in an area declines faster than expected from the decline in
habitat availability alone because moose are unlikely to use habitat patches that are small and far apart.
Moreover, surveys conducted by regulatory agencies or private industry between the years 1960 and
2008 in the Oil Sands Region showed that moose density is declining in that region. The declining trend
is statistically highly significant (Spearman rank order correlations rs=-0.52, N=44, p<0.001, analysis
based on Table 5-1, Attachment 1 of Suncor 2008). The declining trend of moose population density
appears to coincide well with the declining availability of moose habitat in the Oil Sands Region.
                                                                                                     Page 7
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
             Figure 4: Moose pellet group density (indicating intensity of habitat use)
   in moose habitat increases as the amount of moose habitat increases in the landscape
        (up to approximately 70%, there were no landscapes with more than 70% moose
                             habitat in them; reprinted from Stewart 2007)
There is a great deal of evidence from research in landscape ecology that fragmentation and isolation of
habitat patches affects the ability of animals using the patches (Collingham et al. 2000, Laurance et al.
2002). Research on moose in Alberta appears to support this evidence (Stewart 2007).
3.3           Evidence of Moose Habitat Decline in the BC Focus Area
The rate of decline in habitat availability was calculated based on satellite imagery. Using a series of
satellite Landsat5 images we calculated the yearly rate of disturbing moose habitat between 1993 to
present. We applied a change analysis as described in Section 2.1 and Appendix A of this report.
Moose habitat in the BC Focus Area declined from 8,134 km2 (in 2002) to 7,061 km2 (in 2008). This
represents a loss of 13% of moose habitat or a yearly loss of 77 km2 from the originally available (in
1993). Moose habitat was determined by calculating the area of vegetation communities that are
preferred by moose. The data on distribution of vegetation communities were obtained from federal
mapping sources (Canadian Forest Service, Pacific Forestry Centre, EOSD Land Cover Classification).
However, the accuracy of both the vegetation maps and the preference of moose for any given
vegetation community should be tested in the BC Focus Area, because we have currently no field data
that would allow us to verify our assumptions for this particular area.
                                                                                                  Page 8
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
We also assumed that habitat normally preferred by moose that is within 250 m of industrial features is
avoided by moose; therefore, we assumed all habitat within 250 m of industrial features as having been
disturbed. Our assumption is based on many ungulate studies in peer-reviewed literature (Rolley and
Keith 1980, Dyer et al. 2001, Forman et al. 2003, Gavin and Komers 2006) as well as our own
measurements in wildlife surveys and field courses with our students. The Alberta Sustainable Resource
Development, in its Terrestrial Ecosystem Management Framework (in North-Eastern Alberta) also used
the 250 m zone of influence in their calculation of disturbance when planning regional land use, adopting
the understanding that animals are disturbed within this distance from industrial features.
In conclusion, the declining availability of moose habitat combined with an increasing fragmentation of
the habitat has probably already resulted in local reductions of moose density. If the disturbance trend
continues, the moose population within the BC Focus Area will likely cease to be viable within a few
decades. A map depicting the declining availability of moose habitat and increasing fragmentation
between 1993 and 2008 in the BC Focus Area is provided in Figure 5.
4.0           Recommendations and Closure
Information is now needed on how much land is “sufficient land” to exercise traditional rights. In other
words, an analysis is essential to show how much land a First Nation requires to exercise its rights. Is
the remaining 69 % in the year 2008 sufficient for this purpose? If yes, how much more development can
occur until the threshold is reached when First Nations can no longer exercise their rights in the BC
focus area? Whether it is at the current state or at some future development scenario, the observed
rate of development begs the question: Will the First Nations and their culture disappear from the
landscape or will regional development planning somehow accommodate the existence of First Nations?
Our results provide a basis for discussion between the DTFN and industry and government, with the
hope that such discussion will lead to avenues by which the DTFN can be involved in regional land use
planning, setting targets and thresholds that would achieve a balance between industrial development
and effective traditional land use.
                                                                                                   Page 9
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                                     Figure 5: Possible Moose Habitat in the BC Focus Area
                                                                                                           Page 10
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
5.0           References
Bayne, E.M., L. Habib and S. Boutin. 2008. Impacts of chronic anthropogenic noise from energy-
         sector activity on abundance of songbirds in the boreal forest. Conservation Biology, 22:
         1186–1193.
Collingham, Y.C. and B. Huntley. 2000. Impacts of habitat fragmentation and patch size upon
         migration rates. Ecological Applications, 10, 131-144.
Daily, G. 1997. Nature's services: Societal dependence on natural ecosystems. Washington:
         Island Press.
Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Neill, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2001. Avoidance of industrial development by
         woodland caribou. J. Wildl. Manage., 65, 531-542.
FMA Heritage Inc. 2009. Traditional Knowledge Study, Chipewyan Prairie Déné First Nation
         Meg Energy Corporation Christina Lake Regional Project, Phase 3. FMA 147908.Tk
Folke, C., J. Colding and F. Berkes. 2003. Synthesis: building resilience and adaptive capacity in
         social-ecological systems. In: Navigating Social-Ecological Systems, Building Resilience for
         Complexity and Change, ed. by F. Berkes, C. Folke, and J. Colding, Cambridge
         University Press, Cambridge, pp. 352-387.
Forman, R.T., D. Sperling, J.A. Bissonette, A.P. Clevenger, C.D. Cutshall, V.H. Dale, L. Fahrig,
         R. France, C.R. Goldman, K. Heanue, J.A. Jones, F.J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and
         T.C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: science and solutions. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
         USA.
Freeman, M. 1994. Social and human issues associated with large scale land clearing and
         development of boreal ecosystems. Executive summary of a workshop on the impacts of
         land clearing on the hydrologic and aquatic resources of boreal forests in Alberta,
         November 18 and 19, 1994. Northern River Basin Study Project Report 63.
Gavin, S.D. and P.E. Komers. 2006. Do pronghorn (Antilocapra americana) perceive roads as a
         predation risk? Canadian journal of Zoology, 84:1775-1780.
                                                                                               Page 11
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Golder Associates Ltd. 2008. Jackpine mine - Phase 1 wildlife corridor monitoring, Year 2
         annual report 2007. Prepared for Shell Canada Limited.
Gordon, L.J., G.D. Peterson and E.M. Bennett. 2008. Agricultural modifications of hydrological
         flows create ecological surprises. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 23, 211-219.
Imperial Oil Resources Ventures Ltd. 2005. Wildlife models used in the assessment of potential
         effects of the Mackenzie Gas Project. Prepared by AMEC Americas; submitted to the
         Northern Gas Project Secretariat, Exhibit Number J-IORVL-00072.
Kroodsma, R.L. 1982. Edge effect on breeding forest birds along a power-line corridor. The
         Journal of Applied Ecology, 19, 361-370.
Laurance, W.F., T.E. Lovejoy, H.L. Vasconcelos, E.M. Bruna, R.K. Didham, P.C. Stouffer,
         C. Gascon, S.G Laurance and E. Sampaio. 2002. Ecosystem decay of Amazonian
         fragments: a 22 year investigation. Cons. Biol., 16, 605-618.
Machtans, C.S. 2006. Songbird response to seismic lines in the western boreal forest: a
         manipulative experiment. Can. J. Zool., 84, 1421-1430.
Northern River Basin Study 1996. Report to the Ministers; Section 3.4 Traditional Knowledge.
         Canada, Alberta, Northwest Territories. ISBN 0-662-24356-0
Parent, A. 2008. Monitoring protected areas: habitat use of ungulates in the Evan Thomas
         provincial recreation area. April 18th 2008, Environmental Science 505, University of
         Calgary.
Rolley, R.E. and L.B. Keith. 1980. Moose population dynamics and winter habitat use at
         Rochester, Alberta, 1965-1979. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 94, 9-18.
Seto, K. C., C. E. Woodcock, C. Song, X. Huang, J. Lu, and R. K. Kaufmann. 2002. Monitoring
         land-use change in the Pearl River Delta using Landsat TM. International Journal of Remote
         Sensing 23:1985-2004.
Sorensen, T., P.D. McLoughlin, D. Hervieux, E. Dzus, J. Nolan, B. Wynes, and S. Boutin. 2008.
         Determining sustainable levels of cumulative effects for boreal caribou. Journal of Wildlife
         Management 72:900-905.
                                                                                              Page 12
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Stewart, A. 2007. The effects of habitat amount and fragmentation on ungulates in the Alberta
         foothills: mosaic versus binary perspectives. A thesis submitted to the faculty of
         graduate studies in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
         Science, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Alberta.
Suncor. 2008. Suncor Energy Ltd., application for approval of the Suncor Energy MD9 Mine
         Waste Dump; Supplemental Information Requests, Attachment 1; submitted to the
         Alberta ERCB.
Weclaw, P. and R.J. Hudson. 2004. Simulation of conservation and management of woodland
         caribou. Ecological Modelling, 177, 75-94.
Woodward & Company Barristers and Solicitors Law Corporation. 2009. Interviews conducted
         with ACFN Community Members in December 2008 and January 2009.
                                                                                         Page 13
         Appendix A
Change of Land Cover Analysis
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
1.0           Change of Land Cover Analysis
We estimated the change in the landscape based on the:
1) digitized linear disturbances that are visible on the Landsat5 images at a 1:50,000 scale;
2) change analysis of the Landsat images which extracts areas that have been changed between two
     consecutive images; and
3) footprints digitized from regulatory applications for the planned and approved projects that are not
     yet visible on the most current image.
Linear disturbances that were visible on the Landsat images were digitized and used as a separate layer
of lines. We did not have any reliable information on the width of linear disturbances because they do
not have a footprint per se, unless they were buffered by 250 m (see below), so as a result, the change
analysis only addresses footprints of non-linear developments such as clearings, facilities, mining
operations, etc.
The Landsat images used for the analysis were taken in 1992, 2002 and 2008. The image resolution was
30 x 30 m and they were orthorectified using geodetic and elevation control data to correct for
positional accuracy and relief displacement. Large blocks of Landsat data were adjusted through a
patented procedure that uses pixel correlation to acquire tie-points within the overlap area between
adjacent Landsat images (USGS 2008). Ground control points were fixed, and images were projected to
the Universal Transverse Mercator map projection. All bands were individually re-sampled, using a
nearest neighbour algorithm. The result is a final product with a Root Mean Square Error of better than
50m in positional accuracy (USGS 2008). To estimate the disturbances other than linear, we performed
a change analysis using data processing based on the image algebra method (Wickware and Howarth
1981, Singh 1989 and Stanojevic et al. 2006).
The image algebra method is based on a mathematical manipulation of the values of two input images.
Methods within the image algebra method include: simple differencing, image regression, and image
rationing. Rationing and regression are useful when considering more than two dates because a common
relationship is established between the images in an effort to normalize areas of non-change. We have
used the simple differencing method, which employs a simple equation for the differencing of a common
band of imagery for two image dates as shown below:
                                           Dijk = BVijk(1) – BVijk(2) + c
                                                                                                Page A-1
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
where: Dijk = change in pixel value
         BVijk(1) = brightness value at time 1
         BVijk(2) = brightness value at time 2
         c = constant
         i = line number
         j = column number
         k = band number
The image algebra method allows the analysts to define the level of change that they are interested in
describing. In our analysis, we specified that the change in pixel value had to be at least 10%. We
compared the satellite image from 1992 to the images from 2002, and the image from 2002 to the image
from 2007 in the south and 2008 in the north, in order to detect changes caused by anthropogenic
disturbances between these periods of time.
The 4th or 5th image bands were used for differencing within the image pairs. These were used to
minimize the atmospheric effects on the spectral signature of any given land cover type. A raster file was
created based on the output of this image differencing. The output raster file depicted all pixel changes
greater than (approximately) 10% between the two dates. In some cases, the bands being compared
were evaluated for minor differences in reflectance unrelated to changes in cover type. Discrepancies
were treated by evaluating and matching the histograms of the bands used in the analysis. This process
aided in the reduction of in-between scene variability as a result of potential differences in atmospheric
conditions.
All of the raster files depicting change were compared with the image pairs to ensure that the
appropriate data were captured. In order to reduce the data “noise” that resulted from the processing
routine, the initial processed data set was re-processed using a filter to eliminate the smaller, scattered
clusters of pixels that were less than 0.27 ha in size (3 pixels). Upon visual inspection of the image pairs,
the vast majority of these small, scattered clusters of pixels appeared to indicate “natural” and/or
phenological changes, such as varying water levels in wetlands and lakes, or varying leaf colour and
cover. In some cases, the filter eliminated linear disturbances such as roads, seismic line, etc., but these
were manually re-inserted into our “anthropogenically-disturbed” data layer during the visual checking
stage.
An unsupervised isodata clustering process was also applied to the image files in order to provide an
additional dataset to assist in determining whether specific identified changes were anthropogenically-
caused disturbances. Clusters which fell into both classes were identified as “crossovers” and these
pixels were subjected to another round of isodata clustering (with a greater number of specified classes)
                                                                                                    Page A-2
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
and then classified accordingly. This complementary data layer was especially useful in identifying areas
affected by wildfire.
In addition to the classification of pixel clusters in the differencing output raster files, the analyst
manually “cleaned” the borders of some of the detected changes. Some of the changes that were
eliminated by the “noise” filter that was performed were manually recovered and added back into the
data set of anthropogenically-disturbed clusters. The pixels classified as “anthropogenically-disturbed”
were used to create a digital disturbance layer.
1.1           Disturbance Buffer (Zone of Influence)
A disturbance buffer or zone of influence of 250 m around the footprints of developments and the
centerlines of linear corridors was arbitrarily applied based on the potential for reduced animal activity
and hunting and trapping activity near industrial features. The distance of 250 m was chosen because, for
example, moose sign was found to be reduced within 200 m of roads (Rolley and Keith 1980), caribou
avoid industrial features within about 250 m (but avoidance could be greater or smaller for some feature
during some seasons, Dyer et al. 2001), and other mammals have been observed to avoid industrial
features within this distance (Forman et al. 2003). Birds in woodlands have also been observed to avoid
roads, power lines and seismic lines by up to about 300 m depending on species and ecological context
(Kroodsma 1982, Belisle et al. 2001 and Machtans 2006).
Clearly, the zone of influence differs widely between the species, the type of industrial features and
related activities, and the ecological context (reproductive cycle, hunting or predation regimes, habitat
structure and quality). However, it appears that, in absence of detailed information on any of the
situations, the 250 m distance is a reasonable approximation for a zone within which First Nations could
not effectively exercise their rights.
1.2           Atmospheric Correction
The solar spectrum electromagnetic radiation signals that satellites collect are affected by aerosols and
gases in the atmosphere. Performing atmospheric correction on the satellite images can account for this
modification and lead to improvements in classification and detection, and therefore, atmospheric
correction problems have received considerable attention from researchers in remote sensing who have
devised a number of solution approaches. Sophisticated approaches are computationally demanding and
have only been validated on a very small scale (Tucker and Sellers 1986), and, in fact, some researchers
have determined that atmospheric correction is unnecessary in many cases (Tucker et al. 2004).
                                                                                                 Page A-3
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
We addressed the issue of atmospheric influence in our study by first creating a cloud-water mask and
then performing differencing using only spectral band 4 or 5, because these are less influenced by
atmospheric conditions. Other studies also dropped the bands most influenced by atmospheric effects
from their analyses (Skole and Tucker1993, Collins and Woodcock 1994, and Foody et al. 1996).
1.3           Accuracy Analyses
Accuracy assessments determine the quality of the information derived from remotely sensed data
(Congalton and Green 1999). We include both qualitative-positional and quantitative-classification
assessments.
In previous assessments we tested the accuracy of our disturbance mapping over a large area. In
qualitative assessments, we determine if we correctly assigned disturbed versus undisturbed classes by
comparing the class extracted from the imagery with what we see on the ground. In other words, we
tried to answer the simple question: does the map correctly show what is on the ground? We visited a
number of sites and we travelled along major roads to verify the existence of disturbances that we
detected on the Landsat images.
Quantitative assessments attempt to identify and measure remote sensing-based error such as
misclassification. There are two main types of common errors including omission (underestimation) and
commission (overestimation). Processes that use medium and low resolution images produce larger
errors than high resolution images. In this part of assessment, we compared our data derived from
Landsat images with reference data. As a reference, we used AltaLis 1:20,000 transportation data sets.
Data were obtained from four randomly selected sheets from the National Topographic System (NTS).
Each NTS sheet covered 215 km2.
The main reasons for the selection of the data from AltaLis were data accuracy, availability and cost.
According to AltaLis, “The 1:20,000 Base Feature dataset is the most accurate and detailed of the Base
products, and was created to populate GIS applications” (AltaLis 2008). Base Features is a GIS-ready
dataset that has been compiled internally within the Provincial Government since 1996, and is now
available to the private sector through its distributor, AltaLIS Ltd. The Base Feature Project merged,
connected, updated, restructured, revised, and attributed several topographic themes covering our
study area, using various resources such as provincial 1:20 000 Provincial Digital Mapping Program
(accuracy ± 5 m), Indian Remote Sensing satellite imagery (accuracy ±25 m) and other data sources
including Orthophoto imagery, Aerial photography, and Spot imagery (accuracy ±10 m).
                                                                                               Page A-4
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.0           References
AltaLis. 2008. Bring data to life; base overview. Website accessed 8 October 2008:
         http://www.altalis.com/products_base.html).
Belisle, M. and C.C.S. Clair. 2001. Cumulative effects of barriers on the movement of forest
         birds. Conservation Ecology, 5.
Collins, J.B. and C.E. Woodcock. 1994. Change detection using the Gramm-Schmidt
         transformation applied to mapping forest mortality. Remote Sensing of Environment 50,
         267-279.
Congalton, R. and K. Green. 1999. Assessing the accuracy of remotely sensed data: principles
         and practices. CRC/Lewis Press, Boca Raton, FL. 137 pp.
Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Neill, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2001. Avoidance of industrial development by
         woodland caribou. J. Wildl. Manage., 65, 531-542.
Foody, G.M., G. Palubinska, R.M. Lucas, P.M. Curran, and M. Honzak. 1996. Identifying
         terrestrial carbon sinks: classification of successional stages in regenerating tropical
         forest from Landsat TM data. Remote Sens. Environ. 55, 205-216.
Forman, R.T., D. Sperling, J.A. Bissonette, A.P. Clevenger, C.D. Cutshall, V.H. Dale, L. Fahrig,
         R. France, C.R. Goldman, K. Heanue, J.A. Jones, F.J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and
         T.C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: science and solutions. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
         USA.
Kroodsma, R.L. 1982. Edge effect on breeding forest birds along a power-line corridor. The
         Journal of Applied Ecology, 19, 361-370.
Machtans, C.S. 2006. Songbird response to seismic lines in the western boreal forest: a
         manipulative experiment. Can. J. Zool., 84, 1421-1430.
Rolley, R.E. and L.B. Keith. 1980. Moose population dynamics and winter habitat use at
         Rochester, Alberta, 1965-1979. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 94, 9-18.
                                                                                         Page A-5
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Singh, A. 1989. Digital change detection techniques using remotely-sensed data. International
         Journal of Remote Sensing, 10(6):989-1003.
Skole, D. and C. Tucker. 1993. Tropical deforestation and habitat fragmentation in the Amazon:
         satellite data from 1978 to 1988. Science 260: 1905-1910.
Stanojevic, Z, P. Lee and D.G. Gysbers. 2006. Recent anthropogenic changes within the
         Northern Boreal, Southern Taiga and Hudson Plains Ecozones of Quebec. Global Forest
         Watch            Canada.            Website    accessed      8     October         2008:
         http://www.globalforestwatch.ca/change_analysis/downloadQC.htm. Report needs more
         info for access.
Tucker, C.J. and P.J. Sellers. 1986. Satellite remote sensing of primary production. International
         Journal of Remote Sensing 7, 1395-1416.
Tucker, C.J., D.M. Grant and J.D. Dykstra. 2004. NASA’s global orthorectification Landsat data
         set. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 70(3): 313-322.
USGS. 2008. Landsat orthorectified TM imagery (Landsat_Ortho_TM); Product Readme. USGS
         Earth Resources Observation and Science Centre (EROS) Website Accessed September
         2008: http://Edcsns17.Cr.Usgs.Gov/Nsdp/Tm_Readme.htm.
Wickware, G.M. and P.J. Howarth. 1981. Change detection in the Peace-Athabasca delta using
         digital Landsat data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 11, 9-25.
                                                                                          Page A-6
An Integrated Assessment of Potential Impacts to Dene
_ I o a -
Tha First Nahon Treaty Rights
, EnCana Cabin Gas Plant
4 Environmental Assessment Certiﬁcation Application
" 4.2? 7 "‘
)1 J “$3M,“ W
' ' .~ ‘ . - + ,. . .
" 4 ’ .,~. , ‘ I ,
2‘; 3 W . wmiji' ?! 1 1' “ ‘ ’
- 1- 1» i,m‘ ' _. 924-", "
_ _ av; ( ,4
' , 1+. _ ' ' 3’7 .
. . , W . v ‘4; _ ,
;\:\ ,,’ x : ' I '14:"- :9?/ ' ‘1’“: “I,
.f ,‘ w, 1 . T.»’ i . E} ‘ g i \s I
1 -- 9A,“: ,-»: 4, < :3 E._ 1;. :.
,my' 2* 4.1% E gkv ' " ‘
r ‘i': - x ; l.
1““ ~ ,' ..".'-
- .r’,,.""gz; +4“
Calliou Group
www.calliougroup.com
(P) 403.453.1405
(F) 403.453.1402 ~ '

:7 :7 .77 £3337; 2‘47 -1 7 21.7'7-d7_‘,1 '75“: 1"wa . 2:7th2; .7777 7:7 77 ' 777’ o 7 " . 7 77 77 757775-141 7-7: L" 7‘ ‘37”'7 1777—” I '7: 5:7;14‘15
. 4. "77' {
FIGURE NUMBER 1 1- ,. g _
V‘ ' . , r r
. . , I ; . , 7, Area of Interest ‘
OITIpOSI 9 SB ap 1 I . . 1 , *‘
1"V‘ ' x._'*."--* r' ' * ~~-' 3' ‘ c’ r'-' ~ ’ 'r r -' - , 't 7’ ' ’ "7 7
1 II 77 .I 77.7" 7;” 27" L y I ;_J ‘ I. " .- ’ ‘1: 2 --‘ I7 r u. . . . z : . '2 , [1
,l *1 1 L L s. .7 u .57 V L-w': '1. 77771' 2' . -V .. 2:. L 7:7 .' L ._ _ ’ 't' . l, 77.5 . . . i I"
~ '_ 7‘1 " ,7 .A +1 '-::7"“'=..}¢'"‘,gr"' .g‘. '-’ ‘5 '7 ' h ‘ ». I 9 ,1 v. . -7-< ‘7‘ - C
1 ‘- ‘ .’ n ‘ ,."""| ‘ "';'«' 9'“ ' 4 ' l. ..1 ' 7 1 7, ' ‘~ , “ ' H v ' y
, - ’ r r , z.‘ r - f ' ,. 7- ~ ‘- _ - é -' ,2
11““ i J 77771 L 7’. ‘. 777N77 IL {I la 2 L‘ 71 P . L" . ' ._o 1 . '. r: ' . _ BR 5 AB t.
“~~L..._ .w-f‘ “' ‘5 \x ‘A:\ z \ ; . L 9‘ {.77 f - ' " ,. . ' . ' ~-
.‘1’. '7' “ 7 1 - x 1' ’ - i7 Y ‘, . 7 ' ._ 7 , '7 . ‘ 7 7 7:- ‘ 1
,5;th 5' -,;1- - L} L “.7. '13“? 23/75 1," 1-: , - , ~ . 7“, 7 ~ , 1 ‘v1
1’ L\« *1. "VV‘ u“ i ' 47 r ' * ‘ 1 ' ‘ 4
I d " 7 (17:1';3“7‘3777’5)»7\ .. 5‘7 ' 7 .' -:“ ‘ ‘ . .. - - ‘ .L " b" . 7‘ F
, x --“‘ 7 ".174 ‘3 - 3. afow iT’f‘” , 7 - 1' — ‘ A - v L .A .31 .3; .1 , , ‘ - ; 1‘ :
» v . J a‘ - -‘ .;.~""-"-?A;.a-A r' ‘ *»_,.~-_;. 1 ‘ ‘ ‘ — ‘ .~ ..-, ‘ o «L . 1 .
._ ‘7. ._7,.* 7", . s L 4 f 1 | r L 414;. , _. V ., g, . . _. 7‘) .g L
, ‘ : LA I f] f '1“? . M L' w . .- 'L‘ ‘ 2+“ V 7 ' ‘ . i -7 7 ' 7 L. 1 1 7 ' l' 7 q
7' l l 1 l" 1 7| A n 7' 7 7' 7 7 7 7 ‘7“ L
77 ' X 1 ‘A. 1 . - " . T 7‘ ' 1" . . A . ‘ 1 1 , A . H, _ Z ,
. I Q .ritl ~-'777777 2 __, ?:._,i; ’30:: 1 ‘ﬂ. 7 . . . . ,' . J . ’77 {€77 - ,. ‘ . . _ u . . .. <
‘ ".—--- : ‘ ,"-:7-‘:; ~7L -L 1.": ‘77 v{ 7777 I7 (37:7 _ \ ‘_"7 t‘ q .14 1 '7 ."T ‘ - _ _ L J I, ,—
7, 7 1‘ i 77“.! {'7'€"‘:7. 777? 3 v}, {.‘7 ”-7 “V f 7 1777‘7 "v‘ «2’7 ‘7 1* ‘~' “ - .~ ' ' ' 77" “L- ' 77 7 - ".1 777' 2 7/ '7
. _. _ ?€th 5; v.37) E77 (777777 . ,1 L‘, 1'77 {A 773-1 IL, L..L-L«LL: .- JJ -. 7L1 . ., ‘7 , . a I L. L _ _‘ 1- A 3'” .‘x ._ - . “h, _ I_
. '_ ' L1 ,;-i‘ L: . ,, IL _-.L . ' .33. . J .~.77r ..L 1, _' : 1 , 1,- _ r. -_ ‘ L -. I "J 1
7 [77 V7437 7 i 7 '5': 77 - >277 7.1] ﬂ ‘) 7r, (1.1» " 4 ~' ' _. ~ . . 7‘71 , A I 7' , j ). _‘ 15:1 7 .' "T 71‘ ‘. f7
. ' {- ' 25-“ L 1.1;...» 4:: '1 , gisz; ' . ;. , 1"; L: 5;: ' 17;:— . 1 ' z-x . .~ - ' :~ ' ‘ 12 I ‘ A“ 1
7777‘ a 7 ‘ ‘ F7' 777777;.‘779“2- 7e1_§_ ’7~l7.7=:";~‘{ {{7L7ifr77'77j7 ’77???“ I’7 w: -. _7.7 )1177 i vli’;’, . 1' '1‘ . 7, ;. ‘ ‘ ~‘ 7 *. —4 1‘ o 7 ‘71.: * 7777 A7“ 77 ",7:
---~.--. .——- * -. .-;~ :1 Jun "; .1 r- . ‘ . w ' . ’1‘ '--.- ’
1 1 . ;' “1L; , 7777777 ?77'L’0'9‘7771‘ 777.;\17 '5 <17: {'7 . J :7; ‘17-") '1 ‘32:. ‘7 ’ * ‘ » L ‘7‘; » .‘_ _“-":$&
A 7 7L .I_ ﬂ f’ 1", ‘ [i777 T 44.")? IL 9 7779717 (“1413. L L. 7 LI. IL. . . ,7 I ‘7. ,1 V , L T‘ 5;:
— ., , -' 7 I a7 7 I V7 / 7 7- ' 7‘ :77’77 f) ' JL‘{' "‘5‘”; '1“ L.) | 7\ I 7 L 1- .7 {7777 ', . 1‘ '7 7. ' ‘L
- ,‘ _ 1 .a . - 1‘ ‘ . a 1 ‘. ' f ‘ ' " , . * ’ - V I 1 ' “
77 . 7 ‘ .7 7 ‘(7 7 77 I7 " - "77'7" _d era ‘7‘ up ’ I 7‘ 17"777‘ 77‘} 717:7“ 7‘ ‘77] 7 '77 7 77'7v‘.’ ‘7 7‘ 77 ; ‘ 7 .; J'. 7 37"“ t. 1
1 y ;» yﬁﬁa ' 1—f-h ' A (:1. 7 . 22-: ‘3 . ,, L‘. * '[. '\ . I' '.'- ' ’7 P , " ,' - : Au
’1 L L ' d ‘77 x."‘7-“4!77‘3-7L7-._. ‘tﬁ Tbi‘J‘ n . .v7 7::>I77l’-7 77.. .. {777178 ‘4‘ 77\x -7- }l\r\\7‘7\. 171 L57\ LA 7 7'7 ' ‘ 777“ ' '7 .777 77’ 7‘7777
t .- , . , 4 ,; ' 'v . - z" . ‘4 '"J‘JEL 43‘ 1 *1: u A I : , L: "1 "t ?.x ,. ' ~ ‘ . 1, *- mu:
.7“ .. L L , L a 'x L: I -“,I._v77I 31" ﬁriu'ﬁ7 77;~ . \ Q ' $126 .er ‘ A_ ,1“ Wk? '1‘7 7777'77571’757‘7K77‘7“ .j\ gr. - -- . ~ _ - . 1 i ‘ 3‘43. #777:
, . , . L , g II .7‘. N in" ,7, 1‘ 53 . Z '7 I 7| {7"777‘1 <.- i7" LL 2 \' A (7 732'7'77‘ \h/ rf- ; 7-: . .4 L - '1 2, A L L - 51‘77‘7'7,‘ '6? -.
. l _r.-,Q i'y 7 7.77 7 \‘7"7 ‘I .1‘ .: ‘r- 777 7-7 77‘7“ -7r\.'.) :1 . ~° “ ‘1 \,_ ~J-“7' 7:4'}
1 1 1 N '7 "7‘7““ 1: 147-14 7 q . J 7'“ .17 . , ' “- 1 ”7/- “”3522? 777777 7 77 7" ”‘1': ~*' ‘ V '71" ‘15::
. ~“ 1, ;' .‘ -...—-- “7"M7 -"~. 1 _' 177) ,‘ {'11 o ~‘ , ?*2'” , 1* fg/ ' - '_ .. 4L -1 7: 75“" 1 .._ g)“ 'E
77 7 7 7,777: 77.77; 7 7777777777777 & (‘7'- 'I ' I 775: 777' 71., 777.777‘ ‘ ks . 7 7 - 3771‘ 7 7—1 y I : ‘ r~ 7;. r _._~:q77§77l7\7
. 1 7 _ ’ ', f; __.1-L 2‘.“ 3 L'I‘LﬁfPL . ‘ 4‘ , -.I_ 9 " I 7 ’17, J7< . )5 '17-) r .I ‘1‘: V7777. .7” ~ 7. L L ._ 'r 7177:: ‘Ig-‘IL‘ ‘1.
' 7 7;- 7 7‘ . 7 k“ “‘n ’7 ‘ —-—~7 7 7 l 7 ' V ' 7 7 7 D
_ A ““1 77:1; _— f " ‘77 ”1%"- “~ f ;—..t- 7-,, ; 3A.: -' .. -, . - - ' ’g ‘ 2-,; -_ 3.,"
. ' '4‘? 77- , “F 7"” 7t ’I ’7 é/ 7‘ ‘ 77 77177751“ "2’3 3‘»! . 15 :‘7 \7- 7 7 7 : ‘ 7:
J, [a ”3'" ' ‘— “,\* - p tr?" “gfzitga. :1» - 1.4’7- , ,7 1.". 1". - . ‘ ,_ ' ﬂ.
., ,n- ,1 z a f, , \ 1. .414 .--__ a 2 A. v1“ k- 1' A' a . ~ ,
“t ‘ 7‘ f” 1‘! '7‘ - I g”; ‘ "15‘; “a w?! V3339... ' - 1 . --, " .
‘ ' “~77 1 7* ‘ .-'7 ? 1771' .7 'J' '8‘3‘ 1‘7? 1363;377:477 17* 7.," ‘- . .7‘ ‘ If. 35$;‘ﬁ\1_ - 1' ;« .7 “7 7‘ , 17‘
2‘ A ,. , 1, , a '1 "y: l. E 1 ~. .7— 212377. -‘“ *‘l‘J "‘1 7"7-~‘7‘4~J7 777'777" 77 ‘7 7 '7 7 ‘
\. LI.__L I [J IW ' ﬂ 2&3; WM, 1 111% .' L5,, L. V L.
. 4 -_~ «.1 Jr.- 1 ~ ~ L 1w .11: - «a ' 1 1w. - ' s
. . , , ,".' _- ‘ , , (.777 .ILL r ,,.- (:1 .771 77‘." ‘. 7‘, . _ - 7’} I‘f .- .1 ~71 .J 7\\ LKI L LI ’2‘ £14457 '_ . . . ' ‘3 . :4 f‘ ,;
I f . “L ~ .L., - 7’7 ‘4'. ‘ Ii: .- :- ‘ '\_ ,#I¥j;, g I 7.1,. L 7177 , \SCA-VL' IL, [17,15 _ 7.:~ 7 .3777? 7 . ‘ . ,
777777517 :77 7 - 17) 77 ”777 . . ”7517.77" I717: ??"S 1f - 77 ‘ J 77' 77‘: 77 7 ‘7'7 .7 ~ ‘ b .771“> 7.\777‘7:_:-‘ I777 7, 7 A7 x -7 7 i 7' '7 777 N 77
7.7‘~«.,’, 7 7.. 7277/11 7737/27. l‘_”~—Ti ‘ 'ﬁ..\ 7 '17” 7- 7“ 77 7 -'7 ' E ‘**~ 7V7? 71 1'7 ' -77-‘ 77 - 7 -7 7 > 77
7 7 7777’ '7 7 77 ~ '7 77 777-777 -’7’ 77\‘ 7151-477 i?- M 7 7‘ 7 v7“ ' r 5‘ ‘7 9777-47 7‘53); 7 7' 77 7‘3' 5) . 7.777 .' ' '7 . 7 I 7 7
,. ' . ', _ - 1 .. .. ‘rf‘. 'K L 7 - '7h 1 'LIy—K. I 1 LI 1 5 AL . . ”77". ' a L ”4.7-7 .‘7‘ '5 7 ‘ T77 '— ‘ J [I
, ’L- . 5.4;: t 6773'”, 7“ ' ;‘ -_ .247» . ‘§ _'7 L‘e P; L ‘ _ ' - , _L"_( 2.7-, .721 t ‘.' ‘2‘ ‘7‘ —-——-h—P .7 :1 1 ~' ,
7+ _ f. ‘ ”’4'" 7" 7- 77 1"? ”Te, ‘ \L‘ 7575111:pr ~. - ' ' ‘ ~ ‘ . > ' - i
, . .\ «r1 1 fr.~-:-,:~<-x«. . . . w , - - 1 . ,
- , V"- Lug. . . #7 1 ,‘U 1f‘~A§<\\«r 4;, .2 . A . ~ . . _ ‘ , V f; , . _
- ,7L - 7 “-3,;3713 n 7 ‘\“71 ~.. "11 .7 7 ,- 7 . _ . L '17 \./‘ '7)
1 xy- .+ 1%; L. - A - .1 , .~
7 7 .1 7‘ 7 ,,‘. '7 I 7 7 ' :37: 77 ‘_ .r‘ ﬁlllfjth') 5g, 7» 77’ 7'7-7 ” ' I ‘7 - “3777 1
7 77- 7 :. {7'7777-71777 *— 7 I . 77 . 7' 1"" 77- 7 '7'1' 7 ‘- '7 77 ~ 7
.{7 7‘ ' 1- "- . 7%!" 56.” 1 1 ff .‘ 1 7‘ ”1.3.915 » . .
. - --a ‘ ' - f t - ‘t ‘ 7 ‘ 7‘7 ‘“ _ . ' ‘ A 7 - 7 ‘
, A A .. a . ., 2,111» — . . 1 1 1
1 , ‘ L‘7 7 . 7 2 -* \Jma . 7 Ff \‘x‘b‘b 1 : 7 ‘ l - y" 7 7 ‘ ’7
I ‘ q _ u- 7. . ‘a _‘.‘ : :‘ _ L, A . L ,- . . - I
. '77 1 . _, - .- I‘ ’3 ‘ v9, - ' L11; _‘ L . . ' - . . ‘ L
‘ni ' I .- _l _ ~ : 7P: ' ' - L . . , i J '1.
,1 7 . 7 ' . —, 7 , _’ 7 7 ,1 _._ . ' 3 '. . , - L ,‘r
‘ - A“ ‘ P f‘ : ‘—T [7 - .775. K7 - ‘ , m ’ O.- 7 . 7'7] 7 ’ME. ‘
_ ‘_ _ ‘7 _ 1. 2 :72 -V - ‘ 7 a . -' ‘L‘. ﬂ), -' 77.—— «IA _ﬁ. ‘ ' r ' b ‘IW
v 7 >777'L7 -7 ~ ‘i~$ 7 i.‘ ’ f '.
~ 7;» 7 ‘ _ 7 7 7 : 777 - ‘ 77 7. 7 ‘ _ . . A V; , _ L l‘ L. r7 r'-<:ﬁ‘7-‘~ I, , u 7'“ _-__- ' —9
1 1-1 1 - 1 .. 1 1, 1-2 - 1 .- ' . ~ .. ' p I" -’“ ~ 4; ::.L-._.F——~
- , ‘I III, ‘L a ‘ I L“ . 7. .7. . .. _ I 1.17.; — .1 . -_ 1_. 7‘ - 1 ‘— _: _ ~ — 7 "-”l ’ \J’ L
L I *2 . 1 1 ‘ 71777 ' . ‘ _ , ,ﬁ, . . L ‘r " f,” ' 7
“L 7‘ - I 1 7 w... 1'! r '1‘,“ 1. ‘
. __ ‘1' .L r . ' _ L' .' . 7 . , -_‘ . ' , 1‘ I lr'Lﬁ- 1‘ " V
L -— ' L .- _ ‘ . . c‘ - ._ .7 . .
,7 . 7‘ 9 ' 7I 7 7 7 '7 7 . . " I|L
.1 » 71.“; .'_" ‘7. ‘ ' I \ .— ' J 7‘7 ' 1...!" ‘ é ‘ ‘
, _. :\, _L L I I 7 - (L. . . - g L- 1‘." __,__.___,‘ ———L~ . .- 7. I‘
7 7 I 7 7 7 7 ---~ ‘ 7\;. 7 ‘7 1’ . 7'7 7 — ‘ 7 7 7 7 t l' - i 77 7- 7 j 77' 7 7777 ‘ ~ , 77 77‘ - 7 T7 7 7 ““7:
— ' . ‘ 1 ,,:'—~‘; ~ - '7‘— _ . . , ‘ ' : ' ‘ L x77 1
s_L-rttfz..-’ I77 #7 7 ' _ ~7‘ - L‘" 7“ M75227 ‘1." 1, o7 1 ’ 7 .’ ‘ 7 ? .1 7 - ‘--— ‘ {‘7‘ A - _
la ,1 r. I _: .. A ' ‘. . - " f.'?g;77"I15“:~-A . . .~ . ‘._,_; __ , . ' 1 ‘7 A27 - " 77"
7 n 7 L I), 77 .7 7 7 '7 77 .77 -- 7 . 7 k 7‘ ?‘7 7 77777 7 7 7 7 7:“, ‘27“ '77, 7 77 .- :7 ‘ 7 . 7 ' 77 7 7 7 7 77:77:77: 7 ‘ 7‘77t7777 ‘T‘f‘:
,v _,,r' , 725,“, .5 .r ' ‘ ,‘1 . ' .1 " L 2 ‘-~£.;_' '~ 5L = L a s‘ .‘5'77 ' 1 ’“ ‘ '* “~*
‘ ,i :i’ , -. ';7I'1' ' ~ ‘. .1 u L ‘ I 1. ,a‘ I 1 . g . L L . A. , 7| , . i I ‘ .‘ <*—
" .17 7 . 7 \ t r i ‘ v. 2. 7 - 77- ‘ v. ‘7 . ' 7 7 ‘7' . LL 7‘, r-
. . I .~ . \ 2‘ °.-,. f" . 7. L V .1 7 ‘ 1 - 1 ~M.
, ‘77.7'7 '2 , u LL V I r ‘ . . ‘4‘ .. .- a 7‘ 7 L7 ' 4 -" .1 ’ - : 7 ‘ 7_ - x- 7. x .\ ‘ I ‘ath 3" '4‘. ‘ “,.-..“
"‘ ,1 A; 7 .7 7 " . ~ ; 3-} -A.' . 7 7 A 7 7 1 ‘ ' ‘ .4 7 ' - . 171k. 7‘ *-—-—-—‘7‘7 7 7 --'.‘<"777¥ ' 7:7‘L7iz‘cﬁJL7?
77 7 2—: 77 7 7 . ' —-.f 7‘ .: 7 h 7 , “7 __ -- ’ .7' ’ '7" 7, ' 1 L \\ ’-‘ 7-7 ‘ -L :‘d'7‘774747‘~ﬂ A 7 7V7 7
* ' ‘ ‘ .- ;**-A~“-.’:_-1 _._;=. r“ — t 1 '; I 3:— .. " 1: - “M mafa—q-e-‘ﬁ’t " - 1 ‘
. .7; Y ‘ ILL_. 7:, .>-. ,J‘ "“7 7-17 ' , ”r "’ :71) ’4'. 3*" - ' - ’ - 7 V 777 7 r 7 77‘ . I 7 777 7‘- “77‘? 777 ‘1 7 7
- ab. ' a a“ 0, . l ‘ - r , J . v t V 77 - *~' .. ‘ 7 ‘1“ W. ,- ~ ‘7 - ‘77 7 " " 7 — 7‘ 7 ,‘ a
' -11; a" 77.: "7. {$77 ‘7' TL 7. ‘.;7‘ 7..‘_ 7' i. ‘d -_ 4A7- 7‘ ,‘z 7 7 l7 7' .7 , L o ’ L'L , 1. - ’ D' 7. ' 3‘ LI‘ ,; ‘ ‘
r 717177 .1" $7777"? L 7_7_‘..7" ;,‘ -. u 3 “1‘"? ‘ ' no ‘1 ' ._ 1 ' “_ -r ‘ A :1 77‘ -. “ é-. L A I . -. _‘ z , _ L 7..
‘ ' ' $7377.". 71"», J _' _>_ r" ‘ '* -_ ," ' ‘7 A 753-12; _, -. _".'“*~ 7 ‘. r" 7‘ _ '.' . -./"7 ’ 77
7 55‘1“ :7 ~ , .-' J , >?' n“ 7 ”I 7‘ 'r . - .\ ' ._7 ~ 7 r— '17“ 7:77.
’3’ ' ‘ , :1. "§ “'2' - '\ .‘ ,7. , - _ . ' 1 I I f ,_. _ 77‘ . "—1.," , _" _ _ _. '\. )1“ “A‘A7P.K,)A.rrd ‘ , I . ‘7'- _. A
ELL. Ji‘__ Rik“; L1.“7: 4,77- , , I7‘¥ , H - “,0. ,, . , J}. A 1 . . -2...". ".77.‘ ,-,_77f’”_77_.7 Em,77
_ ‘1 Legend D Burial & Ceremonial Site 7 7l7 Fishing Area D Hunting Area E Wildlife Area
71:: EnCana Cabin Gas plant RAA D Burial E Multiple Use Area D Medicinal Plant Gathering Area E Hunting Area & _
, . D T IA L m _ Area for Land Use Planning
’— TransCanada Pipelines D Cabin Area r av e rea Sacred Site
I '3 Fort Neison First Nation E Camping Area D Hunting & Fishing Area Settlement Area
TE Trapping and ﬁshing Area D Ceremonial Site D Hunting 8. Settlement Area [ I Trapping & Cabin Area 0 10 20 30
ID Berry Gathering Area D Fishing & Hunting Area D Hunting & Trapping Area C Trapping Area E

l
4.0 Summary of Impacts to DTFN Treaty Rights of Projects : .,
During the conduct of the two (2) TLU studies, DTFN study participants identiﬁed l
concerns regarding their ability to hunt, trap, ﬁsh and gather within the Project vicinity, y
as well as throughout northeast British Columbia. The two studies were conducted “
separately, showing twenty—three (23) interviews and twenty (20) interviews
respectively from TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline TLUS and EnCana Cabin Gas Plant l
TLUS. ’
Adverse impacts to their ability to use the land were identiﬁed by DTFN as disturbances, if
either by clearing of vegetation (seismic activity, forestry) or clearing of land coupled
with the installation of a permanent facility (wells, pipelines, gas plants, roads). ll
When project—speciﬁc TLU studies are viewed as stand alone evidence, the total amount ‘
of use is restricted to only those interviewed for the project-speciﬁc study. In this case, |
DTFN interview participants were not asked to describe their concerns of the two 5'
projects together. This regulatory approach, of course, downplays or minimizes the i"
true adverse impacts to DTFN rights. l
Under the current regulatory system DTFN’s identified impacts for the two projects will l‘—
not be considered together. This is despite the Projects being physically connected and i
operating jointly. Under the current framework, neither Regulatory Authority
responsible for the approval of these two projects is required to consider the combined l
potential effects, as identiﬁed by the TLU studies. The Study Team notes this approach
minimizes the total amount of use identiﬁed in the area by DTFN, as well as minimizes I '
the scope of concerns raised when additional DTFN participants are asked to describe
their land use experiences. This is a limitation of project-speciﬁc TLU studies to i”
accurately identify potential impacts to treaty rights. 1
However, given the concerns DTFN expressed about existing industrial development, it
is reasonable to conclude that the two projects, acting together, would compound DTFN L
concerns about the adverse impacts of development on their ability to exercise their .
rights. When the results of the two studies are combined, the amount of total use in §
the area almost doubles. ‘
Therefore, the Study Team concluded that the combined potential effects of the two l
Projects in question will adversely impact the exercise of DTFN Aboriginal and treaty h
rights. i7
l
l
10 “

\ Impact to Category Interview
Treaty Refe rence
Right
Hunting Timber Loss of animal cover on footprint; cumulative 3- :hnassgviﬂs- szena; J‘-J
. - - - - - - ' ; . tc oo ; .
; Trapping addition to exnstmg regional fragmentatlon génitha; s. :eniantﬁ? c.
Gathering Talley; R. Tsonchoke E.
Kolay; S. Seniantha; S.
Tsonchoke
Gathering Loss of trees for birch bark harvest on footprint F. Chonkolav; A. Talley
Gathering Medicinal Loss of medicinal plants on project footprint; A- Talley; F- Chonkolav; A.
Plants addition to regional decline of plant 63",ant‘ R' MEtChPOVeah" 1‘
‘ Seniantha; 5. Samantha; H.
Tsonchoke; Lucy Fou rnierl
_ Gathering Rare Plants Loss of plants on project footprint; cumulative F- Chonkolav; T- Didzena; R.
V impact to regional decline of species M€tch°°yeam 1' seniantha‘
S. Seniantha; G. Martel
Gathering Berries Loss of berries on footprint; cumulative impact F- Chonkolav; A. Gallant; R-
to regional decline of species M9t°h°°yeam 1' seniantha‘
S. Seniantha; H. Tsonchoke;
V. Bonnes; R. Tsonchoke
Wetlands Loss of wetland, muskeg due to clearing; R. Metchooyeah; V. BonneS;
(Muskeg) altered drainage patterns; cumulative to region J' seniantha
Access Increased non-Aboriginal access to footprint 5- Didzena;1.$eniantha; V.
"l--
__ Martel; W. Yatchotay
Access Decreased DTFN access to footprint; G. Ahkimnache; Louis
Cumulative decrease to region Former; 0' Burk? 5'
Chonkolay; T. Dldzena; R.
- ' Metchooyeah
Hunting Wildlife Decreased animal population on footprint; P- Ahnassav: D. Martel; 6-
Trapping cumulative regional effect to population reigﬁ:é;?:ggihoke; s.
Tsonchoke; W. Yatchotay
‘_ Hunting Wildlife Need for further wildlife studies (3- Chissakav/R-
Trapping Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay
._. Hunting Moose Decreased moose population on footprint; Louis Fournier; 0- Burke; E.
_ cumulative impact to regional populations Ch°nk°'ay5 Lucy F°“mie” 3'
Martel; J. Metchooyeah; J.
Seniantha; S. Seniantha; H.
} Tsonchoke; V. Bonnes; J.
_‘ Ahanssay Sr., S. Tsonchoke
Hunting Caribou Decreased caribou population; fragmentation 5- Chonkolav; 3- Martel; R-
‘ of habitat in region Metchooyeah; J. Seniantha;
. S. Seniantha; H. Tsonchoke;
V. Bonnes; D. Martel
Hunting Caribou Industrial activity (deep wells) causing caribou A- Talley
fatalities
--. Trapping Furbearers Decreased furbearer population on footprint; PvAhnassav; D.Burke; E.
cumulative decrease to regional populations Ch°_“k°'ay‘ B Mam" J"
7- Seniantha; S Senlantha; H.
‘ Tsonchoke; V.Bonnes;
,. S.Lefou
' 11

mm_-
cumulative impact to regional population
All Traffic Increased traffic to footprint; increased T- Didzena
regional traffic -
Gathering Increased dust on edible plants on footprint; V. Bonnes
cumulative regional impact of increased dust 1‘”
Hunting Increased wildlife mortality rates due to 6- Chissakav; 1- Seniantha; V. 1
footprint traffic; cumulative regional traffic 3°”"es
increase 3
Burial Sites Destruction of burials by industrial activity, 1- Ahnassay Sr-; C. .
burials along the TCPL Project ROW; cumulative ChissakaV/R'
. . . Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay
Impacts to burials throughout region
Cabins Cabins and settlement sites along the TCPL C- Chissakav/R. ‘
"I-I
settlements throughout region 7
Fishing Water Inability to consume water near footprint; 6- Ahkimnache;1. DenaiS; ‘
Quality increase cumulative impacts to water LUCY meie” 1' Mane" "
throughout region Senlantha; H. Tsonchoke; J.
Ahnassay Sr., P. Ahnassay, G.
Martel; J.B. Talley; S.
Tsonchoke
Fishing Water Lowered water levels due to footprint impacts; P- Ahnassay; C. Chissakav/R-
Quantity cumulative impacts to regional water MEtCh°°Yeah/E‘ Ch°nk°'ay ,
Lowered levels in the Hay River A. Lefou; S. Lefou
Fishing Fish Effects of changed water quality and quantity R- Matchooveah; P. —
on fish due to footprint; cumulative impacts to Ahnassay; C' ChissakaY/R'
regional water and fish Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay ‘-
Hunting Noise Increased noise during construction and 6- Ahkimnache; E. F“
Trapping operations and subsequent effects on animals ?gﬁgffﬁszntﬂhaorﬁF £‘- ‘
activity of Project; increased cumulative effects Marte’l ' ’ '
of noise in region -
Safety Pipeline blow-outs or ruptures of pipeline; 5-Seniantha;A-Tallev;1- B-
increased cumulative potential of incident in Talley; W' YatChOtaV
region
Toxic gases from pipelines of project; increased 5. Seniantha: W. Yatchotav ‘
cumulative potential of incident in region. ‘
Decrease in traditional livelihood; lack of 6- AhkimnachiE; Louis : ‘
identified economic benefits from project; EELnJEEIS-iugazzzna-J
cun.1u|ative effect on livelihood throughout Martel; J. gerﬁantha; s’. '
region. Seniantha; H. Tsonchoke; J. fm‘
Ahnassay Sr., 5. Lefou; W. ;
Yatchotay '
Health Effects on animals health from ingestion of LUCY Foumier; 5- Seniantha; ‘ :
hydrocarbons and other industrial chemicals A' Taney‘ R' T5°”Ch°ke‘ 5'
. . . Tsonchoke ;
from prolect; cumulative Impacts of health
" effects throughout region
Water Effects on human/animals health from J. Seniantha; S. Seniantha; H. ’
industrial contamination to water Tsoncmke “
All Consultation Lack of notification and/or consultation prior to A- Ahnassay; A. Lefouz S. ‘ ‘
12 ‘

|__‘
Process industrial activities LefOU
Preservation Lack of protected/conservation areas near P- Ahnassav; S. Seniantha; R-
Areas Project footprints for practice of treaty rights TS°“°h°ke
_ , Industrial Location and amount of industrial features and A. BeauNeU: R- .
features activity; total amount of conservation or Metcmoyeah‘ 5' sen‘antha‘
d ' BC to allow for exercise of A' Talley; 1' 8' Talley; W'
Rmteae areas In Yatchotay; S. Lefou/T.
‘ ﬁghts Didzena
Reclamation Ineffective reclamation practices; potential for L Ahkfmnachie; Louis
ineffective reclamation practices throughout F°“m'e” 5' Didzena; 1'
. Martel; J. Senlantha; R.
region Tsonchoke; S. Lefou/T.
Didzena
Climate Changes resulting in usual climate, seasonal P- Ahnassav: 5- Didzena; A.
Change patterns Gal'am
; 6.0 List of Appendices
. "DTFN Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study - EnCana Cabin Gas Plant.”
Calliou Group, 2009.
. . "DTFN Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study - TCPL Horn River Mainline
,— P/pe/ine. ” Calliou Group, 2009.
; . "Rate of Disturbance in DTFN territory — Northeastern BC. ” MSES, 2009.
. ‘Dene Tha’Presence in Northeastern BC. ” Bouchard and Kennedy Research
‘ , Consultants. Prepared for Calliou Group, Calgary Alberta on behalf of Dene
Tha’ First Nation, 2009.
. 13

‘5 integrated Repm’?
_ An integrated Assessment of Potentia! impacts m
:3 ' Dene Tha’ First Nation Treaty Rights
A ﬂow: the
. Environmentai Assessment Certification Application for the
~ EnCana Cabin Gas Plant
. 7. and the
Application for a Certiﬁcate of Public Convenience and Necessity
' for the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline Project
5 Prepared For:
. .i The BC Environmental Assessment Office
, Victoria, BC
'? Prepared By:
Calliou Group
1 Calgary, AB
. On Behalf of?
t Dene Tha’ First Nation
: November 4, 2809
1

f g. 0} inﬂation" ad . “r
the Dene Tha’ First Nation. Citation, use or reproduction of the A
Enformaﬁon contained in this Finai Report is permissibie oniy with
the written consent cf the Dene Tha’ First Nation. t

Executive Summary
* The following Report, An Integrated Assessment of Impacts t0 Dene Tha’ First Nation
- Treaol Rights is intended to characterize and portray Dene Tha’ First Nation Aboriginal
use information identified and documented in two separate Traditional Land Use Studies
‘ conducted separately for two different proposed Projects: EnCana Cabin Gas Plant
(regulated by the British Columbia Environmental Assessment Ofﬁce) and the
' TransCanada Horn River Mainline P/pe/ine (regulated by the National Energy Board) in a
7 single Traditional Land Use Study Report (“Report”).
The Study Team concluded that, based on information collected from DTFN interviews,
i DTFN are already experiencing negative impacts to their ability to exercise their rights
? from existing industrial disturbances throughout the BC portion of the DTFN traditional
territory.
Further, from the combined results of the two TLU studies, it is reasonable to conclude
. - additional adverse impacts will result from the construction of these two proposed
Projects.
Finally, the Study Team has concluded that by combining the results of the two project-
speciﬁc studies, more information is available to Regulatory Authorities regarding the
type of Traditional Land Use information and effects to DTFN exercise of treaty rights.
By examining each TLU study separately, however, we are concerned that Aboriginal
knowledge of the area or potential concerns of the DTFN about proposed activity is and
will continue to be, minimized.
3

Contents
Executive Summary 3 '
1.0 Introductions ‘
2.0 Existing Disturbances to Land in NE British Columbia 5
Rate and Amount of Disturbance to DTFN territory in NE BC 7
3.0 DTFN Traditional Land Uses 8
Composite Traditional Land Use Information Map 9
4.0 Summary of Impacts to DTFN Treaty Rights of PrOJects 10 V
6.0 List of Appendices 13

4

- 1.0 Introduction
The Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN”) commissioned two Traditional Land Use Studies
(“TLUS”) for integration in the environmental assessment of two proposed projects,
namely the EnCana Cabin Gas Plant (regulated by the BC Environmental Assessment
Ofﬁce) and the TransCanada (“TCPL”) Horn River Mam/me Pipeline (regulated by the
National Energy Board) (“Projects”).

_ Forty-three (43) interviews were completed by the Study Team from May to August
2009. Twenty (20) interviews are represented in the EnCana Cabin Gas Plant TLU
study, and twenty—three (23) for the TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline TLU study.
These TLU studies are included as Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively.

The EnCana Cabin Gas Plant Application has been submitted to the British Columbia

‘ ‘ Environmental Assessment Ofﬁce (“BC EAO”) for consideration. At the time of
submission of this Report, the TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline ESA has not been

provided by TCPL to the National Energy Board (“NEB”) for consideration.

2.0 Existing Disturbances to Land in NE British Columbia

During the EnCana and TCPL TLU study interviews, DTFN participants expressed
' 7 concerns about existing disturbances to land in northeast British Columbia. These

concerns were expressed to the Study Team to describe the anticipated impacts of the
proposed Projects. Virtually all participants described negative effects from the

' previous disturbance of land by industrial activities in the vicinity of proposed Projects,

__ and more broadly, throughout their traditional territory as a whole.

Participants noted that noise, clearing of land, impacts to water and increased access by

‘1 existing industrial activity were already negatively impacting their ability to hunt, trap,

fish and gather throughout their traditional territory in BC. DTFN participants also cited

1 increased fragmentation and disruption of wildlife habitat by existing industrial activity

‘ 5 as a primary concern. Further, this disturbance to the land was cited as causation for
decreases to regional wildlife populations over the last 20 years which in turn was

, a negatively impacting their abilities to harvest traditional resources.
" Unfortunately, Aboriginal Knowledge of land and changes to land over time documented
in TLU studies are often seen as anecdotal evidence, and is not considered as reliable
5

as western science observations and conclusions. For example, in the EnCana Cabin
Gas Plant Application submitted to the BC Environmental Assessment Ofﬁce, the project
vicinity was described by EnCana as “pristine”1 and further that 93.2% of the area was f
undisturbed 0r “intact”.2 This was contradictory to the information provided by DTFN
interview participants,
For example, DTFN Harvester Abraham Talley said that "there is too much actin for N ‘
the animals, 50 they a// leave. ” Sylvester Samantha expressed the sentiment t0 the
Study Team that the future viability of the region was in question. “I pih/ them [future ‘
DTFN] 'Cause there Wi/l be nothing Ieﬁ“. CompleteXy nothmg, nothing left“. ” He went on
to say that tra pplng is now a "waste 0fgas”because there "arentany good areas fez? ” .
DTFN Harvester Robert Tsonchoke also expressed the concern of the effects of existing
industrial disturbance in the area as ’too many dear cuts [clearing] are mak/hg the
anz'ma/ habitat dISappean If the habitat disappears, so will the anxhva/s. ”
DTFN Harvesters like James Metchooyeah, Ernest Chonkolay, Abraham Talley, Betsy '
Martel, Howard Tsonchoke, Sylvester Seniantha, Thomas Didzena, Lomy Ahkimnache, '
and Jimmy Seniantha all report an increase in cutlines, pipelines, oil wells and forestry
activities in DTFN trapping areas that have affected their ability to hunt and trap. _
The Study Team concluded that based on information collected from the two TLU
studies, there is considerable existing disturbance to the land by industrial activities that ..
is in turn affecting DTFN’s ability to hunt, trap, fish and gather in British Columbia.
To provide empirical scientific evidence to support and corroborate DTFN observations, ~ ~
DTFN commissioned a study to identify the amount of disturbed lands by industrial
activity in BC. That study, Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Traditzbna/ Territoq/ - NE BC} ..
was completed by MSES (Management Solutions in Environmental Science) and is
attached as Appendix C.
The conclusion of the MSES study identiﬁes, as of 2008, approximately 31% of the
MSES study area3 is already disturbed by industrial activity. “Disturbance” of lands is '
described as the loss of natural land cover resulting from development or human
activity.4 This conclusion supports DTFN information submitted in both TLU studies
that there is considerable existing industrial activity which is negatively affecting DTFN
ability to conduct traditional resource harvesting activities. -'
1 0c EAO Draft Assessment Report, dated September 25,2009 9,38
2 EnCana Cabin Gas Plant Application, Section 12, p 12-9. :1

3 MSES Study Area comprises approximately 50% of the DTm traditionai territory in British Columbia
4 MSES 2009, p. 1.

N ’
5“ ~ “—-
- Leg.“ I m - Changmaws m
- Mapped Dammanm- lnduda 250 mzor I mu- HEEL.“ ﬁM§E§
-StudyAm Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development nwémmcm ‘ .5.....-.......<
l on Natural Surfaces In the BC Focus Area Figure 2_
'ZU-Zaledlntunu l
Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development on Natural Surfaces in the BC focus
.. area (From: MSES Rate ofDisturbance in DTFN Territory — NE BC)
35000 J
A 30000 I
i 5 —. 1
g 25000 - l
3
__ a
1 9. .0
; a 20000 ' .
, E '0.
1: '0
c O
r 5, 5 15000 ————————————5.——————
i 1: '0
. o O.
. e 0
a 10000 ' ,
.2 c.
.. __ 13 ‘ ’0
1 C O.
1 3 5000
'0
. .0 .
I '0;
0 . . . .
7 1 950 1 970 1 990 201 0 2030 2050 2070 2090 21 1 0
. Year
‘ The projected conversion of all natural land cover to industrial surface,
' including areas of zones of inﬂuence, in the BC Focus Area (From: MSES Rate of
Disturbance in DTFN Territory — NE BC)

3.0 DTFN Traditional Land Uses
Forty-three (43) DTFN Harvesters identiﬁed ongoing and historical use in both Project ~
areas. These uses included:

- Hunting (both current and historic);

- Trapping (both current and historic);

- Fishing (both current and historic);

- Gathering Areas (both current and historic berries/medicinal .

plants);

- Travel and Migration Routes (both current and historic);

- Sacred Sites;

- Cabins, Camps and Settlements (both current and historic); and

- Future Use Areas.
The use of northeast British Columbia prior to the imposition of government restrictions ‘
to hunting and trapping activities was integral to the DTFN nomadic lifestyle. Historic
use and presence of DTFN in northeast British Columbia is described in the attached
report by Bouchard and Kennedy, 2009.
The Study Team documented a decrease in the use of northeast British Columbia by
DTFN Harvesters over the last several generations. The reasons for this decrease _
include the imposition of government restrictions, such as provincial trapping and
hunting regulations. DTFN interview participants also cite the laCk of ﬁnancial resources '
as a reason for a decrease in use as compared to historic levels. Finally, DTFN
participants cite the effects of industrial activity to hunting and trapping activities as
reasons for decreased use. .
However, despite the restrictions on their use of northeast British Columbia, DTFN
continue to use northeast British Columbia to pursue traditional activities, including _»
hunting, trapping, ﬁshing and gathering activities. These activities, as documented in
the two TLU studies for the Projects can be found in Map 1. Moreover, as other parts .-
of their traditional territory are taken up for industrial development, those areas which X
are not yet fully developed become ever more important as places where DTFN can still
exercise their rights. ~

8 .

Appendix A:
 1.   David and Helen Ahkimnachie
 2.   Gabriel Ahkimnachie
 3.   Ernest Chonkolay
 4.   Allen Didzena
 5.   Diana Kolay
 6.   Don Metchooyeah
 7.   Robert Metchooyeah
 8.   June Penner
 9.   Jane Providence
 10.  Janice Providence
 11.  Jessie Providence
 12.  Thomas Ahkimnachie and Ricky Pastion
 13.  Ronnie Semansha
 14.  Steven Tsonchoke and Robert Tsonchoke
 15.  Alex Wasp Colin
 16.  David Wasp Colin
 17.  Field Survey: Baptiste Metchooyeah and Robert
      Metchooyeah
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          David Ahkimnachie, Helen Ahkimnachie
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Translator:           Ernest Chonkolay
Interviewer:          Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
David began trapping in British Columbia (BC) in 1959 on trapline #755T014. His
brother, Louison Ahkimnachie, was the “headman” on this line and David accompanied
him there many times. The last time David trapped on the line was approximately ten
years ago because the price of furs is so low that the cost of going trapping is higher
than what can be recouped from selling pelts.
David stated that every winter he would travel to his trapline twice. He would initially
head out the first week of November and return home for Christmas; the second trip
would begin in February. During his time on the trapline, David would hunt moose for
dry meat and trap furbearers for their pelts. David explained that the meat from one
moose would supply food for his family and his brothers’ family.
When David would return from these trips Helen, his wife, would dry the meat.
David noted that there are many members of his family that hunt and trap on the
trapline, and he and his brother used to store several food caches by their cabins for
communal use.
David also recalled travelling to July Lake, with one dog, to harvest beaver pelts in the
past.
David stated that caribou will cross uninhabited disturbed areas looking for food, but
will not go to a place with human activity because they do not like the increased noise.
David does not like to hunt or trap near Plant sites because he does not feel safe and
does not know if there could be gas (H2S) or if it is dangerous.
David would like to go back out on the land around the trapline, but finds it too
expensive to travel. David feels that it would be easier if he had a skidoo, but he does
not own one. Helen stated that if David had the means to go out on the land, she
would go as well.
Transcript 1
 Fishing
David explained that he fishes in Kotcho Lake for suckers.
David has also fished in July Lake, and explained that July Lake is excellent habitat for
fish.
Medicine and Berries
Helen explained that she gathers blueberries and a specific plant with a long stem and
a white flower that she does not know the English translation for. Helen stated that
anywhere there is muskeg there are berries and plants used for medicines.
David stated that berries will not grow where the land has been disturbed or polluted.
Sites
David explained that July Lake is a very important place because there is a story of two
women surviving there alone for a year. The lake is known in Dene as “a Woman’s
Place” or “Tsuk-aye” [phonetically].
David noted that one uncle is buried within his trapline boundary, but is unsure of the
exact location. David explained that his brother knows the location of this burial.
David noted that there is more than one cabin on his trapline, and explained there are
two cabins near July Lake. These cabins have a foundation that makes them warmer
and are the best ones to use.
David also noted that he frequently camps with only a canvas tent near Kotcho Lake
because there is very little evidence left on the land when he camps this way.
Travel Routes
David uses a trail along the Hay River, then heads north using old trails to get to his
trapline. This trip would take approximately seven days to complete.
Another route David would use heads north to Bistcho Lake from Chateh, then west
along the Petitot River to his trapline. David explained the high ground along rivers are
used by the Dene Tha’ for travel because the low ground is muskeg and makes
travelling difficult.
David also travels to July Lake or “Tsuk-aye” [phonetically].
Transcript 1
 David also remembered using a trail that begins at the confluence of the Hay and
Shekilie rivers and continues north to July Lake, running parallel to the Alberta/BC
border.
Observed Changes
David has seen many changes in the way that trails are used; transitioning from pack
dogs and pack horses to skidoos and ATVs. David was taught how to live in the bush
by his father and would use pack dogs, pack horses or would walk everywhere. David
pointed out that the trails are still the same, but the way to travel has changed.
Additionally, winter access roads, cutlines and seismic lines have become routine travel
routes. He explained that in the past there were no cutlines or seismic, and now people
use them to travel. David feels that the cutlines and seismic destroy a great deal of
habitat.
David has observed industry on the land and notes that the animals stay away from
these areas. There is too much noise and too many people and the animals stay away.
David noted that before there was any development on his trapline, it was a good area
for wildlife because it was rich boreal forest habitat.
The Etsho Plateau is also a suitable area for many animals. For example, David
previously noted an abundance of lynx, marten and mink. However, now the land has
been changed by logging and oil companies, many of the animals have left. He
explained that there are only a few marten and mink in this area currently because the
habitat has changed so drastically.
David stated that the quantity of animals in the overall area has also declined. In the
winter, he would often observe many moose and caribou tracks but now notes these
less frequently. David believes this reduction in tracks means the number of these
animals has decreased.
Transcript 1
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Gabriel Ahkimnachie
Date:                 November 4, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Translator:           Robert Tsonchoke
Interviewer:          Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
Gabriel hunts for food in northeastern British Columbia (BC); he generally hunts moose
but sometimes hunts caribou.
Gabriel also traps in northeastern BC on trapline #755T014, which is in the northeast
corner of BC bordering Alberta to the east, and the Northwest Territories (NWT) to the
north.
In the past, Gabriel would complete two hunting/trapping trips each winter; the trips
would be approximately a month and a half long. The second of these trips would often
extend until March, at which point he would pull his traps and travel home.
These trips were used as a means of income and food, with the furs from trapping
being sold for money and the moose hunted for subsistence. Gabriel noted that when
they were on the land they would try to kill a moose at the beginning of the trip to
supply adequate food and would bring the leftover meat home for their families.
Generally, he and his family prefer food from the “bush” rather than from the store; he
explained that “everybody still lives on wild meat”.
Gabriel rarely hunts for caribou but explained that when he does hunt them, he only
kills one, which is enough to live on; he never kills more than what he needs for food.
Currently, Gabriel only hunts in areas with vehicle access, which was not the case in the
past; he would go everywhere when he was younger.
Fishing
Gabriel pointed out that the water from Kotcho Lake flows into Kotcho River, which
flows through the Shekilie River and into the Hay River. He explained that these rivers
are used by many Dene Tha’ for fishing.
Transcript 2
 Gabriel does not go fishing in the winter.
Gabriel explained that access is limited to northeastern BC in the summer and has never
fished at any of the lakes in that area as a consequence. However, he did note that July
Lake has a lot of fish, especially suckers and jackfish.
Gabriel indicated that Kotcho Lake contains a lot of jackfish, pickerel and suckers. He
pointed out that he catches these fish in the Hay River when they migrate from the
Lake.
Sites
Gabriel explained that the Dene Tha’ have many burials and ceremonial sites around
lakes. For example, there are a number of burial sites around July Lake and Thinahtea
Lake.
He also pointed out a Historic settlement and cabin site at the confluence of the Shekilie
and Hay Rivers. Gabriel explained that there are six burial sites located there and noted
that Dene Tha’ people still go to this location today.
Gabriel also identified a cabin near Kotcho Lake and two cabins located on his trapline.
Traditional Knowledge
Gabriel indicated that caribou are plentiful in the area surrounding the proposed Plant
site. He noted that the caribou generally travel in groups/herds of about forty animals
and generally migrate in swampy areas. He explained that caribou head north in the fall
as far as they can go and migrate south in April.
During the caribou calving season the caribou prefer the warmer areas in BC and stay
close to swamps and muskeg in May.
Travel Routes
In the past Gabriel would walk from Assumption/Chateh to Kotcho Lake through the
bush. He explained that he would construct a birch bark canoe at Kotcho Lake and use
the river for his return trip.
Gabriel currently uses his vehicle on the “Powerline Road” from Rainbow Lake to get
into BC.
Transcript 2
 Observed Changes
Gabriel has observed many changes to the food that he hunts, traps or fishes. He noted
that the food he harvests from the land does not taste the same and he feels that oil
and gas activity is responsible for this change. Gabriel feels there are too many oil and
gas developments on the land, especially within his trapline.
Gabriel explained that the oil and gas development on his trapline have led to an
increase in noise. This has resulting in a decrease in the animals that frequent his line.
For example, he could previously hunt or trap an animal for food each day but it is no
longer this dependable. Gabriel indicated that within his line it is often difficult to hunt
or trap anything.
Gabriel explained that before the trapline licensing system existed, there were no
boundaries and Dene Tha’ went hunting and trapping anywhere in BC. He noted that
this is not possible anymore as people are restricted to traplines.
Future Generations
Gabriel has seven children (five daughters, two sons); his sons go out on the land and
hunt/trap as well.
Concerns
Gabriel indicated that the location of the proposed Plant site is not ideal. He explained
that the rivers and creeks that cross the Plant site eventually flow towards his trapline
via the Shekilie and Hay River. He explained that the Plant site will have a negative
effect on fish and beaver in these rivers and believes the plant is a bad idea.
Gabriel is opposed to the Plant being constructed because he fears that it will result in
the same negative changes to that area that he has observed on his trapline. He is sure
that once the plant is built and operating there will be no more animals in that area due
to the increase in noise; there will be nothing left to hunt or trap in that area.
Gabriel related two examples of noise driving the animals away from an area, the first
when the Dene Tha’ moved to Assumption and the second when the road to Zama was
constructed. Prior to the Dene Tha’ moving to Assumption, the area contained a variety
of animals including rabbits, moose and beavers. However, once the Dene Tha’ moved
into the area there was a significant increase in noise and activity and the animals
moved away. This happened again when the road was built to Zama City driving away
the geese and ducks.
Gabriel is also concerned that the proposed Plant will have a negative effect on berries
and other vegetation in the area.
Transcript 2
 Gabriel is frustrated that oil and gas companies make a lot of money from the resources
within the Dene Tha’ traditional territory, but the Dene Tha’ do not see any benefit.
Instead they lose all the animals and resources they depend on to live.
Gabriel indicated that an oil and gas company recently drilled a well on his trapline. He
felt the well was too close to July Lake and was supposed to be compensated for the
drilling, but he never got anything.
Transcript 2
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Ernest Chonkolay
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewer:          Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Ernest explained that the Etsho Plateau in British Columbia (BC) is excellent habitat for
wildlife. He has noted numerous tracks for moose, lynx and caribou throughout the
plateau, specifically the area west of Cabin Lake.
Ernest indicated that he uses Alberta trapline #1063 and generally traps for beaver in
the spring because they are fat this time of year. Since the price of a beaver pelt has
decreased, Ernest feels that it is no longer worthwhile to trap beaver commercially. He
noted the cash return on a beaver pelt is not worth the gas it takes to go out trapping.
Medicine and Berry Gathering
Ernest noted that the Etsho Plateau supports an abundance of traditional medicines and
berries.
Ernest harvests low bush cranberries, raspberries and cloudberries.
Fishing
Ernest explained that he was recently flown to Kotcho Lake to participate in
environmental field studies and observed that the lake is very large with good habitat
for fish.
Travel Routes
During Ernest’s most recent trip to BC, he noted a trail following the Hay River that
branches out in two directions. One branch loops back towards Alberta following the
Hay River, and the other branch is a historic wagon trail that continues on to Fort
Nelson. He explained that the second branch of the trail follows the high ground
because the low ground is muskeg and is difficult to travel.
Ernest explained that he uses the winter access road that extends from Rainbow Lake
along the 28th baseline and continues on to Fort Nelson.
Transcript 3
 Ernest also noted using the seismic lines and pipeline right-of-ways to travel.
Traditional Knowledge
Caribou require lichen or “caribou feet” as a food source; this is very plentiful on the
Etsho Plateau.
Ernest pointed out that the Kotcho Lake is the main body of water for all the creeks
around it; some creeks flow into Kotcho Lake while others flow out of the Lake.
Ernest indicated that the water and creeks to the west of Cabin Lake flow into the area
of the proposed plant.
Sites
Ernest explained that there is a gathering area by the confluence of the Hay River and
Shekilie River where people would meet and dry meat.
Ernest indicated there are two cabins on his trapline (#1063).
Concerns
Ernest is concerned about the rate of development within the Dene Tha’ Traditional
Territory. There are exploration drilling rigs in so many places, and there is so much
noise from these rigs, that the animals stay away. He also feels that there is so much
garbage from the rigs and camps that the bears are attracted to these places for food.
Ernest noted that there are two Plants on trapline #1063 and he does not go there
often because there is too much traffic and the terrain is muddy.
Transcript 3
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Allen Didzena
Date:                November 2, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Translator:          Thomas Ahkimnachie, Ricky Pastion
Interviewer:         Tracy Campbell, Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Background
Allen is currently 43 years old. His father was Pierre Natannah (deceased) and his
mother was Alice Didzena (deceased); Allen also has one sister Peggy Didzena.
Hunting and Trapping
Allen did not hold a trapper’s license when he trapped in the past. Instead, he would
accompany Paulis and Elder Louison Ahkimnachie (his brother in law). Paulis and
Louison were in their sixties when they took Allen trapping, and when they could no
longer go out on the land, Allen continued on his own.
Allen explained that the three of them would head out to trap in mid November, as
soon as the ice was thick, and head home in March. During the first two weeks of the
trip they would set up camp and lay their traps. Then they would spend approximately
two weeks checking the traps before heading to another site where they would repeat
the process. During this time they would sleep under tarps with blankets by an open
fire. They would use one skidoo between the three of them and take two dogs to pull
the sled with their supplies. Allen noted that he enjoyed this time out on the land very
much.
He specified that he trapped in the area around the proposed Plant site.
Allen also noted travelling to July Lake with Louison and Paulis from November to March
to trap otter, beaver and muskrat and explained that he still hunts in this area.
Allen noted that he also traps for marten, lynx and mink.
Allen explained that, from fall to December, there are about twenty or thirty herds of
caribou in northeastern British Columbia (BC) from fall to December which is when
Louison and Paulis would generally hunt them. Allen noted that Louison and Paulis did
not hunt caribou during spring because the caribou often carried fleas during this
season.
Transcript 4
 Allen indicated the majority of his diet is from the land including ducks, moose, bear
and eggs. He often travels upstream on the Hay River to hunt for those animals.
In order for Allen continue going out on the land he requires a vehicle, adequate
supplies and money to purchase fuel. Unfortunately, Allen does not have a vehicle and
notes that this is his biggest obstacle. He noted that financial assistance would help
more people get out on the land and hunt. He also stated that assistance in form of
adequate supplies (“supplies in a box”) would encourage more people to go out on the
land.
Allen explained that he usually does not go close to a Plant site for hunting and
trapping. However, some people will often hunt near well pads because the moose are
attracted to the sound of the pump jack.
Fishing
Allen explained that the lakes around the proposed Plant site have an abundance of fish
such as jackfish, finescale dace, trout, pickerel, walleye and longnose suckers.
Allen also noted that Courvoisir Creek and other creeks in the area of the proposed
Plant site are used by fish for spawning.
Medicine and Berries
Allen explained that he travelled around Kotcho Lake approximately four years ago
while firefighting. During that time he observed numerous species of trees such as
poplar, black spruce and tamarack; he noted that tamarack generally grows on high
ground.
Traditional Knowledge
Allen explained that the area surrounding the proposed Plant site is part of a caribou
migration route. Caribou either migrate north or south from that area depending on the
time of year. For example, during the summer they stay around Kotcho Lake and other
lakes in the vicinity to consume berries.
According to Allen, the caribou do not remain around Kotcho Lake in the winter. This is
because they migrate south for the season. However, in the summer Allen observed an
abundance of wildlife, such as moose and caribou, around Kotcho Lake and the
adjacent smaller lakes. He also pointed out that this area is important for migratory
birds including ducks, loons, geese and swans.
Transcript 4
 Kotcho Lake is also habitat for many small furbearers such as otter, muskrat and
beaver.
In general he considers the lake and surrounding lakes as a sensitive ecological area.
Travel Routes
Allen uses two winter access road to travel to BC. One access road crosses Alberta
trapline #99 the other crosses through BC trapline #756T001. These two winter access
roads are connected by the Sierra Yoyo Desan Road which also leads into Fort Nelson.
Allen explained that he would travel the entire area between Kotcho Lake and the
border to the Northwest Territories (NWT) during his trapping and hunting trips each
winter.
In the past, when Allen would accompany Louison and Paulis trapping, there were no
access roads that they could use. Instead, they would travel on an old horse and dog
team trail from the 1950s/1960s. This historic trail followed the Hay River from Habay
and continued on to Fort Nelson. Allen used to break this trail using snowshoes for
about 40km so the skidoo could follow.
Allen noted that currently, people require access roads and vehicles/ATVs to go hunting
and no longer use horse or dog teams.
Allen currently travels with other trappers because he does not have a car and has to
rely on others to get out on the land. He says it is difficult to get out on the land
without a vehicle.
Observed Changes
In the early 1980s, Allen noted an increase in cutlines, pipelines and roads. Even
though Allen believes these activities are great for job opportunities, he explained that
they are not good for the wildlife. He noted that while caribou are often found in
cleared areas, moose and deer prefer the bush.
Allen explained that a long time ago there was not as much sickness as there is today.
He noted that the Dene Tha’ prophet [spiritual leader] had prophesied that illnesses and
disease would kill many people.
Allen indicated that in the past there were “moose everywhere” but now the population
is down. Allen believes this is due to increased hunting and the high number of
predators such as wolves.
Transcript 4
 Future Generations
Allen explained that many of the old trappers have retired from trapping and the
current “headmen” are now working to train their “juniors” to carry on with trapping
and hunting.
Allen is concerned that the communities’ young people are slowly losing their culture.
He believes that it is important to start teaching the youth to preserve the Dene Tha’
culture.
Concerns
Allen is concerned about the effects of oil and gas activities on wildlife. He pointed out
that caribou, moose and lynx drink the water from well sites because of its salty taste.
He has witnessed animals that have ingested this water getting sick and dying within a
year or two. He is concerned that this will continue with the development of more sites.
Allen is also concerned that an increase in oil and gas activities will damage the overall
area and all the animals will eventually disappear.
He is worried that pipeline leaks could seep into the water causing contamination and
disturbing the ecosystem; this would affect fish, birds and insects. Allen explained that
the creeks flowing through the Plant site in turn flow into Kotcho Lake, flow out at the
south end into Kotcho River and later into the Hay River.
Allen noted that activities, such as building a road, have a negative effect on wildlife.
Wolves, for example, have an increased advantage killing moose in the cleared areas
that are created as a result.
Allen would like to see some compensation flow to the Dene Tha’ for the damages oil
and gas activities have caused to the land.
Transcript 4
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Diana Kolay
Date:                 November 4, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Diana hunts for moose in British Columbia (BC) using the winter access roads from
Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson. Sometimes she drives all the way to Fort Nelson before
turning back; this trip takes about 4-5 hours. She usually hunts with her sister because
her sister has a vehicle.
During her hunting trips, Diana will often use the cutlines to travel further from the road
and prefers to use them for the ease of access.
During a recent hunting trip to Sulphur Lake, Diana and her family killed three moose.
The moose were shared among the families and they made sure to bring enough back
for the people that couldn’t come. Diana noted that they always share meat between
families.
Diana explained that woodland caribou are protected and she does not hunt them
Diana also traps on occasion for rabbits, muskrat and beaver.
Diana explained that most of her diet comes from hunting and trapping and she only
uses store bought meat on special occasions.
Fishing
Diana fishes for pickerel in the spring at Sousa Creek. She also fishes for suckers and
jackfish at Habay and Rainbow Lake. In the winter, she fishes at Bistcho Lake for
whitefish.
Diana does not fish in BC because there is no access to that area in the summer
because the entire area is muskeg.
Medicines and Berries
Diana specified that the area around the Plant is mostly muskeg, and that wild
cranberries grow in these conditions.
Transcript 5
 Diana also noted that there are cones on spruce trees that can be boiled and used for
colds and stomach aches. These trees are present on the Plant site. Spruce trees are
generally found in muskeg and the cones are best when harvested from smaller trees.
She also mentioned that there are patches of medicines along the Sierra Yoyo Desan
road but did not know the English translation for them. She noted that certain types of
these medicines do not ripen till late July or August.
Diana indicated that juniper can be found along the road from Rainbow Lake near the
water fall on the Hay River. Juniper can be used to cure many ailments and she
explained that juniper can be found near Kotcho Lake.
Diana stated that rat root grows by ponds or in swampy areas. For example, Habay
generally has a lot of rat root. It grows like a vine and must be cut with a small knife
because the stalk can be very tough.
Diana also harvests “moose berries” which are small white and orange berries that help
with liver and stomach ailments. She also collects wild mint and strawberry roots when
they are available; strawberry roots can be boiled and used as a cure for diarrhea.
Sacred Sites
Diana noted a number of grave sites near Bistcho Lake. These graves are flagged with
pink survey tape from a community research initiative.
Traditional Knowledge
Diana indicated that moose prefer the habitat found on the Plant site because they
prefer treed areas. Diana specified that once the Plant site is cleared the moose will no
longer frequent the area because they will be exposed and they do not like that.
She also noted that bear prefer the type of habitat present on the Plant site.
Travel Routes
Diana uses the winter roads to travel and hunt in BC; she noted that there are two
winter roads from Fort Nelson; One road heads to Rainbow Lake and the other one
goes to the Zama area.
Observed Changes
Diana noted that the buffalo in BC and Alberta have become overpopulated. She feels
that the government should control the population as buffalo chase the moose away.
Transcript 5
 Diana does not like to eat buffalo meat; she feels it has a particular odour because their
urine is strongly scented.
Concerns
While Diana prefers the cutlines for their ease of access, she notes that they do affect
the animals. She feels that there are too many cutlines and the land is overcrowded.
Diana is concerned about chemicals travelling from the Plant to Hay-Zama. She feels
that all the creeks are connected and the water or fish could transport the chemicals to
the Dene Tha’ community.
Diana is also concerned that moose frequenting the Plant site may become
contaminated and if she, or her family, eats moose from that area they will become
sick. She would not want to hunt, trap, fish or gather near the Plant because she has
no information about the side effects to her health. She pointed out that the animals
still go near Plants because there are often salty deposits and this could be very bad
depending on the chemicals that create that salty flavour.
Diana is concerned that the clearing of the Plant site will destroy a lot of vegetation.
She feels that the Plant is located in a very beautiful area and that it will be destroyed.
Diana explained that cleared areas are not good for berries because it destroys where
the berries would naturally occur.
Transcript 5
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Don Metchooyeah
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Don hunts moose in British Columbia (BC) using the winter access road that begins in
Rainbow Lake and ends in Fort Nelson. This road takes him near Kotcho Lake which is a
good area for moose.
Don has hunted moose using cutlines near Kotcho Lake.
Don does not hunt for caribou because they are a protected species and he does not
like the flavour of the meat. He noted however, that some community members do
hunt for caribou.
Don traps for beaver, marten and lynx in Alberta on trapline #84 in both the summer
and the winter. He has trapped since he was 17 years old and is now 56.
He noted that he still traps the same amount as he always has, even with the increased
development on his line.
Medicines and Berries
Don noted that there are patches of berries and medicines along the road to Fort
Nelson, but he only travels that way in the winter and does not have the opportunity to
harvest them.
Don explained that juniper can be used for coughs and colds and noted that his
daughter, Janice Providence, knows of places it can be collected.
Don noted that there used to be a place to collect rat root on the 29th baseline near
Assumption. However, since a pipeline was placed under this area, the root tastes like
oil. People now avoid that area and collect rat root in Habay instead. He noted that rat
root is generally found in swamps or very wet places.
Travel Routes
Don uses the cutlines on his trapline as a mode of travel; it is much easier than
breaking a new trail each time.
Transcript 6
 Don uses the winter access roads to travel to BC, he noted that there is one road from
Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson and another that goes to the Zama City area. The road
from Rainbow Lake passes by Kotcho Lake.
Don mainly uses his truck to travel the winter roads.
Traditional Knowledge
Don stated that the Plant site is good habitat for moose.
Observed Changes
Don noted that there are numerous pipelines and pump jacks on his trapline now. While
he does not like the industrial developments, he finds the roads that come along with
them convenient because they are often graded and makes travelling to his trapline
much easier.
Don explained that there used to be a great place to get rat root but since a pipeline
was placed under that spot the rat root tastes oily and people avoid collecting in that
spot. He related this to the Plant site, stating that the Plant site is mainly comprised of
muskeg, where rat root generally grows, and if you collected it there he speculated that
its taste would be affected like the rat root above the pipeline.
Concerns
Don feels like his concerns go unheeded because when a company says they are going
to put a Plant in a certain place, the Plant will go there no matter what he says.
Don explained that he would still go to the area no matter what; he would just avoid
the Plant site itself.
Transcript 6
                                    Interview Summary
Interviewee:           Robert Metchooyeah
Date:                  November 3, 2009
Location:              Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:          Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
 “We are just like the animals that we live and depend on. We are not from this land we
   are a part of this land; just like the water is a part of the land, that is who we are.”
                                                                        -Robert Metchooyeah
Background
Robert was born May 11, 1965 in Fort Vermillion. His father Paulis Metchooyeah was
from Habay and his mother Sophie Chambaud was from Meander River. His
Grandfather’s name was Paul Metchooyeah, also known as “Big Paul.”
Hunting and Trapping
Robert’s family holds trapline #755T013 in northeastern British Columbia (BC). He
would spend time on this trapline with his father trapping furbearers such as lynx, mink
and marten.
When Robert and his father were on the land and required food they would hunt for
moose. If the moose were scarce, then Robert and his father would hunt caribou
instead.
When Robert was in the Cabin Lake area for work he saw many caribou, moose, mink,
squirrel, muskrat and beaver. He noted that the area “is not even touched yet, there is
no disturbance, just the way it is naturally”.
During Robert’s time working in BC he found two baby caribou antlers in the area
around Cabin Lake. The company he was working for at the time was proposing to take
water from that lake to freeze the road as it was deemed a ‘dead lake’ by the
surveyors. Robert disagreed with this determination because he found the antlers in the
vicinity of the lake. This tells him that the area around the lake is used for calving by
caribou.
Robert noted that the area between Kotcho Lake and Cabin Lake is used by caribou
when they are migrating north from Prophet River. They complete this cyclical
migration annually and travel south along the Alaska highway. Robert recently spoke
Transcript 7
 with a member of Prophet River that indicated there are not many caribou left anymore
because many are killed on the highway during this migration.
Robert indicated there are porcupines in northeastern BC and some people in the Dene
Tha’ community hunt/trap porcupine for food and their quills for art.
Robert explained that the Dene Tha’ always share the meat from hunting with
community members that need it. For example, when he killed a moose recently he
brought the hind leg from Chateh to Child Lake for his son and family there. He
explained that the Dene Tha’ share the kill with everyone who needs it.
Robert prefers wild meat to meat from the grocery store. He explained that the Dene
Tha’ do not just go to a ‘Safeway’ and fill their fridge, they go to the land.
Fishing
Robert has fished in Thinahtea or Ah-tin-net-teen [phonetically] Lake, Kwokullie Lake
and Kotcho Lake.
His father would often fish in Kotcho lake for pickerel, jackfish and whitefish. Robert
noted that whitefish must be caught by net.
Robert explained that some Dene Tha’ community members still travel to Bistcho Lake
in February to fish for whitefish by net.
Medicines and Berries
Robert noted that the Plant site is a good area for muskeg berries, gooseberries, low
bush cranberries and black spruce. This is because it is close to rivers and is in an area
that is dominated by muskeg. Robert explained that these types of plants can grow in
both high ground and low lying muskeg.
The black spruce berries from the Plant site are useful for chest colds and congestion.
Robert has gathered mint by the Sahtanah River, which is known as bear creek in
Dene.
Travel Routes
Robert travels to BC using a winter road that goes from Rainbow Lake to Kotcho Lake
and connects with the Sierra Yoyo Desan Road. This road is known as the “Powerline
road”. He noted that this road passes Kotcho Lake and connects to North Helmet Camp;
it also continues west to Fort Nelson.
Transcript 7
 When Robert travels in BC he often heads north past the Petitot River where his family
trapline is located. He often spends time at July Lake, February Lake and Mid-winter
Lake.
Robert mentioned that the Dene Tha’ used the Shekilie River for travel and that the
Kotcho River flows south from the Lake and connects with the Shekilie. He also noted
that the Kotcho River connects to the Hay River which in turn flows to Chateh, then on
to the NWT.
Robert travels to the southern end of the Northwest Territories and throughout
northeastern BC.
Robert explained that there is a trail located by Pago Plant and North Helmet Camp that
is used for winter access. This trail cuts across the Shekilie River through the Bootis
Hills.
He also noted that some Dene Tha’ travel to BC using the 31st baseline by skidoo. This
route leads to the Petitot River and is the remnant of an old dog sled trail. When the
Dene Tha’ would historically use this route, they would often meet with other Dene Tha’
travelers at Kotcho or Kwokullie Lake. Everyone would travel there using different
routes, meet for a short time and then go their separate ways.
Robert explains that the Dene Tha’ will travel even when the roads are not plowed. For
example in 2004/2005 the winter road from Rainbow Lake into BC was not plowed and
to go another route to Fort Nelson would have taken 14 hours. So instead of taking the
long route, Robert had his brother drop him off at the end of the plowed road and he
travelled by dog sled and skidoo to the 101 camp. Robert noted that dog teams are not
widely used anymore as this is a different era and the Dene Tha’ First Nation is an
evolving Nation. He notes that most people currently travel by quad or skidoo.
Traditional Knowledge
Kotcho Lake is known as Go-tcho-ge-keh [phonetically] in Dene. Robert stated that this
Lake produces a lot of water for the region as most of the rivers in that area flow east
into the lake, then into Alberta.
Thinahtea Lake is known as Ah-tin-net-teen [phonetically] in Dene. This is where the
last Dene Tha’ prophet [spiritual leader] is buried. The name translates to “the first
prophet”.
Robert noted a story of two women surviving alone at July Lake over a winter season.
In the fall they melted spruce gum and used it to glaze the rocks so that when the
Transcript 7
 geese landed by the lake, during their migration, they would stick to the rocks, making
them an easy kill. They dried the meat from the geese and this provided them with
food for the winter. They plucked the geese feathers and used them to fashion blankets
to keep warm. Robert explained that the girls also pulled up plant roots from around
the lake and wove them into nets which they used to fish. When spring arrived, their
brother came searching for them and found the girls still at the lake and thriving. This
lake is a sacred place to DTFN and is known as “Woman’s Place” or “A Woman’s Place”.
Robert noted that black spruce was plentiful on the Plant site. He explained that black
spruce berries are used for chest colds and congestion.
The Dene Tha’ often cache or store food and supplies on the land for their personal use
and the use of other people out on the land. These caches are often stored in the trees
for winter and are placed out there in the fall. Everyone is invited to use these supply
caches as long as the supplies are replaced the next time the person travels through
that area. These caches often contain dry meat, fish and some basic supplies for
survival.
Observed Changes
Robert stated that before there were gas plants we [Dene Tha’] would go “all over” but
now that there are Plants why would we still continue to go there? “If animals are not
going to go there, there is no food for us”.
He explained that many years ago there were no provincial borders and the Dene
people would go all over to hunt; if the fish migrated somewhere they would follow, if
the moose migrated, they would follow. He stated that the Dene Tha’ still travel to
hunt, trap, fish and gather today but now there are borders and with those borders
comes different rules and regulations. He said if the borders were not in place the Dene
Tha’ would still go where they went before. He feels they are limited by traplines,
borders and designated areas. Robert explained that moose come and go and do not
have to ask for permission but if a Dene Tha’ wants to follow them they have to adhere
to the rules and regulations.
Robert explained that the traplines regulations are a recent development, only existing
since the 1930s.
Robert explained that some areas over there [in BC] have no disturbances but “the
more people come, the more disturbance they make”. Robert said that people come
from away and bring their big trucks and the animals move away; they do not stay
Transcript 7
 where this activity is occurring. Robert is concerned with this occurring in the Dene
Tha’ backyard; “that is our home and our backyard”.
He has noticed that industry is beginning to develop northeastern BC more and more by
putting in plants, pipelines, powerlines and roads. He noted the example of the Sierra
Yoyo Desan Road that is now being paved. Every year they [government] pave more
and more to North Helmet Camp. He speculated that they would be paving about 30 –
60km of this road each year.
Concerns
Robert felt that the vapors that come out of Gas Plants might contaminate the
vegetation, food and water that the animals in the area depend on. He felt that if the
animals, which the Dene Tha’ use for food, were contaminated that the community
would become sick. He felt these contaminants were the reason numerous community
members were dying of cancer.
Robert felt there is not enough consideration given to water. He felt that it is easy for
industry to say ‘put a plant there’ but wonders how this will affect the creeks and the
water in the lakes. Robert is concerned that the Plant could affect the water system in
the region. He feels that because the water in that area flows to Hay-Zama that his
community could be affected by runoff from the Plant.
Robert notes that all the little creeks near the plant site flow into Kotcho Lake, which in
turn flows into Hay Zama. This water then flows into the NWT and joins with the
McKenzie delta and flows into the Arctic. He states that eventually the water flows back
south through the Petitot and Liard, “it is all a cycle”.
Robert wishes that industry and government would “look after” the water because
everything depends on the water; “water is life”. He feels that if a pipeline breaks or the
plant causes contaminants to flow with the water, and the Dene Tha’ live by the rivers,
they will be affected. He also states that Dene Tha’ are not the only people that live by
the river, and all those people will be affected as well. Robert feels that if these
contaminants get into the water the fish will be destroyed. He is also concerned that if
the moose drink the water and then the Dene Tha’ eat the moose they will pass on the
contaminants. He feels that is does not matter how close you live to the plant, the
effects are all connected by water.
Transcript 7
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:         June Penner
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
June hunts for moose in British Columbia (BC) along the winter access roads and the
Sierra Yoyo Desan road. She travels to the area near Kotcho Lake via these roads.
When June hunts in BC, she often hunts for the day and heads home in the evening. If
she is nearby Fort Nelson, she spends the night there and heads home the next
morning.
She hunts in the vicinity of small wells and pump jacks because the ground does not
freeze completely due to salt deposits and this attracts moose who travel there to lick
the salt.
Medicines and Berries
June noted that two types of cranberries grow in muskeg, in addition to herbs that can
be used for coughs and colds.
Sites
June’s father-in-law has a cabin near Kotcho Lake.
She noted that there are graves throughout most of BC and Alberta and explained that
her grandfather is buried somewhere in BC.
Traditional Knowledge
June explained that moose travel all over northeastern BC and if a moose is in the area
of a Gas Plant it doesn’t just stay by that Plant, but travels all over.
She explained that moose prefer the low ground because they require willows and
meadows for calving. The high ground is often too dry and moose generally only use
the high ground for migration.
June does not hunt for caribou because they are protected and she does not like the
taste of the meat. She stated that the flavour is different than moose meat.
Transcript 8
 June noted the importance of muskeg as it holds freshwater underground. She
explained that it is also important for medicines and berries. She explained that most of
northeastern BC is very swampy and cannot be accessed in the summer for this reason.
June explained that her uncle has told her many things about muskeg. For example,
last month (October) when they were out hunting and he specified that muskeg water
is better than bottled water because the muskeg has filtered it. She explained that her
uncle only uses muskeg water for his tea when he is out on the land. Based on her
uncle’s advice June also still uses water from the muskeg when she is out on the land.
Travel Routes
June noted that there are two winter access roads that head into BC; one access road
begins in the Zama area, crosses the Shekilie and cuts across to Kotcho Lake. The other
road begins in Rainbow Lake and cuts straight west to Fort Nelson.
June noted that the good thing about another Plant being built is that there will be
better quality roads and makes it easier for her to access the area for hunting.
Observed Changes
June has noted a change in moose meat recently in the form of a white powdery
residue that is present on dried meat. She speculates that the residue could be an acid
or salt and she notes that she has never seen this before.
June explained that in recent years when she goes hunting near smaller industrial
developments she has noted that it looks as though the ground is frozen with a cover of
snow but when travelling on this snow the ground is not frozen and you or your vehicle
sinks in. This is due to salt being produced by industry and she speculates that this
could happen near the Plant as well.
June has noted in recent years a change in the berries available in northeastern BC.
Now the berries seem to be smaller than they were before and the patches are
scattered further apart.
June explained that when she is out on the land she sees lots of signs posted that
indicated the area by Kotcho Lake is a protected area for caribou. Even though this is a
protected area she explained that there are hardly any left.
She also noted that in recent years some of the roads in BC have been blocked with
gates that she does not have permission to cross through. This makes it difficult for
June to hunt in the areas near those roads.
Transcript 8
 Concerns
June is concerned by development within DTFN traditional territory; specifically the
impact of development on animals. For example, developments often result in a salty
residue that deer and moose lick. June previously noted a white residue on dried moose
meat and attributes this to a gas Plant in the valley where she normally hunts.
She is concerned that wildlife will be affected by the increase in development. She
notes that animals don’t just stay in one spot. One little thing in BC can affect the whole
area. She noted that “If there is a gas plant somewhere, a big one, you don’t see
nothing close to it. No fresh tracks, nothing”.
June is also concerned that fish will be affected by the Plant, although she feels that
fish will not only be affected, but everything will be affected.
June explained that when industry is working in northern Alberta they are not supposed
to damage muskeg or mosses on the sites. She is concerned that the proposed Plant
will damage both muskeg and mosses as it is located in an area where these types of
habitat and vegetation are plentiful. She feels that if the site is fully cleared of muskeg
there will be damage to the overall area.
June asked why the Plant was being built on the high ground as she felt the location
would increase the risk of runoff from the Plant contaminating the streams and lakes
below. She is concerned about the risk of contaminated runoff.
June and her daughter are concerned about mercury and wonder if it could be a by-
product of the Plant. They have heard about the side effects that can occur from
mercury and noted that it could get back to Hay-Zama via the lakes and rivers and
could lead to community sickness.
Future Generations
June specified that she intends on taking her children and grandchildren out on the land
to teach them the DTFN traditional ways.
Transcript 8
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Ronnie Semansha
Date:                 November 4, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
                             “This [BC] is our traditional lands”
                                                                     -Ronnie Semansha
Hunting and Trapping
Ronnie hunts for moose in British Columbia (BC) near Kotcho Lake along the winter
access road that spans from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson. He once shot a moose
adjacent to Cabin Lake.
He also uses the Sierra Yoyo Desan road and the winter access road that loops around
Kotcho Lake for hunting. He takes this route once a week beginning on Friday
afternoons when he is finished work.
Ronnie also hunts in the area near Kwokullie Lake; he travels there via the winter
access on the 31st baseline.
Ronnie strictly hunts for moose in BC, and noted that there are hardly any caribou left.
He explained that there used to be lots of caribou in BC but there has been a drop in
recent times.
Fishing
Ronnie noted that there are pickerel in Kotcho Lake and explained that there are all
different kinds of fish out there [BC].
Travel Routes
Ronnie travels to BC using the winter access roads. He noted that there were two roads
that he generally used, one from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson and one that cuts North
to the Zama area (along the 31st baseline). When he does go out, other community
members will often accompany him and everyone chips in a little for gas and supplies.
However, he generally goes out for just one day and does not require supplies beyond
fuel.
Transcript 13
 If he cannot travel to a certain area via the winter roads then Ronnie will often use a
skidoo and the cutlines to access those areas.
Ronnie also travels to the Petitot River on occasion.
Sites
Ronnie pointed out the location of a cabin at Kwokullie Lake. He explained that this is
an old cabin that he saw while hunting in that area. He travelled there via the winter
road that is located along the 31st baseline.
Sacred Sites
Ronnie explained that in the old days there was no way for the people travelling out on
the land to transport the bodies of those that passed away back to Hay-Zama, so there
are graves everywhere.
Ronnie has only seen one grave on a hill in BC. This grave was located on a pipeline
right of way and the route was changed and the grave marked.
Traditional Knowledge
Ronnie indicated that moose calve around Kotcho Lake in the spring. This is because
there are willows surrounding the lake and that is the preferred calving habitat. They
also like to stay near a water source during this time.
Ronnie also noted that there is a moose migration through the area surrounding the
Plant site in late July, August and September. During this part of their migration the
moose head to the high ground that characterizes the Plant site.
Ronnie explained that moose are generally more active in the morning just prior to
daybreak and that is the best time to hunt.
Ronnie stated that muskeg acts as a filter for water and explained that it soaks in all the
contaminants. He noted that muskeg is good habitat for fox, lynx and marten.
Observed Changes
Ronnie has noted a drop in the number of caribou in recent years, he explained that
there used to be a lot, but now there are hardly any left.
Ronnie also noted that near wells and Plants there are often “salt spots” in the winter.
These areas look like they are snow when actually the ground is not frozen and quads
Transcript 13
 can easily sink and get stuck. Ronnie explained that he avoids areas immediately
surrounding industrial developments to avoid these ‘salt spots’.
Ronnie explained that he used to trap but now finds it too far to go; he has a job with
the Nation and does not have the time required for trapping regularly.
Concerns
Ronnie knows of a creek that flows from the Cabin Lake area into Kotcho Lake. He is
concerned that the chemicals from the Plant could flow from that creek into Kotcho
Lake and may eventually affect the Dene Tha’ downstream. He also notes that the
creeks and lakes are used by fish for spawning and migration to the Hay River in the
spring which could affect the DTFN food supply. He feels that this concern is especially
relevant to the proposed Plant because it is in an area characterized as high ground,
allowing chemicals to flow to the lower lying areas. Ronnie does not want freshwater
issues for the Dene Tha’ downstream.
Ronnie is also concerned that the chemicals from the Plant could kill the beavers.
Ronnie feels that there is potential for bears to be affected by the Plant. He worries
about bears being contaminated because some Dene Tha’ still eat bears and hunt them
while travelling on the winter roads.
He is also concerned that any berries in the vicinity of the plant site would become too
dusty to eat. Ronnie has previously noted, while quading, berries near a Plant site being
covered in dust from the roads that accompany this type of development and is
concerned that this will be the case with the proposed Plant as well.
Ronnie is also concerned that if the muskeg and trees that characterize the Plant site
were removed, the animals would have no place to go.
Ronnie also finds the increasingly restricted access in BC to be of concern. He noted
that most places have signs indicating no trespassing, gates, and warnings about H2S.
He understands the signs are necessary to warn people out on the land, but feels the
Dene Tha’ need more access to their traditional territory; “There needs to be balance”.
He is concerned that with more and more development there will be less and less
access.
Transcript 13
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Steven Tsonchoke and Robert Tsonchoke
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Translator:          Robert Tsonchoke
Interviewer:         Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
Steven is a registered trapper on British Columbia (BC) trapline #756T014, where he
traps beaver and hunts moose.
Steven explained that he used to trap with his brother and one other person but he is
too old now to trap regularly and also only has winter access by vehicle.
He trapped beaver at Kotcho Lake.
He has previously trapped in northeastern BC for beaver, lynx and mink.
Robert noted that he still goes out to BC every winter and hunts for moose most
weekends. He travels there via the Sierra Yoyo Desan road to the Spruce Road, which
takes him 5-6 hours one way. If he kills a moose before he gets there he turns back
and heads home.
Sites
Steven identified a settlement site at the confluence of the Shekilie and the Hay Rivers.
He noted that there are six burials at this location.
Steven pointed out that burials and ceremonial sites are often located along rivers or
adjacent to lakes.
He noted that there is a burial around July Lake and another at Thinahtea Lake.
Steven also identified the previous location of two cabins on his trapline; both of these
cabins burned down.
Transcript 14
 Traditional Knowledge
Robert indicated that there that there are a lot of caribou in the area near the proposed
Plant site. Steven added that caribou roam in the swampy areas of northeastern BC and
head north in the fall.
Travel Routes
Steven noted that in the past he would canoe along the Hay River and Kotcho River on
the way to and from his trapline; the canoe was made from birch bark. The would
generally head home from the trapline in the spring and would use the Hay River.
Now Steven travels by vehicle using the “Powerline Road” which begins in Rainbow
Lake.
Observed Changes
Robert explained that their trapline is still good for hunting, but things are changing
because there are too many oil companies on the trapline.
Concerns
Steven has noted changes on the land. For example, there used to be a lot of moose in
northeastern BC but now they need to go further south to hunt.
Steven would like the logging to stop on the traplines.
Steven explained that when a company drills the animals disappear and do not come
back because they do not like the noise. He feels the Plant will lead to an increase in
drilling.
Transcript 14
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Alex Wasp Colin
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Alex hunts for moose in the area by Kotcho Lake via the winter access road that
extends into British Columbia (BC) from Rainbow Lake. Alex always uses the access
road to reach this area. He generally travels to BC with Ronnie Semansha approximately
once a week.
Alex has also hunted near Cabin Lake in the summer using the Sierra Yoyo Desan road
and small access roads around Kotcho Lake.
Alex noted that the area near the Plant site has a lot of moose.
Fishing
Alex noted that there are a lot of fish in Kotcho Lake, specifically jackfish.
Travel Routes
Alex generally travels to BC using the winter access road that originates in Rainbow
Lake. However, he knows of another access road that cuts north from this road and
loops around Kwokullie and Kotcho Lake.
Alex always travels with other Nation members because he does not have a vehicle of
his own. He noted that there are a lot of community members that travel to BC that he
can go with.
Concerns
Alex is concerned that chemicals from the plant will travel through the creeks and end
up in Kotcho Lake. He explained that there are a lot of fish in Kotcho Lake and feels
that if the chemicals were to end up in the lake that it could kill the fish.
Transcript 15
                                  Interview Summary
Interviewee:          David Wasp Colin
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewer:          Tracy Campbell, Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
David explained that he has travelled and hunted with his father since he was 13 years
old. Through his family and the community, David’s father learned how to trap, hunt
and fish on the British Columbia (BC) trapline #755T015.
David prefers hunting for moose in BC using the winter access roads as a means to
travel to the area.
David explained that his father used to take him moose hunting at Amber River. They
would travel there via horse team. They would hunt enough moose meat to dry and
store for the winter. David reminisced about those days because “it was really nice”.
David also traps for beaver and noted that back when his father would take him moose
hunting at Amber River there were not as many beavers as there are today.
He explained that the majority of his diet comes from the land and that given a choice
between food from the store or from the land, he always prefers food from the land.
David also hunts wild chickens in the fall and collects as many as he can explaining that
it tastes better than duck.
David made special note that Dene Tha’ rarely hunt alone because ‘Fish and Wildlife’
release grizzly bears into the wild in many parts of their traditional territory. He
personally encountered this on his Uncle, Louison Ahkimnachie’s, trapline (#755T014).
David had been hunting for days and when he arrived at his uncle’s cabin he was told
about signs in the area indicating the release of a grizzly in the area. David felt that the
release of this large predator contributed to his inability to locate moose in this area.
Fishing
David uses a skidoo on the winter access roads to go ice fishing at Kotcho Lake.
Transcript 16
 Medicines and Berries
David explained that his mother was knowledgeable about medicinal plants. She would
know where to pick them and what they could be used for. He noted that she would
collect medicinal plants near the bottom of the Zama Tower.
Sites
David knows of two burials located at the Fort Nelson First Nation Reserve, Fontas. He
explained there are also buildings still standing at this location, but they are not
occupied. Also, Charlie McCarthy had a cabin at Fontas that doubled as a small store
and he remembers going there numerous times on his own and with his father.
David noted the location of a cabin just south of Kotcho Lake which he last saw this
summer (2009) when he was flown over the area during a field assessment for a
pipeline.
David explained that his family also used to have a cabin near the Bushe River Reserve.
Travel Routes
David uses the winter access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson.
David explained that he also uses the highway going from Fort Nelson to Fort St. John
and remembers when it was still gravel.
David noted that he travels to work in BC using the both the main highways and the
winter access roads. The main highway goes to Manning and then he continues west
from Manning using a winter access road called “Forestry Road”. This winter access
road separates into two forks near the AB/BC border. The south fork is called ‘Lady
Fern Road’ and leads to Doig River while the north fork is called ‘Fontas Road’ and leads
to the Fontas Reserve.
David has travelled to Fontas using both horse teams and, more recently, vehicles. In
the past, when David would travel by horse team, his father would always say that
Fontas was “just over the hill” and was not far. David stated that he has “travelled all
over”.
David says in 1971 he travelled by dog team to his uncle’s BC trapline #755T014 via
the Shekilie River. During this trip they walked north to July Lake which is known as
“Tsuk-aye” [phonetically] or “Women’s Place”.
David also recalled his mother indicating a trail near Rainbow Lake and a horse trail
located near Zama Lake. He explained that she remembered former Chief Talley using
Transcript 16
 “a trail going over a hill” to travel from Alberta to BC. David noted that his father would
travel using pack horses on this very same trail when he travelled to BC.
David explained that when he and his father travelled they would stay on the high
ground because the low ground was muskeg which made travel difficult.
Observed Changes
David noted the price of furs has changed over the years and currently the price of
beaver pelts is so low that not many people bother to trap them; it is a lot of work for
very little money.
David related a trip to Bistcho Lake in 1971 where he constructed a canvas boat and
paddled across the lake, then west along the Petitot River. David noted “it’s a really
nice place to camp”. David indicated back then there was not too much oil & gas and
the land was good. David did, however, note that there were a lot of bears at that
time.
Concerns
David is concerned about a Plant being constructed near Kotcho Lake stating “it would
not be nice”. He felt if there was a spill or some kind of accident, that contaminants
would get into the water and pollute both fish and wildlife. David explained that Kotcho
Lake is large lake and that the Dene Tha’ continue to use as a fishing area.
David noted that the community is afraid to construct cabins in areas near sour gas
wells. He explained that people think it is “risky where there is poisonous gas” because
they are afraid of the gas being carried toward the cabin on the wind.
David is worried about the continued development because wildlife will avoid
development and all that will be left in the area is fish.
David noted that some animals stay away from seismic lines, so he worries if more
seismic is done.
David is also concerned about how information about new developments is
communicated to the Elders of the community. David indicated that there are some
Elders that do not have technical knowledge about oil and gas and do not understand
why more development is continually occurring in their traditional territories.
Transcript 16
                                     Field Summary
Participant(s):      Robert Metchooyeah, Baptiste Metchooyeah
Date:                November 18, 2009
Location:            Westcoast Energy Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Field Survey:        Site Assessment
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah attended a one day site assessment of
the Westcoast Energy Fort Nelson North Processing Facility on November 18, 2009.
During this assessment Baptiste and Robert noted numerous concerns that could
potentially impact DTFN Aboriginal and treaty rights.
Consultation Process
Baptiste and Robert indicated their concerns with the consultation process because an
archaeological impact assessment report had been filed for the Project in July 2009 that
lacked DTFN input. They felt that this, coupled with the November 18th site visit was an
unsatisfactory consultation process and did not capture DTFN concerns and knowledge
about the Project area. This was highlighted by the site being covered by approximately
1 foot of snow which made it impossible for Robert and Baptiste to accurately assess
the archaeological site or identify any traditional use areas. Both Robert and Baptiste
expressed a desire to return to the Plant site when there was no snow cover.
Baptiste and Robert were also concerned with the construction that appeared to be
underway on the Project footprint. They noted heavy equipment tracks on the ground
and felled trees. They felt this activity was inappropriate because the ground was not
yet frozen and the project was still pending approval.
Environmental Observations
During the site visit Baptiste and Robert noted that the Project could result in
destruction to woodland caribou migration trails, wolverine habitat, fresh water sources,
medicinal plants, edible plants and animal habitat. They were particularly concerned
with the disruption to caribou migration trails and wolverine habitat as these are species
at risk.
Robert and Baptiste expressed concern about the Project’s cumulative affects to the
environment and felt that there was a proliferation of gas plants in the area.
Transcript 17
I -
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
._ 4 . _
Dene Tha Fll’St Nation
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline Project
, Application for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
‘ Final Report
‘ .3: Tr”? j’ :‘4 :’ .h . ff
" “7...”; ,.4 .
‘ WW“ K Cf.” .; » ,-.’.4. 45’2“: "1 -'
' . . l-f' . ‘ R: 543m {45' 3:“- I' 7",. -
i-« , -
‘W‘ 0‘2 4+1, . 4. r4" . x , . 4:
. . § ‘_ ’2"... 4.- 2,4; C \r :4 w p.
' ., «4; 74. . *t 4 “74C '2 4t. :
:3‘ z ‘\ 4‘ ”ZC‘VCCa‘ C C ,
- *3; 4 ' :2 J ~ C
~ 4'" 3.?! $5. 4;: «:‘4 '3 14 1. 4
‘ ...£3+‘.:.’~« 345% 4'4"“ it? 3C’ C' .J'
5*. "‘I J ._...“3" 5". ‘\"'- 3 ' 4:: § ' 4‘ - i . ‘
: , 5""; ‘. ’5': 51‘; "2-“.
C [31.41; fﬁwiih
.4 4:7. ~.-;4:,'~
Calliou Group
www.calliougroup.com
(P) 403.453.1405
(F) 403.453.1402 ‘

-' DENE THA’ FIRST NATEON
'- Aboriginal Knowfedge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline- Pipeiine
Cmtents
' Executive Summaryz
‘ Authorship 6
Abbreviations and Acronyms 7
1 Introduction 10
‘ 1.1 Purpose 10
1.2 Traditional Land Use Studies 10
H 1.3 Incorporating TLUS into EA to Determine Effects 12
. 2 Methodoiogy 13
'. " 2.1 Project Design 13
" 2.2 Intemews16
' 2.3 Site VISItS 17
~ ~ 2.4 TLUS Limitations 20
3 Community Information 22
' 3.1 Introduction to DTFN 22
3.2 DTFN Traditional Territory 23 '
g 3.3 Aboriginal Consultation 26
‘ 3.4 Historical Documentation of DTFN Land Use in Project Area 27
35 Previously Collected TLUS Information 31
' Dene Tha’ Traditional Land Use and Occupancy Study (1997) 31
Mackenzie Gas Pipeline (2005/2006) 31
' BC MEMPR Land Sales Interviews (2008) 31
3 EnCana Cabin Gas Plant TLUS (2009) 32
4 Project~5peciﬁc TLUS Information 33
4,1 DTFN Knowledge 33
4.2 TLU Information Organization 33
4.3 Hunting Areas 34
4.4 Trapping Areas 41
. 4.5 Fishing Areas 46
-. 4.5 Gathering Areas 50
.. 4.6 Travel Routes 53

DENE THA’ FIRST NAT¥ON
Aborigina! Knowledge and Land Use Study '-
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
4.7 Sacred Sites 56
4.8 Cabins, Camps and Settlements 58
4.9 Future Use Areas 61 ‘
5 Changes in Land and Land Use 63
5.1 IncreasedIndustrialActM’cy63 ‘
5.2 Harvesting Restrictions 65 ”
5.3 Lack of Financial Resources 66 '
9 .I

~ DENE THA’ F%RST NATiON
é - AboriginaiKnowfedge and Land Use Study
. TrensCanade Horn River Mainline Pipeline
i Entreduct‘ion
H 131 Purpbse
._: The following Repo rt, Dene Tha’H’rst Natfon Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
i H for the preposed TransCanada (TCPL) Hem River Mainline Pipeline Project (the Project),
‘ was commissioned by the Dene Tha’ First Nation in order to provide representative
information on past, present and intended land use by the DTFN in the vicinity of the
‘ TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline Project. This study is intended to coilect and
document information for consideration in the regulatory review process for the Project.
1.2 Traditional Land Use Studies
Traditional Land Use Study (TLUS) information coilection and documentation can be
described as the formal exercise of supporting anecdote! testimony of Aboriginal people
:~ to “prove” or demonstrate use of land to support the exercise of Aboriginal and treaty
2. rights over time.
“Desp/te the tremendous dversih/ among First Nationg they
E . ' all share one thing -- the harvesting of ﬁsh, wi/d/ffe, end
p/aht materials has been the h/S‘torica/ basis of economic life.
In pursuit of the resources that continue to he the
foundahoh of their cultures people lea ve traces over the
landscape, ewdehce that they ha ve been there.
‘ﬁhor/y/ha/ peep/es in Canada he ve been mapp/hg aspects of
their cultures for more than a generation. Think of it as the
geography of ora/ heathen, or as the mapping of cu/ture/
and resource geography ”(Tobias 2000)
E; There are two types of Traditional Land Use studies: preject-speciﬁc and
cemprehensive. Project—spec/ﬂc TLUS collect and document Aboriginal knowledge in
. the context of single application or project—speciﬁc regulatory processes. These studies
. generally focus on the narrow spatial and temporal parameters dictated by the
proposed project in question. Documented TLUS information arising out of project-
' ' specific studies tends to broadly focus on the question, “what Aboriginal knowledge of
" use exists in the area potentially impacted by the project?” Project—specific TLUS, by
. design, do not attempt to identify on their own (either qualitatively or quantitativeiy)

DENE THA’ FiRST NATION
AboﬁginaiKnowfedge and Land Use Study ‘ -'
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
project effects on the TLUS information collected. Thts is a separate process facilitated
by the larger environmental assessment (EA) process, and results from the integration
of the collected information into that larger environmental assessment. ,
The process of identifying potential effects to traditionai or Aboriginal use of the land
within the project area requires integration of Aboriginal people at several points :
throughout the environmental assessment. First, Aboriginal people should be consulted
to ensure the design of bio-physical studies includes parameters which reﬂect their use
of specific species and habitat. Second, Aboriginal people should be involved in the ' ‘
execution of bio—physical studies to ensure ﬁeld or place~speciﬁc information is
incorporated and reflected by each discipline study. Third, a project-speciﬁc Traditional ~
Land Use Study is completed using temporal and spatial parameters specific to the ..
project in question. Finally, the integration of the project-speciﬁc TLU study ﬁndings
into each biophysical discipline assessment of effects is required to identify what
potentiai effects may result from the project on Traditional Land Use information "
Without speciﬁc and quantitative measurements, facilitated by Entegrating TLUS
information into the conduct of an environmental assessment, a TLUS on its own does '
not anaiyze or identify to what extent the proposed project potentially impacts the ‘ '
~ exercise of Aboriginai and treaty rights. This is due to the lack of connection and
incorporation of TLUS information in the analysis of the environmental assessment, ,
which is meant to identify overall effects. Without integration of TLUS into the design ..
and execution of the environmental assessment, and into the determination of '
signiﬁcance of effects, a project~speciﬁc TLU study is limited in its applications.
Comprehensive TLUS are primarily community or Nation~driven studies meant to coilect {
and document comprehensive [and use information throughout a Nation’s traditional ' I
territory. These studies are not project—speciﬁc, and do not identify potential impacts f
from any speciﬁc or individual projects. They are useful in documenting cumulative 3
knowledge on a Iarger-scale and preserving that information as part of the Nation's
heritage. However the ability to quantitatively measure the extent of effects to ;
traditional use is absent. Comprehensive TLUS are extremely useful in estabiishing the ' "
ttigger for Aboriginal consultation, by documenting genera! TLUS information
unrelated to any speciﬁc projected project effects.
Oftentimes, the collection and documentation of TLUS information and the identiﬁcation '
of potential project effects related to that information is grossly incomplete. As a result, '5
the known (either quaiitative or quantitative) impacts of industrial development on the -
exercise of Aboriginal and treaty rights are largely undocumented.
11

t I: " ‘ ‘ DENE THA’FiRST NA’inN
‘ Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
. _ . TransCaneda Horn River Mainﬁne Pipeline
1.3 Incorporating TLUS irate EA to Determine Effects
It is anticipated that the DTFN Abor/yma/ Knowledge and Land Use Study will be t
a: incorporated into the broader environmental assessment of the TransCanada Horn River
M Mainline Pipeline conducted by TCPL and TERA Environmental to identify the extent the
;i proposed Project will speciﬁcally impact the exercise of DTFN Aboriginal and treaty
‘ rights within the project area.
E DTFN has also commissioned another independent 'TLU study that will identify DTFN
' Aboriginal use and knowledge existing in the area potentially affected by the impacts of
H the proposed EnCana Cab/h Gas Plant. Both the TLUS for the proposed Project as well
5 as the TLUS for the proposed EnCana Cabin Gas Plant will be used by DTFN to prepare
g ~ a report with a working title of “An Integrated Assessment of Impacts to DTFN Treaty
. Rights of the Proposed Cabin Gas Plant and the Preposed 7'00}. Ham River Main/fne
P/pe/Ihe.” This report will be submitted to the British Columbia Environmental
l " Assessment Ofﬁce, the National Energy Board, and to the Major Projects Management
' ' Ofﬁce forconsideration. ‘ ’ ‘ ‘ ~ ' ~ ' '
. 12

DENE THA’ HRS? NATION
AboriginaiKnowiedga and Land Use Study ' '
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine ..
2 Methedoiogy ‘A
2.1 Project Desigh : ‘
The execution of this TLUS follows methodology outlined in several documents ‘
describing best practices for the conduct of Traditional Land Use studies, including:
e ChlEf Ker/yfs Moose: A Gufdebook to Land Use and Occupancy Mapping. Terry i
Tobias. Joint Publication, Union of BC Indian Chiefs and Eco Trust, 2000 a
e A Guide to Conductmg Traditional Knowledge and Land Use Stacy Terry Ga win, .
Northern Forestry Centre Staff. Northern Forestry Centre, 2001 '
e Mapping How We Use Our Lanai Mike Robinson, Terry Garvin and Gordon
Hodgson. Arctic Institute of North America, 1994 i .
The Study Team also used their collective experience in conducting previous TLUS, and "
their knowledge of the DTFN community to guide the execution and development of ~
this Fina! Report. ' ' ..
Sixty (60) TLU interviews were conducted with DTFN Harvesters throughout the j '
' summer of 2009 (May to August 2009) for several project—speciﬁc TLU studies to coliect ~
TLU information throughout both Alberta and British Columbia; Twenty three (23) 0f .
these interviews that best represented DTFN knowiedge in the vicinity of the Project . .
were identiﬁed, described and incorporated into this Final Report.
The spatial boundary that was used to identify DTFN TLU information potentially
affected by the project is the Regional Assessment Area (RAA) used in the EA (See
Figure 2-—1).i '
There is very rarely enough time or money to gather information from everyone in a g; .
community, the Study Team endeavored find a representative sample (or subset) of the
DTFN population that would broadly represent the DTFN knowledge and information
about the study area in question. 5 '
The interview protocol for this study was developed by the Study Team. This protocol '
outlined themes for the conduct of interviews, as opposed to formulated or rigid
questions, which is sometimes used for the conduct of TLUS. This was consciously done sE '
. 1 The RAA used to identify impacts to Aboriginal and Treaty rights in the environmental assessment was . .
requested from TCPL, but was not provided to the Study Team at the time of Report finaiization. f
Therefore; the Study Team identiﬁed and used information that intersected the Project footprint oniy. ..

DENE THA’ FiRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowiedge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Hem River Mainline Pipeiine
to ensure DTFN participants were more comfortable and allow for better ﬂow of
information, as stories or discussion tbpics often lead to different areas for discussion.
Many of the DTFN participants adapt more readily to this conversationai style of
interview as it reﬂects their normal conversational manner.
A series of ﬁeld visits were conducted by DTFN representatives and accompanied by
TCPL ahd/or TERA Environmental staff during the Spring and Summer of 2009. These
A ﬁeld visits provided DTFN representatives an opportunity to see selected portions of the
proposed Project area.
; ‘ Foiiowing the completion of the Fina! Report, a community verification meeting should
be held to verify contents of this Report. However, this community veriﬁcation meeting
. was not held prior to submission of this Report. If substantive changes to the TLU
report are required as a resuit of the community verification or meeting with Project
representatives, the resufts of these will be submitted as a supplementary report to the
' NEB and TCPL.
In addition, a meeting should be held with TCPL representatives, NEB/MPMO
" representatives and DTFN participants to discuss speciﬁc project eﬁ’ecizs, which are
~~ identified through TCPL’s Environmentai Assessment process. A group discussion win be
. conducted and possible suggestions for mitigation to these impacts can then be
idenﬁﬁed. "
14

. 7 :57“- . ;- : . .\ I d! _, mf‘f ,7 '7 ' '1' m‘ﬁx 77._"~" ’7 j" 'I—‘Q‘ 577:. :E7‘77 '777“;‘§7;711“‘-'-=7'l “5f: 7.1; x '1 +11 4.55;):- n—d, 1r” W_-':.-'T':-'~‘—__mr:u 3;—
, ‘JI‘I: ,7 \3 (\ _ ' , _ ‘l ' I 1' K i 4 1 y __' u j 1 1x ‘1. «Is F‘Nl 1177.31” A 77‘7'ﬁgj‘ ﬁg B I I
‘ N ~ ’ 7 -' 55'3'1‘ - ‘l V '7 7771 7" “' '7 ‘ r ‘) 7-777 7' ‘3 ‘ 1*‘7771‘ 5% I 7 -73'7'”'7’777 I: ‘
=1 hr 1 ‘r “36:- - 1. . ,‘e ‘ , | 1. 1 1! . 1- ' . 1' 1 m. - - -- . ‘11: 1. a Area of Interest 1
7115 \I 1. ‘ . ‘v‘I I 7:," .1 ""‘5‘ 9 ~21” ,; II :R‘ .1, ,J, ’ hlﬁ‘ -’ - .‘ . 5 I. o 1.?177 ‘5} '1- $ «4 u 1
{'1 HI _‘ “5 l L 1" III" . £4 ‘ ‘ . “17’ r) 1‘ v '\I\._ -‘ a 7L I , ,1; 1:1,. ‘ -I '. 1‘; ,2 ) f ‘I 17: 5 I r , r 5," ' ,' ‘ [I 4 V I
11.1.1151 i1 1 .151 - 13». s, 1 1.11 . .1 . - .1 1 1,1 .51 .— 1 1
I 1" ?\F‘ I! ‘ (p 4 {f'ﬁi—(K.‘ﬂ 111’» ?.I .- , y‘ .7 -. 1 1. . :f ' 5‘ f I {£7}; I’ I1 7 v j!) 5 {415‘ 1 771
1— .74.. , .5 " \ on ,5- ~-_.__2 1: 7 l \ \ . 4 1 ' . 5 59‘ ‘
[?m: ; .17 V' 1.5;"! 9. 7 7% W 7 i f kt _ * ' 1 L1 ‘5' f 7“ I :1 § ‘ ‘ ll '._.'7’ “'l h [ ‘ .
‘ ‘ "u _ —. -_:"":' I '55 "I! ”-5.51 — < v ‘r: j 4—- l . | 7D . I I . . '. l ‘5 .III I I
17’ a3 ' ‘ ' 4 . '. . ?'{Vf I lﬁggra ‘ ‘1 ‘ " 7 l) 1' ‘. A .“7'3 l ' ‘ "
~' .’ 1"" =2, I. rx-a;1:..m,1" :v-r-d‘ 1M ‘. 57% 45 41'? 111-1 ‘ 1 :1‘ '
1’1" 1‘ r —. 1 awn 551.1% 5:11.511 1 1 1 '51 5 1151,1‘ 1}:- 1 g
- 1 , .v -- 1- , . -' ”u" - 1 ‘ 1. 1. 11 ~11 . ,1 5. ‘1‘ ‘ 1
_ , ‘4‘? . .1: M ‘ ‘1‘- {?&‘7‘ ’ .—' " "ﬁnx 11 . ' ' ‘ $551 #4 A r ' ’ ‘
1'1 I ‘7’ 1 ' ‘ II, ‘. ‘ ‘ 3 17‘7‘7 . ,1 7‘ 1. "‘3‘.” “a I I \v. -’-4{ E I l
- 5 ' 1 5 ”7 l“ 5'? ' ' 1» ' '7'111‘1' »’ *1 m4.” ‘1’?- 1.1 "11’ «'1'? ' 1 ; ‘
1 ~ 7 »... ~- .-~I 1’ . a ‘ 7‘7 .1I1' ~ - .' ‘_ ‘ . 31 7t ‘ "1
~ j .14.“: ,"‘ 3911' 5 : - 1 5 _v 1 ' L9 5 x1 ’5“ 5 ~11 55 k ‘ ‘3‘» "5??” .11 5’; ? ~
1 a ~ 1 :1 .1 )1 pa.- 1 P 1 1 -‘ 1 1’ ‘1 1.; . ‘\.1 1 $\ r- ‘ TN 17 5 ‘ 1 -
I _ , -- _ 1 5 5'_ 1 5. I , 4 .IV _ '13:,“ .4 $71“ .I‘g. Pf; 5 . 77* 5 5- . -I -
J 477:;‘3 7 ' 7 77 :7 171 M" I ’15" 1 .'7 9 r7} :7! l: ”V- ‘57:; \‘ i’rf 7 pa’7 1 k 1 - K “7- 777 ‘1 r
- 1 Friar?!» " — Ht 5-3} — "1 1,1125 119'- ?r 1&1 “h F» s 4' a ~11? 5. ‘ 1'
. - 2 53:1" _;;z+::.~ 5- 77311 ’3 ) 1 :Y/H 1’, 1 u‘ . j\‘. {‘3 . III)? I .... -- ..._ng‘ -
, "'=17_ ,.5‘ ‘ ~11,“ ?W‘ i". 117 77‘ f d ] F 1 - ;§‘ '7‘ .,1,. ﬁr “_‘. )}7;§_—' ‘7 i‘ ‘
7 7“.“ _; ’- g mm& “77.. - __‘-‘ _‘ :7 , 5. , ' “* "Wt-J ‘7’”;N- m::—” 7 3)- , '7‘ t l; 1 .1— ;-._- V 7 71 J ‘7‘“ _‘7‘ I
t‘ "‘ --"" . ﬁg} ‘ ' 1' -» .1'_ 5wa-r) J '7 ' 5&1 4‘ ‘ ' 1~ ‘ 1 ~ u M 1 1
_ __ @5352:— ‘f‘ " ‘35 a 96 “I W— ' 1r“ 7 e‘f" - [-3.3 .-::-—-\§ r 17 ’ ‘ ;, .3‘ ‘-"51-~, L _ .1 -5 5 1
. 77‘7-‘/ , .«f‘ "1"” — _1.‘"7.r JT>§~JS a ’3' 3 '7‘? T éﬁVT'Cii-t ? I} - .J’ "77.1- ‘ 7‘ - 7_ .." _ . I 7 5 ‘ ‘ 1 1
2‘ 4 ‘ .” , 1 ” ' - ‘ ' "" '-' . 7 ' .9" '11 1 7: - ’ ’ 5 ' "7*“1 .
-'. 7' "1, '7 _“ , »_ 15f uJ-ed I 3.... 11.1.,- 5.7 i.‘ - . 5—5/3” . 771’ 7 '1 2:41. .. I 5. .115 -I 57
5 r, ' , ‘1 1 ... 51 ‘ * ' 14:4» . “My?“ 1:12 11 ~ 11 ~ -1 ,1 1 1 .21“ “131' 1
_7'? .r.——‘77?="'. [- —:. 1 “5". -,I 5 _‘ ov.h I 1“ 5 ‘_‘1.--- 1 I-
1 ? 4*‘i-‘Q73‘ ‘ 1.? L *3“: 7 ”“7757 z: 1.7», "J 1/ 1 67:17:; ‘ . :3 1‘39, ‘3 , q .- 7. , .51 . -1 '5 1
" 1 “x 35%» H _‘-;;;"-‘%‘-ia a '1’1 r, *‘ﬁb- (amt- *- ~ ' : ' -‘ i
. .- "433% ‘j; "MA. - ?__j 2‘ l5 ‘ '1. L5 ‘ ‘- *rxzsgn . —'¥r-::- . -._,_ - ~ 5 .
L‘ ’5“ ' ’ §v~ 1 9 ‘ é} - 3:77.577— '7" ‘ kit; . :‘M ‘q' a —- 7 7 7 ’ 7 ‘ 7
.;"-'~'-.-5>“.1TLF .. 1V " ;.-.__’ .5 .5.— ‘l‘iw ‘ ‘ ‘ _.. ' Ft‘wn” .77 -1" .' ~ .
1 21:3339112114:s'; 0’ {3 "“ i-s-x ‘ 7‘77 11?) 1*?”7‘ ' "'71 @7— 7 7 *' 7: '“
7 775 7* .‘ ‘i\ Y 7 T‘ t . H 737—} . i :37 7.7 7 5": 'V 571:;- 5 J ‘- 655‘7 7 7" kg]? 7“ ' \ “ - “7 7-— 7. 7 ‘ 1
. 7: '. 7,7;7 \ 1x: ’ . § ‘0 :1. ‘- ‘7'71;‘j/“.',f 1': . _\! '7‘. z; (75' 1. . I .. 11‘ - ‘ I . I _ .— V _ .7 . I_
77:7 77‘7 ‘M 7 [‘7‘ #«427 1': 7wf74' '17 '17.: I ?k’:;7j 7 7' 7 77-: .~ 'I ‘i
'1 1- 58:1 4-5- 7W. H ...:.'5 I? 5.;2‘12 E 1. ﬂ - F.- -. 3 2‘ .II, 5 , _I _ .
T 777" 71%: H I ~ ’ rs t’7 7‘ I 3k V77S‘7‘k1 ‘7 i‘ 777‘” 7 ”7 7 I I "
‘5' cu: 1‘.) ._ _- . II _ .-’;..' ¥w‘:.l , “'h~ Iﬂ 1‘ , .1 , : J 1 -A _ 1
.3 ,1 1 . 11 - 1:. 5a 1. 1 ._ _ 1 m.
1 ~ 1 : *"J'fzr'g- ‘1 ‘ 3" “1n ' ‘ ‘R. 1’57 1.22 3*" : * .— ‘ .- " ' ' 5
‘ ' "?"w:k«v""q-t' .“*‘. 2..- ‘ \ 7 ‘r— 7.‘ r" _‘ 7' 7 :‘\‘ - 7 ' ‘ . - ‘ l] 4 ‘ U ‘y : ‘3',» \ ' ‘ ‘
5 73‘1“?” “”737.“ ,5 (‘1 1/ .w 5 I ,_ t I 75%:31129 - .5 r .— “.5 99" ﬂ 1'1]; I . 1' :3- ”.3! . 4;
" ' "‘_ . ,7" " — I ~ 01 7 7 5. - I “‘1 - V 7 7 7—7 _
~.““1,' 2 9:- 1.: 1 ‘ ~ ‘- - «.4 ‘ z'.’ .1. . 5 1
I7 7:. w 1, '75”; 7 7;? 7 127'77- 77 ,7 ’7‘ - '3 \a . 77' ' - 7 l; ' ‘ 5 , ‘A ‘
‘ '- “ 7' 1 7 ‘ 15‘ 7 1 5 t "‘7 . . ‘
j —. 7‘7',‘ I ‘7 “ n :‘r 2’77, V 51"} r I” '. - :- . 7 1:" or '7 7 75?:"5‘h‘"7773‘ 777'— ' T ‘ 7 7
‘ 1- w 1 1'11, _ * _ f 12,131.; :9 f:- ‘ A * . , ' " g 1‘ .
V‘: I ‘ ' 7 7 1"!) ‘7"; 73(7 7‘} - ' '_ “1.1, .J m 5 M“ H77 " ' '7 -' ‘
1‘ ‘ ‘Lc-‘11-0' 7 1“ 7 ' ,4); 7 7:? 7‘f-7 ‘77 { I 7 l 1 7‘ - 1' V
1 ‘ " H " W a ‘3 .. 1,-‘1' - .- 1 1 = «‘1 1 1 f *
- "I“ ' 5 ‘ ‘ 77¢,“IPL’. 1‘ 115', “11:5 'J‘ 1‘, E] I' " . ' , -
_ .' ' 1 ‘ 5’ -l ‘ ,- ' .1
‘ . V "‘ I l} 77“. .thf} :1" 7T? .h 3 ' I . "I ' “ ‘..
, ‘ ‘ r . .1 1 1 , J .
5‘15. 1 ‘ “ ,, 1;. =3 ”7 :7" 1 l 0 g . 7° 7
. ‘5 7 ‘ 1.. I .77 {$9. 71g" 7ff.‘:‘47- \Zg7d‘l‘5. 1': 5 ‘ I y 1
_ ._ 51 _ _ ,1 5,, 1 . .\ ,
I . ' ~' ”‘5" ‘R"" ‘7-_~ ' 1 I l I" ‘ . I . ] 'fr7 .1 ’ 7 7 "‘ '. 7 III .
I . 3:1 L I ‘ 1' - _-v- < 1 I .‘I . v::\ .. r,“ : 7-f"~ ( ' ‘I ‘ . {'1'.‘ I: 7 1
.. . .‘ V ‘ :I I 7:1. 7“" ‘ ’1! . ‘7‘ . -. '
7. 3 7 7\ ‘ 7‘ 7‘ "" _ 11‘; 7 - 777‘ 7 .1 7 '. _ Vi
.' .I - _ 7 7'7 1‘. J - 7777 - 7.52““ ﬂ 7 7 1 I
1 ~ - , _ ¢ .-7 , ; 15 _ 1 , - / 5
’ y; I , I , . ‘ . 5 .. 1 07%
, 5" , ,I‘W I ‘ _. ‘- _ 1 7 I r . .< . .5 r I (I I
1 l 5 .- r_ . : m _. , I .I ,
. J . 1 '1 5. v v. - 5’.
I ¥7~ ,___ 7 -' "" .71-1 7 1 5: 3' _ -1
7 ‘4 I ' \7L'7'77,‘ "j— ‘<‘ f 7 ‘7 ‘ 77 ' ‘ h b \
. l I'” 3-: :-_7~4\ 7‘ - v 5 _ ' _ ‘ ‘ , . :'_"1
1 . .‘. ~ 4 “‘7‘.“ _ :7" ' ‘. -~‘ ' ‘ 1 1
' 1 7 . . ' -~' - ‘7 ﬁv—g‘u .O';. ~t."77 7’ [#77 7 ‘ 777-7 ‘1 M14: _5\ .t7,L "~ xx .‘ ' #9‘ ‘
* n I , _ .' I — l t7 7: 7 ' _ 12:17; .\_‘._ 77?.fII:;t:-;:II‘—__F ‘7 f :PtlI’
.. I 5 7 7. . 77 77.7 77717777777377 7\‘—i"~~. 7 7 7
7 1 ‘I ,5. r2" . _ 1 1 71‘ . ‘- ‘7 I: 7‘ 7 '17‘~.\1:: ‘ —’..7‘_ ‘1 _’_\\ 1 7 1
~ 1 ~. ' 1." -‘ - 1+ -’ ‘ 5
1‘. 7 .777. I . 7 77 7 '5' "3 7
' i‘r 1 ¢ -~ " ' ' 2‘ ' 1w ‘ 5 V
..’ . ‘ . 5 7 6 5 -’
. '7 " 7. ‘ g“: t -, f 1 '5 .7 7‘
, , ‘ 3' . . ‘ ,. 5 5 1 ‘r ””1 V 51 ,
5’ 55 752.? a 5 -" .1 i 1, n." ‘5 , ,, _ . ‘; 5 51 I 55 1
7. 7 ‘7; I. ‘1. \I 5 :é! ‘ ..77 ' . “”7? 7" _ ' ‘ 477 _- I ’7' —- ’1 7 7 .7 “1| “ lNR‘I~_I1
7 - a 1'7 7‘ 7A.: .1 f3 7777 1 7777""- ‘ ‘4 ~ 7 7 1 ’ 7 - ‘ '7‘; 7‘ ‘ h, 7 VT77
1 1 ‘ ;' w ‘ 1 ‘ 1
7 777 1.. 7‘73 1 7 7’ :“i‘ 77" 1A 77 '1 ' ' r ‘77. r? 7 . ,1
'~" ' ' 7‘ 77.1 1-15115? 1' T0 7 ‘9‘. "t _-I ' . ‘V . ' ' ' ‘ 1‘ ‘
I ' 'Ing a 7-. ‘ i 1V V .i,"7 I; 4‘ t 3’] .. , . I_ f n . T- 5 I1 1
' _ , :( 3 .. .1 o , {.1}, d‘ ”“5; ,_ . , ,g‘ . . k ‘3 3 '. I»- 2 131
77 ‘ ' 5‘ u. ﬂe‘ - 7 '7 -
n 7 ' . ' ‘ 7 7 w 7": : C, d . :"7 J I 7 ( . 17".
777 7 7 7 " 537 7‘ 77 7 7 7 7 . ,I 77 1 {'77 ‘ 4'": 777 .. 5, 1- A '7
; “"3“; . d, v- 7 A I v ‘14} 7 v ’5‘ 1| ‘ I‘ ,f _- ‘ 7 I7" 7‘ ’7: :. -
7 * 797:4 7‘ J' 1 7 .4 7 ‘- =' “ . .55 5 .n .‘ 77 f5
‘ ‘ 7 777 77 ($3 7- - 7: ~ 77 . '7 t 7 . . ’77 1‘77! ' 7 ‘ ' 7 ‘7‘) 7"‘1 311%; ’ 7
, 7 . ’37 P‘. 7‘ . ‘J 7 .‘ _ f - ,‘7“ " I V’,,.’Y 7 '1‘. I M 1‘ n?" . I 5:. ‘2 j; I I" 7 ‘¢A—1'jgj I
C A ’|77 7'7 “77‘. t‘ . 5 f ‘ . \ - 1. ‘,| 777 . .7‘. I V7 ‘7- 1. I"- 7 H 7 -| ‘ *~ '37-“ 7 <
_- '- ‘ 1 .. ‘ _ . " __ "’ I . ~ 7!" _ _,f_ —_“7 7
1 1 - - , b ; 5'1; ‘ “'.‘ :7 .1 'I_ ‘7“-'-:‘ I . ‘2‘ ‘- 7.7 ”?_fl‘ﬁP‘
. “ ‘ - 5 . 7 J 1 J _ .-7 ’ _. 1 _ ”:7: 7‘ C. ~‘L 1 05" _ A‘ _ , 7, :i— d 7 7: 7-77;"I\ i‘ - 7 7.3L.- “‘7: 7“" —.-' L; J ‘7} L $‘ﬁﬁ Ir ’ '
DRAFT DATE 1 0/ 1 9/2009
_ I I In I I 7 . 7 7 ‘
I rans5 anada C ab "1 I Vlaln me P Ipellne SOURCE. -
P P t F t I! t Dene Tha' First Nation, NTDB, GeoBase, TCPL
r0136 . 00 p” n _ FIGURE NUMBER
2 - 1 ,
I
\

_ ‘2 _ DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
‘ Aborigine! Knowiedge and Land Use Study

2.2 Interviews

As previously stated, twenty—three (23) interviews were conducted with DTFN members
by the Study Team from May 2009 through August 2009. Four (4) separate trips to
three DTFN communities (Bushe River, Meander River and Chateh) were carried out to

i" ‘ complete the interviews. A
0:? Four interview sessions were conducted by the Study Team. The ﬁrst session was held
from May 11th thru May 14th, 2009, primarily in the community of Meander River. The
second session was held from May 26th thru May 28th, 2009 primarily in the community
f of Chateh. A third session was held from July 6th thru July 9th, 2009 in the community
of Chateh. The final session was held on July 20th to 24th, 2009 in the communities of
Chateh and Bushe River. The foliowing individuals were interviewed for the study:
Archie Ahnassay, John Ahnassay Sn, Peter Ahnassay, Adolphus Beaulieu, Peter
. Beautieu, Thomas Didzena, Lucy Foumier, Louis Foumier, Eric Koiay, Aibert Lefou,
1 Stephen Lefou, Betsy Martel, David Martel, Gabriel Martei, Phillip Martel, Robert
:1 - Metchooyeah, Sylvester Seniantha, Abraham Talley, Curtis Tailey, Jean Baptiste Talley,
Robert Tsonchoke, Stephen Tsonchoke, and William Yatchotay. Individuai summaries
.. and maps from the interviews can be found in Appendix A.

The interviews were conducted wherever the participant felt most comfortabie (home,
Chateh or Meander administration office or the Four Chiefs Complex located in Bushe
; River). The interviews chosen for inclusion in the Final Report were based on the
' " identiﬁcation of footprint—specific overlap of the historical and current use by DTFN.
9' Each interview was an average of two hours and was voice recorded, video recorded
' ' (where permission was granted) and noted by the Study Team. The interviews were
conducted in both English and Dene. Where necessary or preferred by the participant,
f a Dene translator was provided by the DTFN Lands Department.
The discussion themes for interviews included:
a Speciﬁc—use sites (including locations of camps, cabins, graves,
' traiIs/travel routes, birth places, Dene place names, etc);
e Areas where participants have practiced, currently practice, or intend to
" practice their Aboriginal and treaty rights, inctuding hunting, trapping,
- ﬁshing and gathering; and
t 9 Reasons for increase/decrease of use.
. 16

GENE THA’ FiRST NATEON -

Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study .
TransCanada Horn River Maihiine Pipeiine
If there was an identiﬁed or discernable change in the areas of use, participants were
asked to provide an explanation for that change If the participants had not been to
the area in question, they were asked to elaborate on this theme.
Composite base maps, used as “mark-up maps” (1:569,186) were created by the Study
Team The mark—up maps encompassed DTFN traditional territory and included the E
Project area. The coordinates for the composite map boundaries are:
a North: within the North West Territories; midway through Greater Slave
Lake (NTS Reference point 0858) .
e East: within Alberta, including Wood Buffalo National Park and the Caribou
Mountains; encompassing the Peace River (NTS Reference point 0843)
e West: within British Columbia, west of Fort Nelson and Maxhamish Lake

(NTS Reference point 094])
9 South: Within British Columbia and Alberta, including Fort St. John and
Peace river (NTS Reference point 084D) .
In addition to the large composite base maps, the Study Team also provided 1:250,000
NTS map sheets for the approximate area of the project in BC and focused composite ;
maps that narrowed the scope to BC.
Mark-up maps are used to document traditional land use sites (e.g. cabins, graves,

birthplaces, trails/travel routes, camps, etc.) as well as areas where DTFN members

practice their treaty rights (either in the past, currently or potential future use) as
discussed during study interviews. Areas identiﬁed by participants are given a
corresponding numerical code on the map, and assigned to a number in the interview 3.._.
notes. If the participant or interviewer was unsure of locations, those sites were given

an asterisk and verified at a later date. .
2.3 Site Visits
A series of ﬁeld visits were conducted by DTFN representatives during the Spring and
Summer of 2009‘ --
DTFN representatives accompanied TERA Environmental staff during several of the ﬁeld
surveys completed for the environmental assessment. These included the Rare Plant
Field Survey from March 13 -- 28, 2009; Wildlife Study from March 16 -- 18, 2009;
17 "i

A‘ Fina! Repay:
Dene Tha’ First Nation
Aborigina! Knowiedge and Land Use Study
:1   ‘ ‘ .; .1 ‘ ‘ 1 . ' for
Application for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity '
T for the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline Project
, Prepared For:
. TransCanada Pipeline Subsidiary NOVA Gas Transmission Ltdt
Calgary, AB
' National Energy Board"
:   Major Projects Management Ofﬁce
‘ ‘ Calgary, AB
Prepared By:
Calliou Group
5' , Calgary, AB
On Behalf 0E“
  Dene Tha’ First Nation
Navember 4, mm

GENE THA‘ FIRST NATiON
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
Wildlife Study from June 16 w 25, 2009; Aquatic Resources Phase II from July 13 —— 23,
2009; Rare Plant Field Survey from July 2 -— 20, 2009; and Wildlife and Wetiand Field
Survey Juiy 20 ~— 30, 2009. Field notes taken during participation in the ﬁeld surveys
were provided to the Study Team by Robert Metchooyeah, Charlie Chissakay, Ricky
‘ Pastion, Rocky Yatchotay and Ernest Chonkolay. The notes of ﬁeld visits can be found
in Appendix A.
‘ DTFN representatives also conducted TLU site visits along the Project ROW with the
speciﬁc intent to document and record Traditional Land Use information (see Figure 2-2
for site visit locals). These ﬁeld visits took place from August 27 to September 17, 2009
.. .. and involved the following DTFN representatives: Jeanesaptiste Talley, Abraham Taliey,
' Steven Tsonchoke, Robert Tsonchoke, Steven Lefou, Thomas Didzena, Victor Talley,
'5 ’ Andrew Talley, Howard Tsonchoke, Charlie Chissakay, Roger Sutha, Rocky Yatchotay,
Albert Samantha, Charlie Tsonchoke, David Wasp Colin; John B. Wasp Colin, James
§ .. Danais, Curtis Talley, Harvey Denechoan and Thomas Talley.
~~ . During these TLU site visits DTFN representatives identiﬁed various resource harvesting
;? 0 areas, cabin/settlement sites, travel routes and culturally modified trees that are located
in areas intersected by the Project ROW.
13 ~

.. -,r T" . “m? Wit” :51 3.11;" ‘15; i‘iv” Fl" 3 i ' . " ‘1' V (:23? V ' {Wm‘—nﬁrmﬂﬂrn£m_7 r,
' " 3"‘.‘l;#‘t‘;:fc;*‘ 22-3“? “3;“ 4" '11 "4. ("195‘ {I ”A; r-' ”1"? ﬂ“**\ " Area of Interest "‘ I
U3 "‘5 é“ ..». :37; '9'" .~ 4’” 1|. Aﬁg‘sﬁ’r‘ ,.; ' ‘x, :3" '4ﬁ“u"rqu' - . I
‘ i1 ' ‘ ' "7‘ ' ""7" V V "”5375? 0 @- “""i v-iV’iéIL-‘I’f't -. “" 55 ‘ - A I .

3" “1 r» ‘ “f! .- 7&9 r: ,. r n: ‘ ”x s?:- ' A n *1
a ‘1‘} F If 1‘} j» ' 4’ 76* {:12Ji¥.i“m’: i": .; o?" ; ti???“ i i
ﬂiﬂgv ’ ‘ ‘ “Ff", ~ . .. l : GXQQL ‘ ﬁ‘dbfg".§‘>¢l ‘9‘ ‘- "5' ’. V. V , .3: ES!” t”, it "Eh I l“

' "' LMEVE’ " 3 ‘ J"" -: \ . 1‘ ' : ‘ 5‘, 7 “Y ' "‘, 5~ “3:" ' ‘ '1' :7 ‘ .

”A. .. _ﬁf ‘34 m3 (‘3 J ' '- .- ' {?A?" .- 4 ,.«i"~‘_£- l i_:
-- ,0 f- . ‘ ~ , 7‘ - _ ﬂ- 31 . J

‘I :f‘fjgwsec‘ﬁké- _ .- L, .' gig! ‘\ . \‘\ 41:3?“ 3;?5‘ 0 d ' ‘
J . f' v 4W" . "'75:" (W ‘ ‘IK\ ‘ ‘.-. . -~. .. ' gag?! ' ” ‘ \ “

, a . ‘ ' ; .,_ I .0 , ~ , ., ffffffl'r‘," _ -7: 4 u [
“,7? _ ,-. ,z 7 ""‘rwr'.,r .,-" y . " . \ . , ‘4’? , " ' .- S’iix'g ‘ " _,‘v‘".“;¢;‘ i -

-. . "JET?" .' 0 7" 's:". . ‘,' 5 t “ 7W mﬁﬁ~if 3'57 6%“ . z _. n ' f .24; .4".
, [423T , .. t “i '- _’ ~ I 5; é , " ‘ " ‘ -1. 7 :1“ ‘ t :3," *1"""'. r
." ~ : 'l -b‘- ‘ 3-,5f-"?5”:§ ,— ' *2" 0 -'~ .5/ HF,“ »' xi» - 54—: '5’“ 5." ‘ 7 F
a - 5 33/154973“ ' ' *" ,7 u“ 4’ (Ni‘ " ’ﬁV” ,- , ._, _ » 1"“‘4‘07 aﬂfr 'f: . _. ' a ‘ NH‘
‘ y‘ I.’ -.. \ W1 7 .‘ a ‘ t" '. ., ,, .‘ . I ”‘3' - I . ‘_ ‘ i
.n‘ / '5' {K . “h, “ QTHQ . EM“ _ ,;.u 7”; ,- - J , L ( . .. . .
. _ " 4‘3-”k.‘ ??Jﬂ ‘1. ":3 Ear .- 2' fa” ' ),f . . . .

,. 1 ‘k 7...! 3?: --,ec - W .0 , .| _*_ ~Cablns ‘

.,"'_ ' 'Hunting&Trapping Area .* , 41.x" ,r’d‘f‘ . ffo e:ﬁ~q,~?:mv. ‘2-5' _ - -CMTs U
i“ "43% : "‘3 P "i , ' *- * ‘ - - " * “4%“; ~ - °Horse Hoid i;

. as}. g e _. 1 mug. } e ,8. . i — v

""761, 1' Q“: ' 0'53?" ‘ " ,‘ n, - “5“? "‘ "“ m - . _ 0 .- (":13 r oHunting.Trapping&Fishing Area
‘. - , 7‘. I0 am; j ‘ . r 0 .. ‘1 " ' r " 1" " "-—‘3-~-°~"‘--¥" ~Huntin &Fishin Ca
‘5‘ . {kw F ' "g" ‘1: £1." ' {A ' '93; ‘ I , ’ - t “(A IN I °Berriesg 9 mp _‘

"“ ‘ ‘1“- ' ' "‘51 .1 ('2'? mizw ' ' ﬁ‘mh ' *1. ‘ — -MedicinalPlanls "
'V 1-,.‘4 ,’ ‘ n ;,' I l ' a
E? g. . ﬁts. , '33. . x, ,7 £3!!:’qm 7" ‘ ~Hunting.Trapping & Fishing Area ‘ ~ -ﬁi:::i:ﬂ?emement ‘.
=9 '_ ‘3: 4 J. -. 3 I54 _ E r; 7 ﬁg?” 1%: ' oHunting&F‘nshing Camp ~Gatherin Place
"=3""”'7' ' "’5.- " “ "‘ ' ' F’g'?‘ W” i'" °Med‘dna'P‘ams Spirnualgsne
, n. n. . ~“ ‘5: -. ., 3.. _ ‘ ’ ‘ ». m #7,. . 'I. E ' o ' ’
W ' 5-22 F I’ ¢ ""5. I {WA 0%“:V’ﬁwﬂﬁ' '. ."1‘ 59W“ . . ‘ oDrinklng Water Source 5'
R; ; '-~’ 41.; ' .77 k Ea; ‘ _, '1‘: , rff.‘ ,-'» 533$." , 'SplmuallHnstoric Slie ‘
_ **' 0.. . 1,, NHWMM 7, 8 g" r»! °Drink'mg Water Source 1
- .' .l.‘ 1‘ . . 1 0
‘ _ " -Snare Post re? "Wig Ogaﬂs ites
H ‘ 4' - Squirrel Den x 5. {‘3}, a 10:..7‘4: amps
-Trails - 'ri , ' .0 , ‘1,
4,}, _ -Trap Set .' - ,a F, ‘
i - Medicinal Plants Y F
J ‘ -Hunﬁng. Trapping 8: FishingArea - J ‘
' ‘ ~MedicinalPlams : “$4.; ,1: 3W _ v‘ V. c? J “u““ngu'appir'gma Fl
° ral ‘ ‘ 0 A , - .‘>~ ".
0 p94 ' ' " 7 " ' 'CMTS -Hun1ing&FishingArea ‘ z " "i ,, 72‘ a.‘ L: .1? :14: ' 0
. .r . ‘ . " . 'BearClawMarks .' ' ‘,t 33' R“ W'k ' .-.'-“'I"‘ F'
.- .~3 1:? ,- '~ :71 3 _‘ ’ 1; -Hunﬁng&FIshingArea . 4: g.gm,.¢;.-.A‘v'- W n i'l‘n‘u‘ 1‘
‘e! 9‘“ 43“ @’ .~.' ~3:,;'_._',_.,, '0‘ 7 ,- .ﬂ‘ 9 K
'r i w , v ,_ ' ,1: . . 4!“ CW 0. W”

r < - 4_ » ;__ s" _ ."'.f_ -"--’ 'Tralls , ,4‘. 6.. ‘ °Trall.sE “ , F
F ; ,sl ‘.' 3,; El , ni‘ 47;?!" , E J»? oHunting,Trapping&FishingArea 1;. ‘ A, C. ; '3 ;, dé/ledfcmalPlants ‘

" .V I . “:25" :Vﬁjg' y'ﬂﬂ‘ .. ‘ ’ " "' w; ‘ i: g H', v"? ' ‘ ~Hilr'1'11'fg Camps 1' ,< , ‘

- 9' Jii“? I . . 3 .E 1 f“ . ‘J. ?i. :7, ‘ﬁ‘rg‘ Clef. V : ,. f / E 1 ‘ _ k. ‘ 3'; ’j’yn‘} .‘Id 0 Hide Tanning Stmcture _-‘ F

‘ - " ' ? ‘” ‘ -. 1’ - :- N:- 0 V " 5 ‘ 'w 1' ‘ -Hunﬁng‘Trapping&l-‘Ishing Area j- ' ‘
_ o , h, _o ‘. .- " :gth” 0 / '4‘. -‘ ’9 ‘ ~ .

r u ' . 1' 12+ 1, .. - .. .1 .» ﬁzgt . , ,. ‘1" ~11“ ‘. J ‘;'. ‘— -‘¢‘li-" .. 7‘ ‘_ E I {Egg ’JR‘Ew-A' ' . .‘H I A :\-“"’ 1...‘ ’ng "I ; E 2
w 4 Legend 4"...- » 0- . a :2: ° '- ,w:.~ , 3' 08w '* 0'”? ~ z! ‘ ‘
F "I ;t ‘ ‘ "-1 - "(A " . " ‘ "I {:8 Tu” '. ”’2' ' “‘ ' 'I LE :1. li“”"""

.4" ’ . . . . 17 . -‘ f” p ‘.‘ v. jf'r; . . ~ . 'u’ f ‘7‘)"; }

. 29 a Ekwan Pipeline(eXIstmg) .1 2-, :E‘ﬂj‘s- ' V __ _~ E H" .- ,. .“‘ W? 3“ -_..,.;~ _ . ,
'4 1' — Horn River Mainline "" "i ' -"*“"~‘"9"W "““*it3~$ 1”} ' f ”a; ' f
,. ,. u m: “fw A , 3‘ -- ’ 1. —f ~ "I . A ~
I ‘ . . ;'""-,_.;._..._ : ‘.' II 11??” . 4" 'I _ .‘V - Wk”? IW’I" - . ._H k‘" "5 ‘[

i O TLU Survey Locations. r .m__ , 5.... 1.5.x; 3*“ ~ .,- a .w, . E F .5. r ._, n.“ E -
3 ‘ 53;: ‘9 :. 9;: 2:75" " ,, . ‘ . . ~ ‘ * “ . " ' . [
i; 3) 1 Ekwan MeterStation _l {_s, E x‘ ' ‘4 . . - L \ f' I .. . . . -‘ , -
I 2 Little Hay RiverCrossing $53" (I ,1. " ,;-. E , 1 ' ~ " -' ( ~ ' " 2 ‘) ‘
. '- 3 Conﬂuence of the Hay R. Shekilie R. and KotchoR ;;__' {ﬂrﬁ E .1 .-V. 1 ‘ I ‘ K . [z
g, 4 Hay River Crossing 1; «?E;~_,"g_:!‘;r~” A. E.‘ g . . '\ \ I ’ 7 f I ~,
‘1 _ - 5 Townsoitoi Creek Crossing Q; E ‘ «‘0; -‘ a - ,. ‘ .‘L-r/X .0 ‘d L é
til 6 Kyklo Creek Crossing 3-: ?pr, -' ‘ ' _. * E Rwy H4 . . . W , A
0"“ 7 Metladoa Creek Crossing _. .a' j ‘, _ 7' 7 . . , _, r \\ , ' f . ' .I’ ' E ‘7- ,' ‘ ‘0
' ‘ B Sahtaneh Creek Crossing Q; .. f” . f" g ‘. ml _ f g l ‘ I t J 7 .‘ ’ VJ ; -
y 9 CourvoisirCreek Crossing fff—v ’2 0 _' 7_ ' \ , . < ”L ‘m’ r. f e. ‘ _ .'; I
F F 10 Kotcho Lake(south end ofriver channel) ¢‘l‘. —' '- i . , ’l‘L — 3")fo ." _ E :I'IWJ‘ = ”,3; M‘
, ‘3 r 5 VZ‘J; w ' ,, 'ﬁ'lfr ‘E-F' A _.‘ 5 :1 _' ' . "—1 , _ ’l ," I’wdtﬁr ‘ 1’ ’_W?3 E3" . {:31 a ‘ _ . ‘L
DRAF'DATE 10/29/2009 ‘
\
TLU F' Id S L t' ”UR”
'e u rvey oca '0 "8 Dene Tha' First Nation, NTDB, GeoBase, TCPL R
FIGURE NUMBER 2 J
L:
I
{

; DENE THA’ FIRST NATiON
’ Aboriginal Knowfedge and Land Use Study
. TrensCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine
a 2.4. "nus Limitations
The unique cuiture of the Dene Tha’ First Nation provides challenges for the
interpretation and representation of information gathered during TLUS interviews. This
_‘ challenge also includes information not gathered or represented during TLUS.
Numerous anthropologists have documented that the Dene Tha’ manner of imparting
knowiedge is primarily through observation and first—hand experience. Termed “non-
interference,” knowledge is generally not shared through questioning or direct
: " instruction. As TLUS are based on the premise of interviewing Aboriginal people on
g: ' their land use practices and underpinned by the concept of voluntary imparting of
. knowtedge, it is often difﬁcult to overcome the Dene Tha’ tendency of “allowing you to
7 . ﬁnd out for yourself" (Goulet, 1998).
"Given the Dene [7778 7 approach to communication, it is deer that intemews ere
_ a poor means of in vestlyaﬁon among the Dene (Gou/ez; 1998).”
5 ~ DTFN participants were also reluctant to identify areas used for the exercise of treaty
rights (either historically or currently) outside of the provincially-«regulated trap lines in
. British Columbia (held by DTFN members) for fear of perceived government
' repercussions. Many interview participants expressed to the Study Team outside of the
interview process that ‘it was against the law' for DTFN to travel outside of DTFN
5 provincialIy-regulated trap lines.
An additiona! limitation to a TLUS is the inability to spatially represent many aSpects of
' information coilected during Interviews with asufﬁcient degree of accuracy (Le. through
two dimensional mapping). Representative scales on maps used during interviews are
often too large to ensure ‘pin-point’ accuracy necessary in a project—speciﬁc study.
. Further, two-dimensional maps pose challenges for some Elders or persons unfamiliar
with cartographic interpretation. T0 fuliy and accurately represent collected TLUS
' information in the interview process, a full and robust field component to verify and
locate speciﬁc sites is required. This is usually not permitted by either time or resource
constraints on a project—specific study.
The Aboriginal connection to traditional territory lies at the foundation of Aboriginal
. culture, language and way of life (Roberts & Williamson, 2004). Centuries of nomadic
travel throughout a land base, over time translates into an inter-woven fabric of land
and resources, species and habitat, activity and travel. Siteespeciﬁc places should not
t be divorced from the context of the broader environment (Valaskakis, 2005). The
.. 20

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginaf Knowledge and Land Use Study ' '
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
specificity of TLUS mapping often over—shadows the broader environmental context with
“specific” sites that can be singularly represented on a map. As a result, a common
response for many interview queries of ‘where do you hunt?’ is met with a somewhat ‘
bewildered response of, ‘we go everywheref’ Specificatly, Robert Metchooyeah
stated, “its not right to ask where Dene 7775’ ha ve fra yelled - they’ve tra vel/ee’ ‘
eve/w/here. Still d0. ”
This particular study is also limited by time and resources, which in turn impacts the ‘
size and scope, and accuracy of the study. There is no practical way to gather
compiete TLUS information from the entire DTFN community for the purposes of a
project—speciﬁc TLUS. Therefore, gaps in study information may result, as oniy a '
representative number of DTFN interviews are permitted. Therefore, the seiection of
interviews can only be seen as a broad sampling of the use and issues the community
as a whole may or may not have. , a e a ..   . . ..
21

.' ‘ DENE THA’FIRST meow
’ Aboriginal Knowiedge and Land Use Study
TransCahada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
3 Cemmuniw information
3.1 Introductieh to DTFN

i i_ There are currently two thousand, six hundred and sixty—four (2,664) registered DTFN
i members (Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, 2009). The Dene Tha’ First Nation have
three separate main communities iocated on reserves: Meander River, Bushe River and
Chateh located in northeastern Alberta (Figure 3~1). DTFN is governed by a Chief and
” an eight (8) member council that are elected in a custom electoral process.

L Since the eariy—to-mid 1960’s the Dene Tha’ have had to rapidly adapt to the
' conventions of western society. Prior to that time, DTFN lived a primarily nomadic
lifestyle, travelling throughout large tracts of Alberta, British Columbia and Northwest
Territories. People travelled in seasonal rounds, following available resources, including
fur resources, which was the primary source of income for the majority of families.
‘ ., DTFN speak of familial ties with surrounding Nations, including those located in
' northeast BC, southern NWT and throughout northern Alberta. Those ties remain
a: ' strong today.
Since the establishment of the main communities of Chateh) Meander River and Bushe
' River, DTFN now hold permanent homes as a primary residence and children attend
local schools. Essentiai services such as nursing stations, gas stations and police
. stations have been instituted in/around the three DTFN communities,
However, even with this acclimatization to western culture, DTFN stiil maintain their
~' strong ties to the traditional lifestyle of their ancestors. The Dene language is stilt
~ spoken by the majority of community members and is taught in the community schools.
A iarge portion of the DTFN diet is obtained from wild foods such as moose, ducks,

eggs and berries‘ Traditional artwork is widely created by many different age groups
throughout the community. Most importantly, travel outside their reserves throughout
their traditional territory to obtain resources is the centerpiece of the DTFN lifestyie that

remains strong today.
" Although there is recognition within the community that their way of life is changing

rapidly for the DTFN youth, there is a strong desire to maintain a connection to their
-- , ancestry and pass that along to the futu re generations,

.. . 22

DENE THA’FIRST NATION _
Aborigina! Knowledge and Land Use Study "
TransCanada Horn River Meéniine Pipeiine
3.2 mm Traditionai'ﬁ'erritew , _ , ‘
' As mentioned, Dene Tha’ First Nation Is a signatory to Treaty 8. Treaty 8 encompasses I
northwestern Saskatchewan, northern and central Alberta, northeastern BC and a ‘
southern portion of the North West Territories. In 1899, the Government of Canada
began the negotiation of Treaty 8 with the ﬁne! text of the Treaty drafted that year. i
The following summer, in 1900, a smaller Commissioner’s delegation travelled to the I
remaining Nations who could not be reached in the ﬁrst year and negotiated with those
Nations to sign adhesions to the treaty. Dene Tha’ signed an adhesion to Treaty 8 in I I
1900 (DTFN, 1997).
DTFN present-day leadership characterizes the signing of Treaty 8 as one that promised
peace and friendship with the incoming nonwAboriginal people to the region (Goulet,
1998)‘ Discussions held at the time of treaty making with DTFN leadership included the
outline of DTFN territory encompassing “the Four Hills” - including, Cameron Hills
(north), Caribou Mountains (east), Clear Hills (south) and the Etsho Plateau (west).3
The description of the “Four Hills," induding Etsho Plateau is important for several
reasons. DTFN Ieadership at the time of treaty making with the Crown understood their ,
territory for the purposes of exercisingtheir traditional lifestyte extended far beyond the ..
boundaries of their assigned reserves; This identiﬁed area was based on nature! f i
' landforms that were, and still are, well known to DTFN. Also, this area was understood I "
and identiﬁed by DTFN prior to the establishment of provincial and territorial political ; "
jurisdictions. ' :
DTFN’s present—day traditiona! territory is approximately 176,000 square kilometers '
spanning AIberta, BC and the NWT (Figure 3-1). In BC, the territory ranges as far ~
south as Fort St. John, west to Fort Nelson and Maxhami‘sh Lake and North to Trout . ..
Lake in the NWT. In Alberta theterritory ranges south of Manning and north of
Grimshaw and foilows the Peace River north to High Level where it extends east,
bisecting Caribou Mountain. The territory continues north into the NWT as far as '
Tathlina Lake. -'
The boundaries of the DTFN traditionai territory was compiled by DTFN based on V
meticulous historical research and traditional land use information collected from DTFN " "
members. The boundaries of the territory are not ﬁxed, and are subject to change as 5 ~
DTFN collects additional historical information and traditional land use and Aboriginal
3 These are the present-day names and do not reflect Dene Tha’ place names. . .I'

. DENE mp: FIRST NATION
Aborigina! Knowledge and Land Use Study
1:: Trehsgenada Horn RiverMainiine Pipeiine
knowledge from the DTFN community. In fact, some DTFN members and boiitical
leaders believe that DTFN territory should be delineated only by the boundaries of
Treaty 8 to reﬂect the areas in which they have the right to exercise their Aboriginal
and treaty rights.

DTFN leadership does not consider the DTFN traditional territory as “exclusive use" by
only DTFN members, or claim proprietary ownership to the [and contained with those
boundaries. DTFN recognizes that many portions of that land were, are and wilt be used
by other Nations in the exercise of their Aboriginal and treaty rights. As Chief James
Ahnassay explained to the Study Team, the land is “shared.”

r; \ M “?’??"W‘."»' Fry? , .. ,. * ‘— 3- t I 4 4
. Y i V dr' "3‘1‘ ‘ I f) - v . I . . . ,. 3 . ;
. 'f‘ r " I5}! '1 r: 4" ft; . 2” ‘ ,- _‘ 1' ‘ "'" I . : .
.4‘ :4 .' /" zifrru; (I VV "PU- ’ ~~V; :r I . > :: :—. ,V‘tIr . T 4. 1 o- .
' x i (l. 1‘ \‘LF "'1“- l ’1 .t‘g‘r"?rz 1" ' ' . ‘ ‘ ’ ﬁ . '
_ , , J3; ' ,: 35;”J6 , ' _ ' Q ' _. _ , V .
. it , 'fJ '. -. ‘73:, “4,. ~ I V
‘I . Jr. 7 ‘ ‘2'. 1} . 'l '
r ‘ I 4*.- 7 , '~. ‘ ‘: ‘ ‘ O _ , ‘
, d. ‘ ,4 ‘- '~ 4 . ‘ ‘
'“ ‘1 . .7 -- '1 . J’ ’ J . " a4 .ﬂ‘ng I j. _- t 3"»..2' .. ‘ " ' a 0' .,~~ r '
- - g _ w A .71: .4 I 9-,. w . a ,' ,- . ‘~
4 440*. _ .3, ~ . - . -
A , d ng 1's ’2 II {II .2: . '3 . . . , . -. . .2.
'1 . -~ - ' J" : -«.‘: 9" 3% -, ~- ‘ ' -
- — ~ V-f d: ‘w '_ .--~ -‘ v" .I-L 3‘; p? In “x. , y . w
‘ ’ ‘4? ' '1’}: . 1 '- _ id" "‘ \ r,“- ‘ 2“
-- , - * as» 4 W ,. - w 3!: J 5‘ :15 » , , ,' X ' 9
. , . 0.1 , - , '1 . 3‘ | q ‘ .'. ~ V‘r r‘ - ' . . .‘
-, . -. - ' .. 5 .. ', f ‘ . 1'5 r» "4 '*'r“'"3‘ 4. 1' ffig; i- ? ' I'. ‘ 1
: rm , I . . u. " .. c ‘_ " . . , ‘ ' , , . : . ‘
V_ .. I. P - VVI‘T . ,. , 4p, (§ng VIVv‘L «’1 ‘f 6‘ iiide 9 ‘3...) I? {*2}. ‘10th : :‘ VII 0 .
.. _ ~,,“_‘ , _, A _i ?_‘I~I‘¢>.: '. J . I ~ & . Irv Vt . f' 4 14—. -‘;:- , i. ' 1- “'1. ."_
‘ . 7' ,; 5‘7"“: ., , _,,’ , " '95. _ _ 4 " - Ir. 9 _".'.\ .~I. .Jr 4 3;. p; ‘: " . _
‘ ‘6) II: . t: «7 ¥ .l , "‘t-Ivr'i‘i?‘ ' ‘3‘: ‘ , , V' 4:1 ‘5 Ir .‘ D," ‘V 'ﬁ? J fl '1‘ '1; _‘ tag. “I v. . I-
~ . ' , “7 .r~-w~;r‘-*s" '2 r . .-., ' ;r'»’ ' - _,,_ -
l II _ _ ‘, AI h 1 “ ’ V. V -- ". > ‘ ‘l “4 ' - . _. ’ '2 '. :9 . _- , ‘ 3
' in} , ‘5‘“ "m : ‘x r ~-. , V r If aﬁr- air , ﬁg .3) *I,.M ‘ . ~ ‘. w ;‘
' <27“ ~ ‘5 , * “a .’ 1‘ -‘r . , 4 V ,- f7 “- ~- '1‘ 1;: Yin. _.”' i-ﬁjgr -‘r -
.0 O. - 4 ’1, .éut‘ .' , \ I‘V‘ \ '. V “.1”: . VI 5 i . .
.. . T- ‘ . n A w b .. DvV- 4 4 ‘{ V 4 \ . . «a
D. .< _I_ b 7‘, V ‘3‘ ‘:‘- c _ I '.’.-." ‘ If v I .-'.J’. I .V ' 7‘ , . ”‘3' ~ 1": II‘ x I
».- .3' e. . " ‘ “ -‘ ~. ,3: .,~ " ‘4: A . r 2* , a 4
< 4 V ‘ ‘ — ' ‘ 7 - q—h‘ r3" \ ~ - " ' " ' 4 . .
. ‘ .é‘jé ' -3? 5’ x1“; 5;; -.‘ V ‘g?‘ graik‘ti‘v “""‘ .- «+2 ,* 3e $-19“? ,
' I .‘f " l” t " v .._' . 3 “?.'I. LI~ ] 74 i , " f ‘2 \ ' ‘ ‘ C _ . ~ 1’ I ‘A . ‘-Q’({ .(‘C‘ ‘1' V .‘é‘l( i? < . I‘ I 4
4 *w >" 'F - ‘ o “'c" n V "" 3x - - . 7 ff ‘5!“ ’
L .. 4-" a ' .1 I' 4. " v? "- , ‘V .— , .‘, '2. -.'- ’ﬁII‘IV II .VV n '
’ *' I33: »- . ' w“; ,. .-<. w ‘ _; ,, 3“ «‘4 .- z . “- I. g .
__ -4 . ., 4"” , II «T ’5’!" . . ? f 4'}; iv ‘ 434‘- 5;?“ , “w" ‘- " V:
.. ‘ -' 5 ' "’ ‘ -- 5'3" ; $51.”; ' 4 ' -‘ 5‘. -- ‘4 _.::!:‘
~ ~ . - — w ~ #5:.- - . ~ ;.-. 4
- ~ - rm 0" ...3_ “"3!” ' 9. fﬁcl‘v' , ' . - A: 34:": ' ‘
IA 7 . 3. 3‘ ' 7 n r ' . -- - ' ’z‘r T —. :’ ~ -' - "U, ""‘ i': ’
' ~"‘ 1 ‘ - o," 43 *1. - . " . 691? "1"" . ' ‘ IA " “a lo ‘ T. ’ ’ , ‘L
' a ’4’ '3'?“ 4.4- " ' " ' a f 1'." " «w W" ‘ 4 ' 9 Li
L. W —‘ " ‘ ‘ —— " f" . ‘ .4 1
r " 1.; v ' 3 ?Ir“ .1? ‘ "h— I:v f.’ ‘ ' I 4- a ,. 6r; ;
' ‘*“ l“ ‘ ﬁk ' '3 . .- ‘4 - 7° “gm! ﬁg,»- ' ,
‘ A 1‘ “V H: (’I I A» v . . ,u , 'V" ‘ V.
- . ’.‘. ' 1““ n I V‘ _* :I» , 1 , r '1: V VI”- “ 3’ ‘3: A
V [JI- ‘. ”V . 13‘ . ‘. ‘V V 3.3. . R .3 «k I‘
> _ 1 I .153 ‘ r”. o), ’33; \I . .‘ {“4"
r . ‘ - ~‘ . j ‘ ' z \ ‘, "f r. ' h _ ' 1‘
. —: . r .3 ' - 'm‘. ., 1 . , ‘
~’ 1- L- sw. . .4 =. ., ’ M
4 -. I V . i V - . :4 .. - . 9. . 4 I
‘, ‘8 ' x4 ‘ .- ‘ 11": , ‘ r‘ -.
‘ 5! r. \ u 3V . ..
w, ‘ ‘7 F ‘ (‘1 ‘ " 2259- - 9
- 4' - ‘ , : '. . -
4 d‘ 3 .' " ' V .7 ‘ ’ L ‘i . ‘
. *r/ . - ‘.. ‘ _ 5" V»... , ’ V \ .V . J . ! VP “ ‘
x" >- . ' ’ " "~' “ , 4 ‘ Nu" 's j 3‘
. , , . .r. . ,l , I .
3‘ " J ?'1 ~ ‘, ' ‘ “ r4" .1, ' ." - ‘ ;-W :;
‘ ".2" ’7’ w? w- '- " '2 '. i .3‘ ' p. -‘u’ | r. "
4 Y “ .IV'“ ‘1!" .V“ I .‘ ‘ 1‘“ _ ' s. 7“ ’ ‘ "' ‘5V'7w‘ I ‘ . \ ' .
. , [‘mfj. ,- VV.="V'§ Ir 1 ‘I 7" ’ ‘ V. 'Ii'rﬂyn'? . I V" “3“; ’I‘ 3: tVVI .J;- a
."w , ' '- .' v ' ‘ Jaw - ‘I . .’-‘ 5 P .., ' .,
' * " ' 'ur- . 4" ., . x ‘ :‘fx'lg' .3: 'r " nut'-'I1~~J.-"'-' - ' ‘ 3 " ‘
. 11.3 A 4‘ 5‘1"“ ‘ v} t!) —‘ '4'" 1. ‘ "r. 'f— ’6" <‘ - » -.
‘ ‘. " .. _‘ ' a . r " I " .; 2 *
' _', I I3". I V . ’ IV 2|: ‘ _',‘_ . Y ‘M V ‘n'h . I ' ”9:124 ‘ ' k ,
f ?I‘r' 11‘ .4; “VJ, ~ . " {9 I ,9. . .. ’.‘ . ‘ ‘. ‘th ‘
{I . 5 m», .-, « ,. _ . - .
, ‘ '3":- .;: _. é. . “-55 ‘ . ‘g "A 31"! I: A ~ ~'-' : V_ 513F- ‘ " “ 0’ ' " l g" '
3 12".“ " -. -. 1 "=-" 45" ‘I * “3' — ' ,. 9': 3 - . .
' H ' ‘11.. J ‘I :T ' ".‘I 11:93:31 "v _ :12 .3) I JV 1-: ‘ ’ I 5‘ " , .' ‘5‘" . ‘ I
' I . - V ,V‘v Ff h _ ’ _' I II" R N : ._’ . I: ~ 1 . “ J‘..v"_! ' ' .' , 5’, _ ’ .4 ¥ ‘ ' I
‘ I ”V- 4 I‘T‘H; :r1;5’ul' 35! ' "I’ll” )6“ ' ‘~‘ ’ f. ",3 ’ o 3:" I 1 £’- _ 133$ ‘ .) I ‘1
I _ _ - x ‘ VIVI - ‘ V~ I I » -rH' NV” : 1.: r: rVV A 'r. n -- ' .-., d II . .I. 1.? 3 J'? 2.‘ _ . ‘V—V‘ ‘4
‘ ‘ H V. \ V I v“ . r ' P.‘ I l, , I ' ‘ V l I. ‘1‘ ﬂ" ’1‘" l I :u ~ k" 1" 5 l1 ' .‘Il ‘ J
- .1 ‘ . .- 4' 4 ' g: I - :t‘ 5-" . - ‘ Ja‘x‘ -‘ . ' 1
. H ' ' ' * ”?'f“ ' .f “ r ~ l“ - " . * "I“ 1 1‘
. V 1 ?w a .I J .t -V ‘ ‘.' 1 . r, . Av I-I» V. ,2 ‘. ‘
' . "‘ .\v .1. Is‘ 3' r ' r“ ‘ I g; ' ‘ ‘ V n ‘
' '; f t «5' ’ a A . ‘f‘ ‘ r H ”’2. Y‘ 4- < '}
'5: -"‘-‘.~ 3 4 . ' -' .. 7". ' r: K \ ‘ ' r
’ ‘ ‘(__ :II . - ‘i If}! k .1 \A ‘5 l :‘ .1: w: ‘J
I ‘ "h, l. u .‘ 4“ 51 V . ' ‘ ”4 9' ' ‘
‘ «‘3‘ “h ' 7‘: .I": ' Hf‘ --_ ~ f'b “ 2,4,2“; ‘ a
.3 ‘ ' . n“ 3; vp. ‘ "4 “- “ 4' ﬂ (.2 . - .~ ’
- " ”z, A 17' , ,.: a x . ., ‘ 2%.?“
.._ 4=I .1 ‘ V 1'” , (VI ‘11., ~ . V ‘VV «- ‘V‘V r, I-, E‘ r I
V .2 :”.k“' ‘3] ¢. 9. Pé‘ “2, V: 4 VV '3
.5 . . V . I u . V3), 3" .
‘ 3 ' T ‘ 7 r ‘ " . .x . , ' . Q .1 ""5." L. H '
' ‘ . ' " . ' " “‘ I I
w V. . A . . . {u ~ -: i
r » 3/ " 4 - a 4 - " . ‘ - .‘ i , ‘
, " 3' g“ ' v- .' O'P‘I' ?f‘.‘ 1,." ' II ’. 2V, 1:]. 4"?! 34;..ﬁ3: " V ‘v 3‘ . 11
.- , . .,- ' {:7 ' . , ..-4.. "" ‘ -" ' ’n' q! 5".” ' ' I7 '1‘
*- ,, ,-. , 3. .a, ‘pr. M- - w ‘
.4 - . .11: Rl' ' , "V 'L , I ' ' L -‘ Aw— A V V ’ﬁ ‘ r' ‘ V ' '
— ~ . x: . .- J » : ~s~ . . .. ~ ~ 4" «A, « W9.» . x --
' u b»._ ' ' ‘ ' I ‘ g. . b ‘ 3‘ ”I; 3‘ . a ' ., "“ :‘J'l‘ y
’- “ :3 I - c. A ,. . v» ‘ I,‘ J ‘ . ;, .L .- w, 4 -- “, .
. _-. , v f!_ ll; 5. _ . _‘ .J‘V ._ VV I ._’ . . I‘M; V _ a .
<.“" . -- - 5 ~ f' . . - .. » . -' "A ‘11 4 H‘ mﬁ‘nilizl‘ " (1‘ J 4 7
.- ,; .1 .3 1 -....-, , , . . _ . w r ' a A v- .w r r :
' 7 - ”i; I ,1 b '35 . ,. "y l d. v.5“ ~ . - «:0- - ‘ é -' l ""‘r L ’ \ “£3; . "1‘ J “"1 i‘
. . e":— .I f V. . (1)04. . l l“ W ». ' Q71 . ’1" ﬁ‘rf’i - q V ‘ ﬁ) 1 .. L&‘o ﬂ - ‘ 2% . ."V A' A- ._- *4 II
‘31 ‘1 a5. 4" 't '1 ”‘4’ -‘ '55“ Q ’ ' “ l. I A J,” .(H- 4 ‘ ' ' V54“? ' “ " ‘1 'ﬁﬁ’q“ .85 '4' 3‘” 'r ‘
m " “(7 , 33m? ‘ 4/ “ d“- . . . 3'» .- A :3 «z a- . '8 «4’ -" ’ m” min? '
“A ’ I. I.- - " -V; II ‘3‘ A iv!“ ‘ .1 ‘y‘ Iv 3‘ ~ \” - ‘~ - ' ‘ 1- ~" ”- ; " I‘ .. - .I K
, ?th V.IV . . ,r .. _ “:37: U7} / 3M . . . J aVV: - - , ,1 . P,» V , .9)? . .bﬁ'kg >3 {2 .- ?2 II '1‘ @ IV
' , u vV “V?i'r. '0 ‘1. .‘ - l ' . » , .1 4 .-7 . I, . g ::-V , t '3 V '5 . —' . _, 5" .g. g . I ‘ . -' .V‘J .I,
I I .. ,_V _ IJIgVﬁp .4; I IV , IV , I y .V~ VI . , VV} V} f” f; f r. f VI .ﬁ‘p I. .‘i’j‘lth f’h ‘4’. “I Iy in f. -’ 3‘ .- ', :3 I
‘ "?T'lfg-WJ' ’9‘". d . J“ . ’3 {6; x . ' f ' 1:?!“ X 5 1:1." ~33; “r .3": 4.. 32.1
- . jIW."-:: 1"” ”VII“? - 'IJ‘4 I ‘ .4‘ 4' f)? . é. ' ‘ 6 3‘ Vi. V. .“ V » a , T. A V .‘I . I “ . 1 -"- —~- :.m1‘<m..i££~ 3’55: ' V“ II
“I ‘1‘ J . -,'J’. . ,. V} t! 1:. VIV . V "1" ~ , V .- 1"”:411‘gﬂ" r‘ 1 V..,_VI¢ w . V V —‘--_.___ 3
' f. 3-“, . .- ,.4 - *4. «a ‘ . ,7 7‘: a I' _' .. .7 , — —V§< ‘
" ’ J " ’ ' ..--‘.‘I', 1T2". I 9,433, - . .' . ~, L (115‘ s"! -A. 4 r )7 .“7'3'” ?‘Qa ’ F". I'~"-.:<'SJ “ ‘1'“ «A '
‘ M «i. - 3 _ _.I.V 4.__ . _ 3. :3...‘ 3‘. :L _..L_.' ’ 5'“ ﬁdglg ALA Jﬂéndgﬁg’w .
A _ -___..-.__.- 1 3
Legend DRAFT DATE 10/20/2009 ‘
Dene Tha' First Nation ° Cities v ~ '
I I I eserves '~
u - - ,
I radltlonal Terrltory Dene The. First Natnon, NTDB= GeoBase. ‘
.3 , , . . . :
Dene lha Tad tional Terr or 4
D T ' 't y FIGURE NUMBER
”A National Park 3 - 1
;
J
J
l

3: DENE THA’FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use. Study
TrensCanada Hom River Mainline Pipeiine
3.3 Aberiginai Consultation
: Aboriginal consultation is largely triggered by the need for a regulatory approvai by the
Crown for activities occurring within the boundary of a Nations’ asserted traditional
territory. Over the past five years, there has been a conscious effort by DTFN
leadership to accurately document the extent of the DTFN traditional territory. This
strive for accuracy is based on the premise that negative environmental effects will in
tum affect the DTFN ability to exercise their treaty and Aboriginal rights. Protecting
that ability for future generations of Dene Tha’ is one of the priorities for DTFN
; leadership.
~ Correct documentation was necessitated because of confusion resulting from
5 . consultation efforts of provincial and federal Crown regulatory authorities in the past,
where DTFN traditional territory was confused with provincially-reguiated trap lines held
' by band members. There is a lack of understanding regarding the distinction between
traditional territories, provinciain-regulated trapping areas, treaty lands and reserves.
: Traditional territory refers to the land that was and still may be used by the Aboriginai
' community to practice a subsistence way of life. Each Aboriginal community travelled
" and lived in its own traditional territory, delineated most often on a seIf-regulated basis.
. As mentioned, boundaries of traditional territories of neighbouring communities often
1 . overlapped one another. Boundaries changed over time, as availability of resources
f i. changed, or as a result of the effects of government policy. .
: . Provincialiy-reguiated areas for the purposes of commercial harvesting of fur resources
' by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people are often caiied ‘trap iines’. The use of
' ' trap lines (or fur management areas) requires an annual license from the provincial
regulator. Trapping iicenses can be held by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people.
~ ~' Licenses can be transferred, bought and sold by the license holder or recalled by the
. . regulator. Licenses are held individually.
" Treaty lands are identiﬁed within the terms of a treaty agreement with the Crown,
- promised to Aboriginal Nations for the purposes of hunting, trapping, ﬁshing and other
.. traditional activities. In British Columbia, Treaty 8 rights include the right to
. . commercially trap. Members of signatory Treaty 8 Nations do not require provincial
licenses for the exercise of the treaty right to trap, including for commercial purposes in
" British Columbia. Treaty rights to hunt, trap and fish are held collectively by the entire
;' Naﬁon.
.. 26

DENE THA’FERST NATION
Aboriginaf Knowiedge and Land Use Study i
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
At the time of treaty making, the provision of reserve lands was identified within the
written terms of the Treaties. Reserves were intended as training grounds for
agricultural pursuits, where Aboriginal people would be provided farm implements,
ﬁnancial resources and land to ‘settle’ as other non-Aborigina! people were doing
throughout Western Canada. Even though the promises made at treatyemaking by a
Crown representatives that traditional vocations of hunting, trapping and ﬁshing could
continue throughout the treaty territory, it was anticipated by the Crown that the
Aboriginai Iifestyle would eventually stop. For many years, Aboriginal people were also
confined to reserves and could not ieave without a pass or permission from Federal
Indian Agents assigned to manage them. This effectively curtailed the use of traditional
lands for the purposes of the exercise of treaty rights. However, despite these
attempts by the government, this transformation (or assimilation) from nomadic hunter
. to farmer did not occur. a a i 3
3.4 Historicai Documentation of DTFN Land Use in Project Area i ~~
Corroborating Aboriginal oral accounts of historical use of land in the non~Aboriginal 3
archival record is an unfortunate, but required, component in the conduct of Traditional '
Land Use Studies For the purposes of this study, an investigative research piece was 5
conducted by Bouchard and Kennedy, and is included as Appendix B.
' Historically, Dene Tha’ use of the land extended far from their preseht-day
communities. For example, DTFN interview participants describe DTFN historical travel .
from Great Slave Lake to Lesser Slave Lake and beyond. Centuries of Dene peopte
utilized the boreal forest, unbounded by non—Aboriginal political jurisdictions. Those 3
travels are well documented in the oral traditions of the Dene Tha’. However, those f '
oral traditions are not given the same credibility that historicat references are.
It is often difﬁcult to identify accurate and precise historical and ethnographical
references speciﬁcally for the Dene Tha’ First Nation in the written historical record,
because outside of a few select sources, written information about the Dene Tha’ is -
virtuaily nonexistent. Different non-Aboriginal travelers used different names for the
Dene Tha’, often misidentiﬁ/ing them, or generalizing them with other surrounding
Abortgina! groups. As a result, DTFN use of the land captured in the historical record
may be incomplete.
For example, early North West Company and Hudson’s Bay Company sources reference ,
“SIavey-speaking” Aboriginal peoples in northeastern BC; however, there is little in
27 3

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION 3 _-
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study '
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeﬁne
Infermation coliected for this study remains the sole property of
the Dene Tha’ First Naﬁon. Citation, use or reproduction of the
information contained in this Fina! Report '65 permissibﬁe oniy with g
_ the wrétten consent of the Dene Tha’ ﬁrst Nation. '

' ‘ DENE THA’ F iRST NATION
Aborigina! Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
these documents that distinguish Dene Tha’ and other Aboriginal groups that spoke a
Slavey—Hare language. By the 1930’s, the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC is
recorded in several sources; the Dene Tha’ have been referred to by a number of a
names, including: “Upper Hay River Band of Slaves”; “Hay River Indians"; “Hay Lakes
Indians”; “Chateh/Assumption Indians”; “Sfavey Indians at Hay Lake(s)”; “Upper Hay
River Post Indians”; and “Bistcho Lake Tribe” (Bouchard and Kennedy, 2009).
Speciﬁcaliy:
A Traders seIdom attempted to seek out knowiedge of ethnonyms-uthe names by which
; groups of people seIf—identiﬁedwand instead applied murky generic terms such as
0“Siave” or ‘Slavey” to people of the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District; sometimes
' this identity included people known otherwise as “Beaver.” Similarly, the term “Beaver”
5 . occasionally included groups more often identified as “Slavey” and very likely inciuded in
some instances the ancestors of those identified today as Dene Tha' (Bouchard and
f '. Kennedy, 2009).
.. Notwithstanding the difficultly of identifying speciﬁc references to Dene Tha’ in the
{ historical record, the Bouchard and Kennedy Report concluded a strong historical
' presence of DTFN in northeast BC exists in the historicai record. Further the Report
~ goes on to describe a heartbreaking account of DTFN use of north-east BC restricted
. by government policy. .
' According to DTFN interview participants and supported by the historical record, DTFN
3 land use in northeastern British Coiumbia was largely undisturbed by non~Aborigieai
presence in the area until 20 to 30 years after treaty making. It was only after
competition for fur by non~Aboriginal people prompted the governments of Alberta and
' British Coiumbia to institute restrictions on trapping that DTFN land use fundamentalty
changed (Bouchard and Kennedy 2009).
' Williams instructed Van Dyk “to keep these Indians [Dene Tha’] out [of BC] until it is
. ' abseluteiy prayed that we have not the power to de 50." (Emphasis added,
r . Bouchard and Kennedy 2009).
. ' Provincial and federal government ofﬁcials understood that DTFN use of northeast
. - British Columbia for hunting and trapping purposes was extensive. At one point in
, 1934, government representatives outlined a trans-boundary hunting reserve for the
; “Hay Lakes Treaty Indians”. Unfortunately, that Option was not executed, and the trap
' ‘ line registration system was instead chosen and implemented (Bouchard and Kennedy
1 ' 2009)..
28

T DENE THA’ FERST NATION ;
Aboriginal Knowiedge and Land Use Study . :
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine
This preposed hunting reserve was recognition by the federal and provincial Crown that
DTFN historically (pre—1930) used northeastern British Columbia to exercise their treaty
and Aboriginal rights (Figure 3-2). a
The imposition of provincially regulated fur management areas was pivotal in the ‘
evolution of how DTFN used their land. DTFN use of land in northeastern British ~
Columbia and Alberta was curtailed. Entire generations of DTFN Harvesters were
brought up to believe that activity outside the regulated areas was ‘against the law’ and
not aliowed. DTFN interview participants ten of sanctions on Dene Tha’ imposed by
Game Wardens or RCMP that included imprisonment, hard labour or warnings if they ’
were caught ‘breaking the law’ by using land outside of their assigned trapping areas.
DTFN who were caught outside their assigned areas had fur conﬁscated, which at the ;-~
time could mean extreme ﬁnancial hardship for the offender, With no access to legai
representation, there was no recourse open to those caught. The resulting impact on
the treaty right to trap (including the commercial right) within northeast BC resulting .2.
from those actions was never analyzed. . "
As a result, DTFN use of areas outside of DTFN registered trap lines was done outside 3
of existing regulations. The perception that this situation still exists today is so strong, '
that several DTFN interview participants were reluctant to admit continued iand use in i
BC outside of the regulated trapping areas for fear of legal repercussions .
However, even with the imposition of government restrictions on DTFN movement on
the (and outside of DTFN registered trap lines, DTFN continued to use northeast British ~
Columbia for traditional use purposes, including hunting, gathering and ﬁshing. g.
29 ,

K“; 7, ” w ,, x , “ '“ . _‘ ,- , , 7 _:-. M-E— " ‘ " : m; w; ,
‘ " , ,' . ' ; ~—>-.,2!.t ,, . . ' .- ;,.;r r _ ‘ ~ -_ Area of Interest 1'
I , :1 V - "7w 1 " ' ‘ '., . ,. _ ~-
"‘ 3 7f | ‘ "' 1'?" , 7 ’0 r A I
{x ‘ , , _ “ ' ' ' . ,- .
t a . . '3’ £7. . ‘ ‘3' I , 4}
-, v' "-127 ’ ”(‘9‘ ' V. “J ‘rlcv‘ -‘~ 3’" y f
, k . M'- {f3} :1", : '2“)... ‘ '
' I ‘ ‘ . ' ‘ .2" I. ." ‘ ‘
- ‘ ' ’ .-. r , v *t‘fﬁfl‘.’ .‘ ' ‘ . ‘0 EL
1 _ . x . l: ,6. - ﬂ . ‘ 5 .- “I -4 ‘ J I! i ‘
_ , ‘ ‘ _ . . .- J _ R, m .,{t,ys.£.,,, J
v ‘ ,‘ ”v, .' . .- ‘, r _'-'f‘- .r;. ' " ' .'
{'.,-‘., , a . ‘.‘s I' ' ’r, P b R “~’;:'::§|t;r::dvréiﬁvf "J. #9 ’ﬁ '
t , ' , ' ‘ ‘ 7' " ré‘it’ J”- J' ‘. 5' ' "" ' ' ' "7”): .115" «I
. ‘ ' _ . ‘ fly :ﬁ J. V7,: ’41. , ' '. «4" 18 ff: ""3“ ‘
' . , ‘ ‘ O ‘ o 4: 9”; ”I .,, 5::‘9:§'1 __ . ’ .._ a: , .1
1‘ ‘ .» . .. ' :' —-’ 1~. »
‘ ’ ,- . , . . > - s -. . 749%."! . if,“ 1’ .2 ._ ‘5’“;5; 1 ,
,‘ A: _ , . . '. . I. . - '- ’ i - .. '. 2 .
‘ I , 1 , , .1 ,. ‘ ”a 1" ' m ‘
um»... .A . .: «ﬂ - ‘, e _
u, 7‘, . ‘,f '- . — " , 5‘ ‘ .. . , . .' , ,~'.4-“}".:#;
~ ~..r~' ' ‘ ‘ _ ' .S- 3...“ ‘ , .4 ”r. ’ , ,) .n’
'1’ = , [gr . ,~ . ,, ' f? ' ' 171* ‘f , ," ‘
,, f: - _ ‘ , ’4 .r . .. . tr? . ' 3“ ,- ,‘ﬂ‘,’ ."f"
. ' . r . ' {f ‘ J -. . ,L.“ . z’ol'jr'
- , 9 _ ‘ . I",; if": {5 . ‘ .' ’Il';-:‘.»f_' I. j; “4/: l'-
. ' _ ‘1 . 15'”, .
' ‘ = "   '1 »a J L i i" ’9‘! 'f 9 4' . I, ,
. . ., = , fa" ' : “ :15? ;:‘e:";'.-= .
. . I 0 fr . ?.‘_ " . 1 \
I . .f’; " _
L. ‘ ;‘   .
r " ' '
, . ‘ . ,
F; 34’ ' ‘ ?’(a .
1L“ 'J'Up,.,f}l‘.‘; :{2'1.:,>:H3 2
. k»
, T'v'ul}.)‘d" ‘fJoU’ 2-; _
‘ ‘ "mi.- vaw I’ '1“!
~ . ‘3 - L
‘ ' I I”. L '
. . 'l ‘2 F"£f/’
" ,.. t. . W -. ﬁwm ' ,,
9E. : :2” “ 7—— ~ ' a I J :1?
‘ V : ‘ H "Zilhj; ‘._ﬁ '., d" .
’13-, 7 ' ,' . . ‘ , I - 4141';th
' ‘ I '47: c'.‘ L , - L ' '- alum&ah
g L", , i' _. w , ’.,”.   r:
Ii“ ..- ~ . . ~ «... . ‘
' N , ; V; ._ . C ’4 - 1.— .—' «Au ' ‘ . ‘
\ 'l . ~y " ‘ )»l'; I , ,_ - .' . ' ' 14*}:‘1 _
w m" ”f“ -. ~ , .. ,4}, ,, , .. w, tt-mmw
,a -' _- 5 ' , ,' _,__‘; 3:7; _ , _- .- , r .. ~. ;
" ' "J 1' ’ , 3 ~ ‘ ' d’iﬁhﬂlfﬁW BI'PWM‘ -"
9f 0-,: A _ .y , , u, 4-» ’ . ‘.,], ‘4’). ., _ ‘ u
, 1;,d‘a . . , . 5‘ 19 1""; ‘ . A E "d a al.1',‘)- ”'.ﬁin, ‘.4‘ [w .. - wit; 0"."k r??? t ' L .
_. '77 I {ﬁt .;; 167 r‘ '“é'w 1" .-. " .ﬁi'vfﬂ:"& ‘ "' ‘
’ 6 n I ' >2." l"( ,. ' l; I ‘v 1-.7 .4lr .‘ 4 ‘ L-A.’ . ' ﬂ 7“ . '4 ' V ' I- ’-
~ . s 1‘ r< ', » I -‘
l ‘ ' , - - ' i). w; 3., ’1 £1» - 5V ,f' . _ , 5,. .. 1 1:? v r» _ .4 3‘ , ' I, _, If _ y -
K ~' _, :1 ‘  '. "'~ . J :I .v #1.. .V I ”v” .‘ 2‘. v.3 :A -' a A I L_ ' 1 'I '7" ' .1 " V
H ‘ ’ ‘ ”a 'v 4 i) V“: .‘ I. (”"7 2“ "I Q" '7 7‘; . L n 2 ‘ III! - D. f - , , I, _
ﬂ “ '1' ' ‘ '. .‘i- " v I} ., .1'.’ " x“ § " — 4' " ' -- ‘ ‘ . .1
. i A ,, “ ‘ " ﬂay} ~ ,, ‘pw 7' ..-.~ "', : " ' - 1 If, ‘
E t ‘ . ,,._ f, f} .' , - I r , ' _, V55“; .;-;:_::((.‘~‘.{'I . 1, 3;. I ‘ J _ 4 . ($.ﬁ/‘i I 1,» ~ 5. u. .
.x ,4; '1'» A ,. >,’ ‘ i J 3" 3-: . .3”. yr 13 j “I A; ,_~ ‘1‘ . ~ ,
‘ l. V . l’ y y ., ". /‘ f , l .:w
.._. , . .. ' J" ‘ ‘ , . , i; ,:'-. 1. .J‘i . .f .,.
, . .- , ‘ ' ; L ' ‘ , "-1,"? '_ - 'e”; 1“ ,
'- 1 J I 3'} \‘Y' 1/ ‘4‘; 1;: J .4 i r . ”‘3 .‘ é
, ‘_- ‘ " . _ L" r“ ,
, F. ’. ‘A. ‘ l. "I ‘1‘. ’, ‘ ._ 3.3:. , ' r ‘ t ‘1‘“! L r 'L
'3 ‘ 3' ‘ [I 1 far. I “' ‘ ~ ' .-' é 35.2”7 I Q? J!“ I ' V"
. ‘ " ‘ f ‘5’ f ‘ ‘ J ’6‘”; O I. ‘ . ' I" v )1 .‘i’ _.
,1 . ' ,,,~ r, v.31, ‘ . . - 1:9; ." '. ( ",5 ' ‘ I ‘ ..
. ‘ ‘ 'i s» ,1 -’ : 1 . mg»; .rT » 7 - . _,
‘ ' '8': ’ I V ' a:v‘r' "& ,—__H
V > ' l. I I 17V ‘ n ' .v'sz ‘; . '_ ‘ ‘7 “Jr ‘ '.,, I ‘1; r I1 _ -
‘ V . n A x 1; y. I- :14; . , “21*. _...;._— ____. __,.__.__‘7.‘_-..;_;.._ A-A___P :7 *5...‘ <._4'-L__a.--4 -4“, ._.,_- j -1 .~ __.-_L‘._._‘ﬂﬂ~tl
Legend DRAFT DATE 1 0/20/2009
, E— Ekwan (existing)
Proposed Transboundary — “War Main'ine SOURCE , _ _
_ [2 Proposed Transboundary Hunting Preserve (1934) Dene Th? Fl’St Nation. NTDB- GeoBase.
3 Huntl "9 P reserve (1 934) E First Nation Reserves Ottawa Library and Archwes Canada
‘ , FIGURE NUMBER
, o Citm 3 _ 2
’ .f; - Dene Tha'TraditionalTerritory

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION - '
Aboriginai Knowiedga and Land Use Study __
TransCanada Horn Riveriviainiine Pipeiine §
3.5 Previously Collected TLUS Information
In recent years, Dene Tha' FirSt Nation has completed a number of project~speciﬁc and
comprehensive studies which documented their Aboriginai Knowledge and Traditional
Land Use. These studies were most often executed in response to government or at
industry proposed initiatives and generally reﬂects the area Specifically related to that
' project/decision. Additionally, these undertakings often were limited by their budget
that restricted the study to the immediate area of interest. ’7 “
Dene Tha’ ?”raditional Land Use and Occapancy Study (1997)
This study was undertaken to record and illustrate the presence DTFN had, and .
continues to have on the land in their traditionai territory (DTFN, 1997). The '.
study was not intended as a comprehensive documentation of aii DTFN
traditional land use, but primarily as an educationai tool for both internal and
external audiences. _,
The methodology used for this study, although contemporary at the time, was ~
one of the ﬁrst of several studies to be completed in Alberta. This study area _,
used as the focus for this report included land use within Alberta and a small
portion of northeast British Columbia. This report is not considered an
exhaustive inventory of DTFN use of their traditional territory. 93. .~
Mackenzie Gas Pipeline (2005/2005) "
This study was an undertaking by DTFN to illustrate past and current use within
the specific project area for the Mackenzie Gas Pipeline. The report focused on "
the Bistcho Piateau and the southern portion of the NWT. DTFN compiled this ..
report in hopes that it would facilitate open and productive discussions with the
project proponent regarding their Aboriginal and treaty rights and how the .
project may affect them and the resultant accommodation from potential "
impacts. .
DTFN faced significant ﬁnancial and time constraints throughout this project and
these limitations are noted in the original document. This report also noted that ~-
the interviews and maps did not represent the entirety of DTFN use within their :
traditionai territory. 3
BC MEMPR Land Sales Interviews (2808) 3
Crown reserve petroleum and natural gas rights are disposed of under section 71 .
of the Petroieum and Natural Gas Act. Dispositions, by public tender, are made
31 . -.

- DENE THA’FERST NATION
Aboriginal Knowfedge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine
once each month (Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources, 2009).
5; The BC Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources (MEMPR) sends out
‘ public notice to interested parties prior to those postings
As a response to these notices, DTFN has prepared a number of interviews and
maps to assert their rights and interests in the area of a number of the land
: sales. DTFN hOpes to engage in further consultation with MEMPR about DTFN
‘ rights and interests.
. ' Enema Cabin Gas Mani 71. us {2009)
.. This project—Specific TLUS was conducted concurrently with the TCPL Horn River
i Mainline Pipeline Project TLUS during the Spring and Summer 2009‘ The
" completed report was submitted to the BC EAO for consideration in the
~~ environmental assessment process. , g . .. . .. ~. .
.. 32

I ‘ DENE THA’ FIRST mmom
Aborigines} Knowledge and Land Use Study
-‘ ~ ~ _ ._ TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
Executive Summary
The following Report, Dene The ’H’rst Nation Abbrigina/ Knowledge and Land Use Study
T, f for the proposed TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline (the Project) is intended to
identify Dene Tha’ First Nation (DTFN) Aboriginal knowledge and traditional land use
information in the vicinity of the Project located in northeast British Columbia and within A
7 the western portion of Dene Tha’ First Nation traditional territory.
§ For the purposes of this Report, the Study Team reviewed 23 interviews conducted with
- Dene Tha' First Nation members. It is assumed that information collected from 23 study
participants is representative of the broader Dene Tha’ First Nation population.
Based on the interviews, the Study Team concluded that DTEN historically used and
' continue to use this portion of their traditional territory in northeast British Columbia.
'f As the following report demonstrates, there is a variety and depth of Aboriginal use and
. knowledge of the study area. This includes hunting, trapping, fishing, and gathering
g areas, travel routes, sacred, ceremonial sites as well as cabins, camps and settlements.
The Composite Study Map (Figure 14) illustrates information shared by all interview
~5 participants in all use categories. In addition, this Report summarizes and draws from
i‘ " conclusions contained within a historical report prepared for the study area, entitled
.-~~ "Dene Tha’Presence in Noztb Eastern BC”(appended in this report), which corroborates
g: .. study participants oral accounts of DTFN historic use of the Project area.
The Study Team also concluded that the amount of DTFN land use has changed over
5 time. Speciﬁcally, interview participants describe the more intensive historical use of
._ . the areahas declined over several generations. This decline in use was attributed by
interview participants to several factors, including increased industrial activity,
government harvesting and movement restrictions and lack of ﬁnancial resources .
required to access the Project more often.
f *2 DTFN study participants expressed concerns, both spectfic to the Project and cumulative
to the region, regarding anticipated impacts to their Aboriginal and treaty rights. These
' _5 concerns have been summarized by the Study Team (Table 1-1).

MW’mn—Kﬁw ~11 ' . ﬁns ‘ ”51‘5"? ' 2‘" 11."; 34*“ 3;: 941*:‘ij‘m ”m'i "
i ' I “ fill" v r‘; (I ,
FIGURE NUMBER 1 - 1 , ‘ s: 1 r1 3—,,»
- I 1) u‘ , 1 Y ‘I 1 1 [1 l 1 A a
c m t St d M * m 1 111-11111; eaoﬂmerest
s o pOSIe u y ap 1 1 1 1.1.1.1,
" 1 2'. 1" “£1.11,“- "56 1
-—r~ A ’~/' " 41 V j g :2] - ‘
; ' 'v‘;' .7 ’H'Ip 7 “-.r ‘ - ‘ ‘ u . w ‘ > .— - ‘A ‘ 'ﬁ ‘ r" ‘ H‘ ‘ ' . .1
,1 11-. --.- re... 1— ww .1 11
n -o 7‘4 » , ) 1| ' v-5> . ." 1- . ‘1 ‘ . 5"" 'T,’ ’3 . g a" —".f,- 1
1.1 1/ . 1W" 1 u :11 n. H. . 1‘ 491:“?- m 1161:1421 ’0 . -.1 1 -«1 ~
‘ 1 " ’ l x .. ‘ ' . 1 1 ~ '.‘ . -. '1‘ 4“ 71 ‘ ' . 3.4-3 ' ‘-
3 K- . ,,‘ z“! ' .L. ‘1‘ ﬂ 1‘ " [+7 xh. - .1 314' {:3- .... ' ’F‘ r
J- z ' \ L‘h ‘ I 4 '- ! J: ‘1' ‘ ‘ '1'“ .’.~ - V'
1' 1 ' f... 1. “ . g... i .- j , .551; '8' 5* .7 9‘ - ‘* . 1~ ' 1 3. a -
:1' :1 “1 " L." _ . 1 t ‘ ~- 1- .5: 11 X! j 1»; ." star: 1. ‘7. f}; ' - " ?’v " 1-
1 .-‘-~"M* .-' v-‘b 1 - I r I ' .' .w'” y: ' 7! f 1 "' . . . ' '~ ;- ' P
._ ‘4‘“. I 1%”- M _ 1 ‘ ﬁ ‘ . (_ _. *— ‘ ‘— x . - a l
* 15:25: 1‘. _ r *7" 11 , 1:: A 1 . .1.
‘is'?’ §~~1 - =.' 1“ 1"}, -- " ‘ -:_.-. ‘ ' " C“ .J 17.‘ 1 - CPL}; 1% 555*» ' ‘ M B 1 1
w ?\u 1.... m 1~ - .1 - 1:.- 1- .1 .111 . ~- .1)»- 3v 1 . 1 1 :
‘1 *‘--~".~' _ . 25s.; .- , t,’ ~ L. ] s — 7 .1 -~ - Ni. 2:. i. .9174, ‘WQ" '1? -. ’ ‘1-1 ‘1 Q
-1_\-e—___ f ‘ ,1.— ~ *: » 1 1 - .. " -- ’ ‘ f 2. «4-: -' ‘13-, n’ *" '
2 - T; £121", 9-:75_ 1 . - 1' . ,3-1‘1‘1 E": :2 E _ .ﬁ’f-fzﬁ G; 31' '41:; I“? 13.7,: _',_r Ag.- 5’ ... .1.- ~
‘ " .r ‘7 :ZI‘ _‘ *1 V _ ' . ,g _ ' _ z, _.. ' t “1““ '_ I4 1 ' i .' . I, -; r} 2'. ( rfaé. V F T—
‘ 11 : 41"3Y-4 '_ - . - . $19555 ”-3,, ' — - ‘1 ‘2? "'93:. ‘51: "TVC‘ ~_,--J ‘ 4 "’9‘" 4 '1" ' ’r’ m i. '. ’ ‘ ﬁx" . ‘:
'1: “7:34: .. -“.:: ' --" “ 1; ' -‘ \ 1;“ "3.1 *’ “ ' . '1‘ ‘ 3"? ~ r. 4V1
" f:- 3’" P f 325-7 L 7": -, -' . - 9 km? " ' ‘ he) "I "‘57.:9‘» -' ‘F . . . y :\ - _;._:..-1i‘_1__ '
11,1" "' S “‘14:. 3 ‘ m; : "VAC’"1-‘"'-'-1:’:::;5.,.."1‘;~‘ “A ‘1' ?‘R‘, 111’?” " ﬂ V .3 J ‘ ' ' ~11 1 ' 3?" '1";- “"ﬁ 2
" ”ix. 1 £3.41. ’1' " - ,_ -~..'.‘a~— :- H?» Yr“... 5 *T‘V'I "I “i'gﬂ-‘fﬁfl ‘c‘Sr-E' “2-. ' . ' ’ " ' 1
.- 3355" 1- 1‘ 1,01 351-.- ' r——~' ~~~. . 1 :1 1 1 3:11: ‘ > 1 -- - 1- .
1‘: .ﬂ v}:- :‘éy‘: \C N ‘ ' b‘,;‘; v ‘I‘I ; r 1. ‘ 4. ‘ “ \ " ‘\ “..\\ 5 "1 ‘i I , ‘-;l_‘>‘:'l\l .1 r“ '7 .- ‘K . 9:.- , :_ _ _ v: ‘7- 1
1- LgkLA-Sériﬁv v 74 .1- ? 1 ‘ . \‘a \T ‘ W i 1' ft . .- ”*3 ‘ _ .. -. I
5':"*--~ ‘5‘ 'b‘f ‘ ‘ . '1‘ 1:= 0 3‘4 5: ‘1' i' '1‘ '. 1 am ' ‘ ‘ x - '—1 1 1 I
‘ TIN- . ff.“ " '5 3’ ' ~ g“ I ' v6? 1; " ’ ' “ ' ‘. I ‘\L\\ f 1' ‘ . * ‘, -:-"- z .‘| 'r-T’ ‘1 ‘. . ‘7 " ‘A ‘ﬁ - ’.
1.~‘ ., ~. “1,- ‘- '\_-1ﬁ iv ,2. g: .4 7 W1 "‘ \ ‘1“ 1‘ “1 “:1 1.121113%; ‘1- 1 . ' KL. — 7 ' ‘ -
5-\-_ dav-fr‘ ‘1‘ " 11-." J“ \l_ 1.3.; 1 '“ 3 ;, ‘19- " . - _
1 - ‘ ,‘T‘ -‘\ 1. '4‘ 1 E 1‘ F 1' 1’ I =N _\ l. 1“: ( j. :21 m j“; . 7‘ ‘ L l‘. .‘ h 12‘ _1 ’ . 1
'2 541.. #ﬁ“ §3 ’ Fixét ‘ '. ‘ﬁi Juli ' ‘ 1 ‘ I "1‘ “E 2:; ‘. 1::rf‘5227vv-5A'. 1.".7 .' -. I- V ' 2 1-1;} '
‘Y-o3*1‘ ' - ”a 1'- 1 . . “ { 1 _ ,1. (17’1“; .Jf'fr/f}. ' 3 1. I __ ‘. ‘ -. 1-1.?“ 1" *
1 2: .,::1 ...- .- ‘m‘. A 'i ' ﬂ 7 FLEE} 1%.? :3 ‘Q'fgfi/ 1,1“? .1 f '. - ' ‘5‘ '. J. ‘ -..~
I" ‘ l“’“‘ ‘ . {l.l: ﬁst’ : “‘ R: 1—3“- v“ )V ( 1" J n ‘ ‘ ’l :“ j"'__>1 "ﬁr" :. ‘7ftch' “‘ »H “ ﬂ -. '4’ b" 'u :-‘ r 7 I“ 1' '.'
11‘1'1 gr“: “ ”1-2/ 3": 7““ -~‘ . 11 -,‘\‘t-:' ﬂ' '15)), ﬂ" m 'l' 1 x‘ : ”“941" 3 ,.' z 31? "k 1:”! " :7: f- . - ‘ "s ’ '
Z: ' .r. A E » ‘ " .‘e ‘ \F’" ‘> . "4 1" -.‘.' I, ‘ ‘1':l ,‘V- ‘ ‘ .. r"!— ‘2’? 1&5" ' n‘ ‘5::§A~- . 1‘. 4 '
1 «5‘13; 11343;: 5r" M‘- 1 ' ‘ -‘ ‘ ‘1 . \- ' ’1 - ‘,. '. ,/,1 )2,’ :5 ,5? * x 1 1
(I vti_‘s’ I,§_‘;§'V _j;‘.‘. 1.. ‘»1‘\. -_ H" t "_ f. . ‘ _ , 3)’ -/ ' i ' i \ 3“ - ‘ u ‘ ~ ‘
i ' -.- --.. 5-." ' . s. f ' V; A “-5- ,' , " ' ,5 ‘ 1 v. , - .-, "v 1 1- , -
3;,- 3 Iii)" .- i’ f $1 .1235 1 7‘ .‘ --11 3 ‘ 3 ; 1.x “‘7“; ;_-~:- 3 fax 1_ ‘ (1' m L. 1 1 u_:\ x .f [
3.“; 1-?“ '4 1/1. 1" ’ s 1‘ ’~' . ‘74:: ‘M' 7» 1/ 1' J ‘5 .; ‘ " “ " ' ' ‘ : 1 ‘
y 1 ‘ ' l‘ aﬂﬁ J“: r {1 )1“. 6‘: 1“", l, _ 'r -‘-'-'#:' ’5 ' ‘-“~-rf. ‘ 1/ I ‘ ‘ 5 r ‘ ‘-‘ ' 1’ ~"’ .7 i 1
‘4 ‘1. | '1" '“A ?; ~- '3 V 3. ,l— ...r b‘:1 \I‘ .‘ [1‘01 JUL] ,f' ~ ‘ b‘ 3' ‘ﬂ 1 - > - " g ’ ¥— ’ I -
”-7 1. "3‘ 1- “T”? ~ ’-“"»~=r-:«\f' ‘r‘ ' x7 ‘21 a: ..'i f ' "-. l‘ X ‘ ‘
...A ' ' W /.+“ \H Li. [‘1‘ ‘ ‘ 1 _ a‘ .‘r’ .- ‘ ‘ _ i ‘ ’ .-
l‘. - —" 1%. (‘1 .' m ' . ‘k‘ .- ddf' \ ( ‘ -“ I , ‘ﬁ . 1‘ _
.. 1:" 1:11.? '1 1- 1331,“; . :1 :13- 1. ‘ - - 1 z .m .',._ ‘r' '- ‘ f"
1.11! ‘1 .. 1% " "‘ T“\er: . 1! . 1' 1, - 1 — - 1 1‘ 1---1—-.1 -» ~ . 1
11. > -, , 11,131" .. -- “1-1“ . . -- . . _ - . . u.._.___
' { ‘ 1 u ' ._'¥ “4 ‘ d T’- 1’ l"- . ‘ ‘ 1
, --" ~1 31111121 1 1 ‘ 1 - . 1” . 1 *-
' TN? ' ‘ 7“”1 $ I “1' :xx;‘ ":4; ;' I “I: k 'W 2 ' : _ ‘ " " 1T
1 ' - w : 1 ‘ ‘_.r ,w ‘ 1.. > -.-. ‘- V . -‘ ' ' ' ‘ 1
- '3 -- ‘ ‘ 1 I. (a ‘o' 3 n , _ . ‘
‘ Z"~‘«'L ---."-"~. 3. Bug» ‘ '1 -, ‘. '2’ g I ' ‘ ' ' ' 5 2 |
h‘ “1‘ Kr \l: 1- ‘ "7‘ -‘ \ “‘\'f‘/’ O E, ‘ i. «'1 ‘ v .. V ‘ 2 u - r V
2 ‘ - ; w u - (K. 'I“ ' ¢_. _ ‘ L") a .-- _ ' . _ ‘ ' L
_ g. __ ’1 1 ‘ 1 1 c; A A '1'" ”I . _ 8.- :1 ‘ ~ "A ‘ .
'- _ _ ‘ -3 ' \ '- “-3-. ' '1‘ 9 i3 1,!” j - .5 ' 1
— ‘ 7 - - x I. “ ' ‘K‘ _.P' I. V 2 I ‘ ‘ / O I‘ 7‘ . d ‘
. - _-‘ , _-- - . ’ . 7 -- .. 1 -
‘ ,w- ._ C" ,_~ \‘ 2 ‘ . w. | ' I ! ‘ -.
': - . 1 ~ 1 .1 ~ ;
~ 1 " — 2 "f r. W M '
‘ ﬂ Y .' f ‘ _ f v, .‘n‘ 9 "ﬂ 4 ’ ': . -' . I . r. 2—2—
. , , - 1 . t! . ‘.1 1 - ‘
C ' . ‘ ‘ :’Rﬁ>§__\~ .. l a " ' — f0 1 g #:O‘if.‘ a W 1
I _“ . .1 V " ‘ 1 » ﬁf‘f;v:.\ _ _ -’ , ~ . 'V 7'1! A. w! J 5 ‘ ' w I - 1 1
'0 . _ . v ‘ ”Qtr\r _ - “ ’ ' ' _ _ v M W ‘
-> “ - r,- - .. F4:p\1\;’_ _, - _ _ . -_ ‘ ﬂ! . . R . ' - .
- 1. . ,_-. -2 -. ”7‘ ' ,.. .’ 1’ ,. _' ~. ~_- ' ‘ _ 1; :§-;~7_\ _ " ‘ , 1 _ - 7-;
k i. " i v v r F. ‘ {‘5 V ‘ _. -. H ‘ ‘ ' ‘ 7‘ “'- _ _\ \\\Z 71.1-75.7” :T‘CC;L\»-\ - é 4" ’ ”J " .f‘ “- ‘ k" - 1/ 1
.‘ . 1 . xi]: ' \ V v *W “ ' ~'V¥‘.‘§\I.C;: ¢¥:\“\;‘\ “‘1’ ' ‘ ' ‘- ‘ J
3 ‘ J ‘ - , - E c r ‘\ \ Q ‘
. . ‘ - \ ‘ '. - ‘ I 4- &‘\" ;_..__‘ .’ .4 j
5‘\ , Kl. ' ‘\ l, . _ . l": i 1 V ':._:'-*_:_t -,§—:-T ._¥ ‘ _ _ } l
4 ,1 . a o I . 1 \ --_? z/é-‘Z' - s- .
A \ . l ‘1: -‘Ml'. ; - k , \_‘ ' V ‘ ' ‘3; V", ' l I . ‘ ’ '7 _ 1 , ‘
_ ‘l' V- g ‘. ‘ ‘ 0‘... ‘1 I ‘f — V f " ‘ " “ ‘ ‘ M _; P ‘I
\ 1‘ i 2- j I s. ‘ J5. 5' ‘ I t_- _ .. ‘ ' F I I ’.-\,‘ .‘ ‘ l
‘l; u ‘ . P . .' . . > < ‘ - ‘.r . ‘ '. ' ‘ ' IF.“
1.. ~ *~ _‘- ‘ _‘ ‘3‘ ataxjf ‘ ‘ ‘ .3 ' ~ " ‘ —— 5.. -1 » . . ._ . ‘i-ﬂ—I' .. 7’ O. - , ¢ ‘ 1
‘ 1.. _4 _(|’\ . ; 1' . .1 -. . Q. ‘» . ' #" ", ' -’ J‘ \ ( I. I
- _ '5‘ -r- - > I “ - |
‘1‘ T 5' ." i 1‘. 5 Ce ’ 3" ‘ > / ' n - . (t 3 '\ ; I .1
1 ‘_ ' - ‘ _ ‘ A '- .g o 7 « ' ’ ‘ . a ’. 3““5» ‘ - '- _ ’ 1‘ ‘ : ‘ SU‘ ‘ ‘ a
‘ d1 - ‘ 5‘; -. qua" ‘ ‘ M .- ‘ ‘ - - - -- " - 11x 1 ' 1111;. -
.. - r. «1‘? ; - _ 3a . 3.1, 1- 2 * _‘_ _ _ ' ' . 14 ~. _ _ . . 1‘ ,- __‘_ ‘z 1 1‘ .. '1‘ ..
2' 7 ‘2 _;vrl~ __v ‘- \ .7. "n ' . - A “I g i'"- 5. --—.3 ‘ ~ v- ‘ , 7 1 ., _ .- > ”I a x. 1m . -.
’ if " 3 ‘ 1 , \T ‘ ~ I ,- ~ _ ' ’ ufr l - » [
:« ‘ m.» - W, ‘ . '11? wwi‘... - ’14 ' ' 5’ 1-) VI l ' I ‘- 1. '! ‘
' « N" l 3‘ ‘1‘. ~K?‘ """_" 3‘» — ' 1‘ .-:';:'t" ‘w - -‘91' :- é ‘ ' 7“ ' I {kw ;h1‘ ~ h ‘ - ”1 .“y
I 'r * j " . ¢_ ”’3" . )f'uar i Z} C11": 1I ' ‘\“-:. FJ‘ - ‘ w v' 1 ,- - 1 ' 1- ,r 5. ’ - ‘ - ’81
1 ff} V-“ i ' >- K i 2.753. .2 x G --"" ‘ ‘ - _ -' 1 . ‘»',./.-.‘$ 2 \a .—
-.-- .it '5‘ - - '1 r . . - . 1-" - 1 L’ ‘ J (ft "' 1 1‘ -‘.
“" ’ri» 1‘ '/ ;‘ ‘ R ?L’JA. "‘ } s \l n. : 2 , i J ‘ .l 4' ‘ — I "x '
o , 1 1.-"". 1- - . - - 9 (-7 '- ” 1
-_ >7 ~ .1: . '.I : ' n f A -‘ ’_' I ‘ . lg", . V . 1 ' 1
- ~ -1 ‘1' -' “‘25.... ' . -' ' 1" 45’ " 11:.“ 1‘ " ’
’l l' V ‘ L ‘ _ 4""? Zip»? ' ".3 I Q) ‘ 1' ‘ ' L ‘7 — _ ”h; )7 i _‘ > :- . I x ‘ ~ f- ‘ 'r — §
,‘ . 11.19.- ' "1 ’1.-.. - . - . mu... .‘ I . 5: 9;. 5 _ H}; é I _ ﬂ 1 ‘ m ,- , .-
1 , ‘1‘- *?$“.’. 3.}. 1" 1. '1‘? - l“1"’.t"°-"“". "?*‘E' 1 " k " ‘3M
' r- ‘ I I p. ‘ : ;d _ ‘ v . I A "V‘ I v ' '1‘, - ‘ 1“ ‘ .. 3V ‘4.“ 3 i ‘ ‘ * ~.. :‘- .. 4“ ,1 - ‘LF. ’ ‘1'" M31. k-" ’ﬂ
—_ '. ' - ,3 ' ‘ K- ‘2‘ ' l " f, f - ’ ‘ " '1‘ ' 7““ . "J ‘_ ", a ' ’ ’ ‘ .1“ h ;"" ’ I‘ - 7.
. ,.- ; - - 1 ‘ 1 '4‘ 1 - av ’ ; .1 , ‘ ‘ -- - z
‘ ’~ ~ ‘ ‘— -.. - 7 4.- ' L . .‘ "7 ’ )n. g,“ . 1:41-35I' -1" T- 21"
- - 4.7 a" ‘ 1‘ - 1-; ‘7 ”w - ‘ - SP .- -1 s- ‘l \i. L :I 1 ' - k_ f v 41, 3 .7. ﬂ ' *~_' “1"A‘I‘ I - ' l
“ _ _ "C - ' ‘4 1' ' . _ 1" ~‘ - ' «' ggx‘ ‘ r. *I ' :1 i. I.-. . s _ 7 ‘ “V 4r _ H “ f” . i 2
-7 7‘. I ’. - . - _ I ‘ - . ‘ 7' ?'V I" .. ' " 2:. ‘- ‘f" «“4? ‘ R .q '--: _ J‘E'vv-Iﬂ“ :2 ‘l _ L .
l. :5 \1 C _" ‘. ~ 3‘ 1 NT ' c "v '. ~ . I a v! . A '1 I ‘ ’3‘ ‘ ‘2? )2 ’ I A- ‘ . A
g. . 11.- , , ' -- . ﬁ , - \ 7-4:, , . .. .. ,'- :.i . 1 ._
-. .1 -“ J? .1-"f’:_v‘1r__-._.._-“ ‘ ’1' _ - : .13 -- ’ - -- - 5 - - _ :2- .1-- --_"‘:“";.~‘~'_ -- -1;— $2.13... m 5.93 9-11 5501090
|
Legend [:1 Burial & Ceremonial Site - ' Fishing Area D Hunting Area E Wlidlife Area 1
- EnCana Cabin Gas Plant E Burial E Multiple Use Area D Medicinal Plant Gathering Area D 23"“;‘9 teadalu Pl ‘
' . ea or n 53 annmg
E First Nations RegionalAssessment Area DCabm Area Travel Area I 1 Sacred Site 1‘ 1
' - . 3 ~- .
[:1 Fort Nelson First Nation DCampIng Area E Hunting 8. Fushmg Area Settlement Area 1
D Trapping and Fishing Area 3 Ceremonial Sate E Hunting 8. Sewement Area I -5“ _1 Trapping & Cabin Area
D Berry Gathering Area D Fishing & Hunting Area I | Hunting 8. Trapping Area Trapping Area 1—
. Li

I
DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
~ TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
, Table 1 - 1: Potential Impacts to DTFN Treaty Rights
Right Reference
Hunting Timber Loss of animal cover (clearing) on footprint; P. Ahnassav: T. Didzena: R-
----
Gathering timber cover Kolay; S. Tsonchoke
cumulative loss of birch in region
' Gathering Medicinal Loss of medicinal plants on project footprint; A- Talley; R. Metchooveah; 5-
--__
Gathering Rare Plants Loss of plants on project footprint; cumulative T- Didzena; R. Metchooveah; '
—-_-
Of specie in region Seniantha; R. Tsonchoke
‘ ----
(Muskeg) drainage patterns on footprint; cumulative loss
of muskeg in region
Access Increased non-Aboriginal access to footprint; 1. Ahnassav 5n. G. Martel;
“-_—
All Access Decreased DTFN access to footprint; cumulative Louis Fornier: T- Didzena; R.
« --
‘ Hunting Wildlife Decreased animal population on footprint; P- Ahnassav: 0- Martel; 6.
Trapping cumulative loss of specie in region geij‘tael'llt:ahga1r'tse;n:moke;s.
Tsonchoke; W. Yatchotay
H unting Wildlife Need for further wildlife studies C- Chissakav/R-
—-_-
additional decrease in regional moose F°Umier‘ 5' samantha‘ 5'
, Ahanssay Sr., S. Tsonchoke
population
1 Caribou Decreased caribou population on footprint; R- Metchooveah; 5-
~ m-—-
_ m_—
fatalities
Trapping Furbearers Decreased furbearer population on footprint; P-Ahnassav: S Seniantha;
---
population
Birds Decreased geese population on footprint; 0- Martel
w-—-
(habitat)
m_—
cumulative increase in traffic
f ‘ Trafﬁc Increased wildlife mortality rates due to traffic G. Chissakav; 1- Seniantha: V.
to footprint; increased regional mortality to 3°"nes
wildlife

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION ‘
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study ' ’
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline i
Burial Sites Destruction of burials by industrial activity, 1- {\hnassav Sn; C. {j
burials along the TCPL Project ROW; cumulative :ahlisakaY/Rh/E Ch k I i
. . e C 00 ea . on oa ‘ ‘
loss of burials throughout region y y ‘
Cabins Cabins and settlement sites along the TCPL C. Chissakav/R-
Settlements Project ROW; cumulative loss of cabins, MatCh°°Veah/E' Ch°nk°lay [
settlements ._ '
Water Inability to consume water on footprint; LUCY Fournier; 1- Ahnassav
Quality decreased ability to consume water throughout 5'" P' Ahnassay‘ 6' Mme“ 5
. J.B.Tal|ey; S.Tsonchoke b ‘
region l
Water Lowered water levels P- Ahnassav; C. Chissakav/R.
Quantity Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay [
1
— Lowered levels in the Hay River A. LefOU; 5- Lefou ;
Fish Effects of changed water quality and quantity on R- Metchooveah; P- ;
fish on footprint; decreased quality and quantity Ahnassay‘ C' Ch'ssakaV/R'
. Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay !
throughout region :
Hunting Increased noise during construction and 8- Martel; A. Talley; G.
Trapping operations and subsequent effects on animals Martel j '
activity due to project; regional increase of noise
Safety Pipeline blow-outs or ruptures due to project; 5- Seniantha;A-Ta"ev;1. 8.
overall increase of accidents throughout region Taue‘" W' Yatcmtay f
_ Safety Toxic gases from pipelines 5- Seniantha; W- YatChotaV t.
Economic Decrease in traditional livelihood; lack of Louis Fornier; S. Seniantha;
identiﬁed economic benefits 1' Ahnassay 5'" 5' Lem"; w'
Yatchotay i
Hunting Health Effects on animals health from ingestion of Lucy Fournier; S. Seniantha;
hydrocarbons and other industrial chemicals A' ”"9"; R'Tsmcmke‘ 5' _ -.
Tsonchoke ‘
Water Effects on human/animals health from industrial 5- Seniantha; i
contamination to water
Consultation Lack of notification and/or consultation prior to A. LefOU; S. Lefou ; ‘
Process industrial activities ;
Preservation Lack of protected/conservation areas near P- Ahnassav: S. Seniantha; R.
Areas Project footprints for pra ctice of treaty rights TS°”Ch°ke t"
Industrial Location and amount of industrial features and A- BeaulieU; R. 1
features activity Metchooyeah; S. Seniantha; "
' A. Talley; J. B. Talley; W.
Yatchotay; S. Lefou/T. ‘
Didzena 1 ‘
Reclamation Ineffective reclamation practices Louis Fournier; R. ‘
Tsonchoke; S. Lefou/T. r.-.
Didzena f
Climate Changes resulting in usual climate, seasonal P- Ahnassav: 3
Change patterns
i ‘3:
5

‘ ‘ ‘ GENE THA’ FIRST NATION
" Aboriginal Knowiedge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Hom River Mainline Pipeiine
; ‘ Authorshi p '
Study Team ‘
Report Authors: > _ _
i ' Tracy Campbell, M.A., Senior Review -
. Germaine Conacher, MA.
Adena Dinn, B.Sc.
Kathrin Janssen, BA. .
. GIS Authors:
Kathrin Janssen, B.A., Senior Review
Adena Dinn, B.Sc.
" " Interviews 8: Summaries:
Adena Dinn
Tracy Campbell
- -- Cathy Baldin
Kathrin Janssen
Brian Beaulieu
‘ ’ Emma Baldin
‘ _ Dene Tha' Transiaﬁam
Agnes Gailant
r .. Thomas Ahkimnachie
Ba ptiste Metchooyeah
' Colin Talley
~ . Robert Metchooyeah
. 6

DENE THA’ FiRST NATION
??iﬁggéii’a’é’fﬁéiigéfédﬁﬁﬁﬁnisﬁﬁé’éﬁ:
Abbreviations and Acronyms '
DTFN Dene Tha’ First Nation : ‘
TLUS; TLU Traditional Land Use Study; Traditional Land Use
AK Aboriginal Knowledge
The Preject TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline ‘
NEE National Energy Board H
MPMO Major Projects Management Office
BC British Columbia ..
AB Alberta . ~~
RFMA Registered Fur Management Areas '
HRB Horn River Basin i
GPS Global Positioning System :
GIS Geographical Information Systems .
LM Local Assessment Area
Regional Assessment Area . '
MEMPR Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources -
TCPL TransCanada Pipelines g .
ROW Right of Way

; DENE THA’ FIRST NATiON
Aboriginal Knowiedge and LandUse Study ' .
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine
4 ijechpeciﬁc TLUS information
“Dene Tha’are not only ﬁom this fancy we are pan” ofit. ”
- Robert Metchooyeah
4.1 DTFN Knewiedge “
During this study, DTFN interview participants shared their Aboriginal Knowledge and
Traditional Land Use information. As previously stated, the information represented in i
this Final Report was included when it overiapped or intersected with the identiﬁed '
Project RAA.4 "
However, it must be noted that when information about the land is shared, DTFN feel
that the knowledge can be applied to other areas, not just the area under study. That i 1,
is, Aboriginal Knowledge is not necessarily piace~specific; experiences and observations
0n the land in one use area can be applied to another comparable use area. For . ..
example, when a Harvester says that ‘cuts tines displace animals on my trap iihe,’ he is . .
expecting that knowledge to be applied throughout the DTFN traditionai territory. This '
is true for the interviews conducted for this Study. :' :
The Aboriginal Knowledge relayed to the Study Team by interview participants included . ..
first-hand or personal experience on the land, as well as oral history accounts passed
on by parents, grandparents, Eiders and other DTFN community members. In DTFN
cuiture, both of these types of information are considered legitimate sources of
information. In fact, if knowledge is not known first—hand or through recognized and
credible sources when questioned, DTFN often respond with “I don’t know,” or “I can’t
say.” 2:
4.2 TLU Information Organizatinn '
For the purposes of analysis, this section of the Report has categorized this information 5
into the following sections: '-
a Hunting Areas
4 The RAA used to identify impacts to Aboriginal and Treaty rights in the environmentai assessment was ;
requested from TCPL, but was not provided to the Study Team at the time of Report ﬁnalization. The
Study Team identiﬁed and used information that intersected the Project footprint oniy. ' "
33

i _ DENE THA’ FIRST NAHUM

Eii Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study

TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine

0 Throughout British Coiumbia (J. B. Talley)

0 Travel route along the Hay River to the Shekilie River to Ekwan Lake (J.

Ahnassay Sr.)

‘ A 0 Along the Little Hay River (3.8. Talley/A. Talley, S. Lefou/T. Didzena, V.

3 Taliey/ A. Taliey, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay) .

j 0 Along the Hay River (V. Talley/A. Talley, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay)

i 0 Alberta trapline #88 around the Ekwan Meter Station (H. Denechoan/T.
Talley) .

0 Along Sahtaneh Creek (R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay)

. While participating in ﬁeld surveys for the environmental assessment of the Project,

participants reported good habitat for and/er signs of animals that DTFN traps including

' beaver, rabbit, marten, mink, muskrat, weasel, lynx, wolf, coyote, and squirrel along
the Project ROW (C. Chissakay/R. Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay, E. Chonkolay, R. Pastion,

.~ R. Yatchotay).

42

I .
V ’ 7 " ' '1 P7
Area of Interest ’3 i I f
I
W ‘
- ; £ '
\ H
g!
‘ H ‘
N . H
L
i}
It.
i:
“Zikg‘q‘vir:<:~k?L—::::_-:_%\ _N l I
l"
Legend 2
- Trapping Area (Historic) I .’
m Trapping Area (Current) V ’ ﬁ ‘1
E Ekwan (existing) ' ‘ l E
‘ l
— Horn River Mainline f :4 I .
r A DRAFTD TE ' '
A 10/19/2009 g?
nappmg Areas n
FIGURE NUMBER ' '1 ‘
I
‘l
i- -

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
' TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
-; l. l ‘ ‘ l \\ Ar! “
,_ V x , \‘\x
5‘ " .
\ .1. :‘i 2‘
) o i ‘ _- “
I \ .«f I“! I " .
‘« // / . if
A .5 / \ , ‘.
Plate 6: Animal tracks along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
- -: - ”4““- “ -__7_ ‘ f ,..
.13": | .' h "" - ' ' . ‘~.“;' .
s §’;H ‘.;I’ 7‘ '. - . ‘ ,7 lb: \\ -”":" ‘ ' .“‘
‘44- ", - ,, :3" \ . , 4 .._..‘ q. ,
-\ _‘§:v” .‘  \ .4 , ' . J ‘ >3 ’0' 7‘ ‘1
., ; w , ..-f ‘9 -' a {5 7" ‘9' ., ‘ ‘
7 a 5 I 5; .3 0-: . 1' .‘~ V .~ .
“‘. ‘NV/V ‘ -‘ f ‘. Iv. ; I l (I “
\ i " ‘ 7‘ . . Iv ' ' ‘ §\ “ \ a ‘ .
~ .‘IT/ (‘ A! ~ '. \‘ - ‘I ' V.. -
cl ‘ ,> O ' v ~ . _ ‘
' "4' :’ ": " n l V #3; - L 2",, ’ ‘ ’ '9
~ <“ ‘. l" .u ‘/’ ‘ ‘. "_ .
23‘“: Z; ’1‘; .k l; ' ".1 1.” ._ ‘ . .
. 7 ‘-5-' ‘k \- ‘ ' ) ‘ . " ‘ p o .. '
“4C3: # 73- ; \gN. - n" _‘ -
3!; ‘- 3‘,” 33“ 10' 2);,,‘ $\. ‘. [I I 1 (f '. A‘, ‘ ‘ “.~7 '
, ' -x; ,/' .. a . 7-. ‘ - '
' f , * x ' / f ,t z; A 4"} ' A". I
. I,» ,1 ~_ ”M ”(V - - ‘ L! ,grk“ - ~ . - _‘.’,
. -'f,"/ (7 KC 7” ‘ ,2'  ~§ 5". . 3“ ’K
'7 / " . ’K‘ 7" :7 o» " ' f‘” .r ;'. f" - 7‘ 7_ .‘ 2» \7‘. - .7 ' " .I
~ ., . . 4 ~ — '  - 2.! .r
l ; I . 'x ‘\\?Q‘¢ﬂg’gi %‘\§f"4;1-,.‘H9 " .‘ ‘l . ~ \. . W I. N...
" , . ‘ 7! .1: 35:?“ 2% *3: ~ \ f 5“» ,3” , ,3 f 3, *.
I I‘ '— ;v'l.:‘_‘. . \ ‘1‘ '. . l“ g! ‘ ‘0 L“ .- , P-4- \ '- ‘ :3
‘ Plate 7: Trap found along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
, 44
3

l
DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline i
”menmmw— I
‘
f,
i
i
/ > ’ r—
. , 'n-‘h,*-",’( Z'Ajf ”I _ . ‘
, / [flu]: ,V‘.’ ‘4 k: \,\‘:'1' /\.-, ,5
, , ' «2’2; 1""? ' l\} , - ""\\,‘1‘ l ' '7 ‘V" .
’. :5 \ _ ’ ’ ' I)! ‘ \\l\". _- 7‘ ‘7 ¥\
. , .' )V. x . , . .‘5 \ ‘ - ~ 2
. ,_ H; > _ “a ’1 ‘, fl." \ d\_f'<;‘_.l\; T
' ' ”l. _ Ir“:./-"./ 1 ‘ . 5 . -/,-\v’\‘: 2' ’ ’/x \L I \\ t
‘ . vxl ' V .:"-E’/J" " ‘ ~4<ﬁil ; ./ an-Q- ‘(Itr’l ‘ [X t I
xx , " >\f.\\\\ J’
..».'~.-.ﬁ~:."; A -. “ - 2  » x 2
Plate 8: Beaver Lodges along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
“ -. “V '., - , V '3 I , "-‘ ' i . , .V _¢?«‘o“' ' v " . 0'1" -' I i
‘ Q .2‘.‘ . 8‘5-1}?_ r, , - f;_ , . 2 . - 2
2.22 ; :32; 3%“ a -- *2 ~
4' V '0‘!“ 7w .. :32; ‘iwbi',’ “79“ 4‘ - '_ , ’3 ‘. v: ‘ f: .2 3R, QJV "_.."
_ 1 ‘2‘, ,~. Q“ ‘5 ‘2‘ ‘ .1; gift“. {‘ '3. 'thi‘ ‘. 5 IV”; . '2‘, M . “ﬁo‘ -
5" '7 ‘ 3g ’9?- - 7&3? I492; Iﬁ 35-23 \‘3’3 3'2“: 5 «>12 A. 2 ‘ e. :
, . Lu. 2 (swam gi‘r/fu.“ ,. z“: » H5?"- - s ._ ‘ ‘-
~ - -‘\ - 2 J.- *2: - 2- --‘-' wk. ‘5'” '22.” ‘ \r' .22
~ 2‘ 2-” *2 «3n 5” 0%” I ~ I" *- 2- 2’ k '7 '-' -
3 " ~g2 ‘. ,' . I J.“_ ,.\4? a ‘3‘ . a ‘ “ ' . " ‘13: ‘ -‘
2 .‘ 2 ~ 5 '2 22u;t3‘-‘*.-‘ - 2, ‘- 2a.: .2. _ .2 '2 , -
' 2 2- r ‘2 .2"; {3352‘ s. 4“ .202 u»: z a m, , .3...
2 “‘ -~ 2 ‘41.] z... 941-. wittnb t‘fp 23:. ' - , 2"»; 7
. ,2 - 222—22 - 2 -~ a2 v2 *
w ‘ ' * ‘1".‘4 '..‘: wk.- 2 2 - ’ _. 2‘2 , . - 9'2.
,- 2:22 xvii“ g ' "(2“ Q ‘ -" 2 . ; \-‘~L-
.. 1 V " ‘3": l" 2- L i ’_ '... glarg : I y l, a' . ' j)" j
' ." 1:) , ¥ 1‘ 9.? ha; ‘0 73“ '.‘T‘ I ~77
, . 2 ~ A g J; ?%- g» *
- =2 2- 2/ . .‘2 2; . - ‘5.“ - $.21 a .2. .
- _ g‘ 2 ’4‘. ‘23» .3; '.- ' K 3:“, .
; _' ‘.1‘ 1" V .. . v” - ‘ f“ x "
x . ‘ \ . - I ,_ i ; _$ 'i ‘ ‘ ‘l 9 .
. ‘ . - - .2 ‘ _ ‘l .dn " ‘m ‘;
Z‘ ', . 2" : I '4’“), ’q‘ V;,. .
‘ w. i 2 ‘ 5‘4 '- '{ﬁ A " 1'4 '
,'- 7 "w — ,__{_ 3:“ "ti," ..‘ awa' l ,
u + .22..» , 2 a 2»: 2; rm *
-g' ‘- ~' ' 7-;2 :F .‘ ' ?m- -’ 1 ‘ '
' I " l‘ -i‘kt- 2;. on. J)’ 2 3:3r‘ . I I
{a ‘ -.- «"2 '2 " “'212‘1‘2‘ ‘—
, ', ‘ 52:3 .2"- ., ’ ' .29. . ‘ :1"? ‘i
' .1 ) {-3 Q ' ” .
2 I . ‘ 4.. "z". ' ‘ 2
1 '. a " .f‘ ‘3' \| Y
2 ‘ - . = ‘ 2 x -‘
9 f > - .. . ‘. - v
D ‘ . n ‘ ‘ -
' ‘- ' ‘ i - ' ‘
4 . . c2 ‘ ~ 9 ‘
Plate 9: Bird nest along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline Route.
45 i
1
i:

33. DENE THA’ FIRST NATtON
' Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine
4.5 Fishing Areas
DTFN participants report fishing for northern pike, Whitefish, jackﬁsh, pickerel, perch,
stickleback, and suckers throughout DTFN traditional territory.
Jean Baptiste Talley reports that the best time of year to go ﬁshing is in October when
the ice isn’t too thick. He notes that in the past October was known in Dene Tha’ as
“Fishing Month.” David Martel explained that in the summer DTFN people would also
‘ ‘ set nets in the rivers for fishing. '
.. Fishing areas included are generaily throughout northeast British Columbia, and those
that specifically overlap or intersect with the Project footprint (Figure 43). Current and
' historic areas where interview participants ﬁsh within northeast British Columbia
“l include:
.' o Kotcho Lake (5. Seniantha, J. Ahnassay Sn, R. Tsonchoke, A. Lefou, S. Lefou, B.
Martel, A, Talley, A. Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, 3.8. Wasp CoIin/D. Wasp Colin, J.
DanaEs/C. Talley, H. Denechoan/T. Talley)
.i o Ekwah Lake or ’14/7~go-z‘ief7”(J. Ahnassay Sr.)
0 Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
; 0 Shekilie (or Beaver) River (18. Taliey, R. Tsonchoke) -
I “g 0 Little Hay River (R. Metchooyeah)
' o Conﬂuence of the Shekilie and Hay Rivers (3.8. Taliey)
' 0 South Shekilie River (A. Ahnassay)
_ _ o Conﬂuence of the Kotcho River and the Hay River (A. Ahnassay)

o Confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River (3.8. Tailey/A.
" ' Taliey, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, V. Talley/A. Talley, H. Tsonchoke/C.
Chissakay, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay, S. Lefou/T. Didzena)

. o Kotcho River (3.8. Talley/A. Talley, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay) '
Current and historic fishing areas that overlap the Project footprint:

0 Along the Project ROW, identified during participation in ﬁeld surveys (R.
"5 Matchooyeah)

o Hay River (R. Tsonchoke, P. Ahnassay, S. Tsonchoke, V. Talley/A. Taltey, H.
Tsonchoke/C. Chissakay, H. Denechoan/T. Talley) _
. 5 0 Little Hay River (18. Talley/A. Taliey, H. Tsonchoke/C. Chissakay, A.
Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, s. Lefou/T. Didzena) "
’ o Townsoitoi Creek (18.; Taliey/A. Talley)

o Kyklo Creek (18. Talley/A. Talley) .
3.15 46

DENE THA’FERST humor»:

Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study '
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine P&peline
o Sahtaneh Creek (R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay)
Robert Metchooyeah stressed that ﬁsh are not just found in large, running rivers and
creeks. He mentions that there are ﬁsh in most bodies of water, no matter how small “
the pond. ‘17ust because we cant ear [the sma/l ﬁsh] doesn’t mean they are not
Important: They feed the birds and hears, which we eat: It’s a Circle. ”
Ricky Pastion participated in the Aquatic Resources Stirvey and identiﬁed stickle backs,
finescale dace, redbelly dace and long nose suckers, He reported that rivers, creeks and
streams are sensitive ecosystems for ﬁsh and other animals. He further expiained that
ﬁsh can die from oxygen depletion if the water gets too low. He says, :
“Rivers, creekg, lakes and ponds are ecologicaf/y sensitive wetland [2‘ /'5 my ~'
important 177/3; beautiful vast wﬂdemess and wetland be protected from future 0/? . ..

and gas de ve/Opers. Th/Is protection will strengthen the restoration of forest,

preserve lane; water and MW 5/50 protect histor/‘C burial sites. ”
47 N

‘1’” -.._ V , ‘ " ' “- 'i“ V " " "' "T‘ ’ , -’ “ ’ ' , f "'."'-i"' ” 2. ' '; ‘~- . -;:, , ‘ 1V- I, r._ ‘ gf,- ‘ '——_-.:.‘ :31 13.73:“: __’. ;. ,;5_
' «M; ﬁ' ‘J‘ v 2H" max_rm JV: .41 J , * . z 3*" “a;- V , . 0., L L; ’ * a
‘ 1“ 1 ’ \ -", z 4(- ‘ ’ u \‘2 “1 1 - J l Vtﬁ 1 ‘ "g 3' " :5“: x H
V I' , ’II bl. x 1» 1" ?‘4: '5 V I y I .1, \M'E‘C‘I I . ’ ‘1 I ‘ 1 'l' 1: » ' E3] ‘ .A .7. ‘; E‘ '. V 7 )J? . 2' EA
2:“ ~ 'a- V £1 '- ~ H - ' W J“ , I '- . " r" x J‘ J W " “3; ‘1' x 1‘3» 1 Area 0“ '"teres't '
- J ‘, .‘r ‘ L J‘ , ‘ - 3 , , h A‘ J ‘ . III 4 ‘. v I , I I V
J \L ‘- , V -’:~~..‘ BU "‘>'*’.;'1-/-‘.'“'Ja \‘ Wm: ' 4 9 -. - ‘3‘)“ m1 .“ I I .3 . ,_.J' < :
I L ‘Q‘ . ' ' ‘1’ ‘ ff . I «?EJS ,’ 1 ,. E; _ I h, .,,\ .f V; . i. w ‘t‘ 3.... 1? IL 3‘ ; ‘i J [i r‘ ' I:
_J' in "‘ ‘ I .( ‘1‘ J," J "3"“, ?- ,,_"‘., ,'-“X _f .1 :f“ - ' ‘J‘ . 4‘ ~ 3' ' .‘1‘l\l “1 “ i ‘ 1 S ,1" .‘ 1
0.. . V J J V. VJ 1 .. 5 ~4 - J - r -J
__ «1.x. V ,\,'-" _ “fﬁ‘s‘. ac: , _, , ' :4 . I \I "K“ I . 1 .- I , ‘ A I I . . . . l J) J .
‘ "~- ‘ ' 'l . r" ‘ "“59”" -‘ , :3" u , \JV 1 1 ‘ ' ‘ J. i ‘ ' V,
l, - V. I A _ '. ‘ T": y“:{:"f—3‘.h/”. .“ ‘I I W. ’3. 1.. I . qJ ' ~ .5.“ I _, L J 3
J.» v! V '- 7‘- ‘ 1" ' iha-J Tm“ myﬂ wJ‘J' ‘ 2' ‘ ' 9"“ ‘ J"
~ » .. "’ " I - _ . JT- [3 0.7; J cg”? . ,.-- ,r, .0 . =5. “ \ («Fiﬁ -~ .g, 5%? ,
.. “4/ ' ‘1’" ‘ ' {-‘l-I‘f}. [Ir 1“ ‘, 2‘», | ,‘ 2:“) I ‘ $4€\ 1? 7 . V ' @ 1.:- _' .1??? ' I) I
V . ' _ _‘ u, o, . ‘ . .1 . I ‘ , 1‘ ~' ' , . 3‘! *‘z‘ w . ' v' I» ~I ‘ ’ c.- .. 7‘ ,
‘ ' ‘ " .7 V 1%; iL Hi ' 5 1" I(R : r.) .‘r\ \: k ‘ ﬁn (ﬁ‘fs- I. h '4” . $2155" -V Y‘
J .' . 4; ,4" ‘ s=?- ' _ ' .‘ ' “ ' ‘.‘ , 1",! ‘ ' ”"7- .4 ‘
I 1 .. 19443 If 15' :5 II ’I J l, (j) [2 .' IL” 3. L '7 19‘ 4,4,: '3: KW, “'5‘; m
_ . V ,— , _ .J_«_°' ‘ ; ,' ' ,c‘ A, ,‘ r '.» . 'é' ‘ V» '- q r‘ xv, 'Iﬁ. t‘gv __'. :
" J' ."‘;:’i‘J“~-<3‘-i- 1th “:p 1;" ,J .H .0 :35“ -- -..-') Jr‘l’x .2. "73% 0.2“. ’- J .-: ,- ' a ‘
.~_ -..-' ivg§ﬂj§9~fr ﬁn. ,, N ‘71 .5 -4 f. f -""n' L“ " ’ L a [I ’ ‘3' "Lazy,“ ,F‘ r’:".'*.‘_u “”5“ ‘ .' W ’ N
I . I. . L "$$$ng ,I a j . ;I. f -r 1IL jv‘VI‘ "“3 {jtﬁ‘té twig: -. :2} iffr§§ ,
“ V"v-"»-—' Ac‘ "3 1} -;' ~4‘« 7‘ ‘ na.“r ': ‘. t "I“ J - ' er- ﬂ'» H J, #240 x. l‘ ‘40' W 7 . ) ‘ VI ~ —51 ‘ . , r r
. __, , _ . K' .- ,, -- ,m 7‘ ., ,., ~V .,, ,n . . ,o __ . . _., , , . . ., ‘
: .. — V?— :J ﬁiiﬁﬁw V mam; .1174 ; ~14" ‘ J" ’1‘ ’J ‘ ' '3’" ‘ '
1.--: J ‘ .0 x‘ " T . _,.,. " '.’-‘ '_._. w. —~ s- v"; v. - ,, .03; r? ‘ ,p. . ,2»; a .-~-~‘ J. ‘ , -. ' , ,0 J *
;, _ .- ‘* ‘ ~ ~*« ' ‘ ’ ~ --‘ s __ '- -. r- ar“ ‘f : 'r"--"JI". ,V -“¢.;'—3 ' v “- 3 r. V‘ .5! 2 A 0 ,.- ' .
it.“ P, -' 3 s; {i ’4“; - I I .4 ' 4; r I L i 3' 1 J):- ' f"; m”"' ’5 l- -' V ‘ .- 4' ' , A J‘
‘_ J . J' - ‘V ,, , _. , — Ko- ;,.. « . ‘ - ,- L. ’ u . ' 41., "-..J ,. 5,1: ". dm 1 ._' 44
s ‘ , 53%;?” ~—. 71> f “"—"'—' 4:, 3e “ . 5"?“‘3/ J: ' ”*5, ,. _ 2; , _
1 : .I -’-'2_ Tq-":f¢-f‘ﬁ':;d “?p‘qx‘ 1‘? ,7 I‘I.‘ . ‘.' _ :-1%:_ '- l‘ 3.329;. :f' | £7; :L’fF-ZL‘ .-. 3:; I .; YI- '- , - 2’? , VI : . T‘ '— -;I
I E V ‘ agaﬁ' ‘ «J. T- ., . {A . a, ‘”"“-‘ . ' - - g “ I 5 a" '3, 14:" “2-: ,. 7"“:,\ .1‘ ’ . :,‘ , ‘ ,‘I'J‘ -V'
: i V' ' 13...; _w. "hi § V N: 3 gxt; 1 1_--:-,;_;~ " ' ,, 3'1' - , " [,‘Yﬁw'j‘?}z§.m . _ V '. , _ : .
‘ ‘ ‘ " V ”’3' “Q ;'< ‘5'” $354 ’4‘ i" 4993‘“ "7:“ 3°. "' - -. I I’V‘exii' ""-.' 4.- ‘ . bf: * ’f
> p\. h. ’33? A "k ’4': ‘N‘qr ‘ M‘<\¥¢J \ _ 4' "l”; p V"V\ t‘. ' _ C ‘ '-Iu*{r(-‘ ' k ’ *—’ - _ -‘ 7 ~
V r-4"=‘r? -. «a ‘ . ‘1‘. , www/v 2 ~~>+ ' \ V - ' - ‘9 Wu r - -~ -.~— ' * , - t
. k ," d‘I'i’33' .‘§V . . *' V 5/!“ ’ ‘ f g); I" V‘ 'a h): ‘ & ‘w \3‘ - ' ‘J' V‘ ’ Q, ’ - - V " ' "
«aw. ~'~ J- «4.2;,» “43* '~’ "-‘-->c;3-> 0“; , V V 1 - +1.4. - - -- - . ,. , ~ - - e
, I I.-";~ t“ _i _ Is" ‘ . 7"; . I _‘V $3. ’II 6 Jv‘tnm i . I; a ‘3 ,7; _'".‘I\ -' I . . Ii _.1 _Ié—‘f '2‘ I 1 I __ _ , . i. _ ‘ .
‘ - 41%. _, ‘éﬁf’i - '/\ ‘4>\‘ ‘ ' ‘~ N» ~ '3‘“) " "‘ J '7; '“IV 1 ﬁr?! ' ' .1 P'J ‘ . - ‘3' - ' .'.
1 - rs~v?"4-“’E‘- ,; haw, «Av ‘- J ecz-gg- am); ‘ ' $.32; ' ‘— V. .sr-H s“ ‘- J “V ) 3: - ~
1 “n v «a.g‘Fr-‘sku b'€'3JS-'i§1“>\‘cv ' J . a J V.» w « =9; V. ' . ~ K J- x. J V - ,
V V ~-. ~2- J .. :J ,~ «A . 2,». . _MJJ - M J, - .J- .J .- 1, w. i. J J _ , .
L" .. J' V r":\ 'V ' ‘§ 1 A“ " k9»>\/© § 3,)" ’~ '- J'-’-’~’5ﬁ‘>~‘>.:7' 1 ‘ - * ‘» t ‘ 4‘9- i‘ ‘ ‘ 7"w' , '
~'*‘-“ '. L; Y‘s“? <9“) ELK 7% ""‘~'-\ ‘ ' ’T «‘r," Y '5’ 1i : ‘ J24? 7"" ‘ ' ‘ 3"?“2‘gxuVV’7JT-ﬁ" ' ,. . '1
‘J-..' .. \ 1 ‘3‘: , ‘5 ‘5 .V "IV’ , k: I . I V |.' .5 ‘ p - k ‘ ‘ ~ 4 - - -~ ‘r' l "I ~‘ “"V’““~ I A‘ I. ’ ‘ ~'
« i, W ~ zxgggw ~20: - . ~- V y r"? .-.. A V . ,. 45w»; V , _ J , ,. --
“er ,-, ~ ' ‘. , ,’ - 5 ,. _. ‘ _ ‘ ' . .M :. .-L . ‘. . ,r. {V .7 IV A ‘ ,'.. I 1‘ ‘ ‘
.J , 'j ‘1 x :‘k‘. Iggriﬁ" 7""',_‘ ‘ V ‘ S?N/‘I’W a \v§<‘>"/.I ~'-.-.- \ _" L ,, v 'J j _- - ‘ 1‘ j} " “ j .1: +13" Q't‘ﬁ’! : '::_ i f.
.V . -.- ‘ “ﬁzj/ - .2 - sm- W» J ‘ Hwy . ’~ w n! J ~ ‘0 an 1 W?“
: :;‘;~_,_I¢(‘!'{""" 2;." .I .I , . ‘ . _ '.- . " '~.'- I'\’,\‘r’< ,‘ \‘I \ ‘N‘2‘ )I- .A f,‘ --I .- v . ﬁ, . ' J 134$. '0" ‘. -. _‘IrI 3 ‘ a ‘1,
L. - , _IﬁV.’ f -1 51.44;; ,J-'V‘_ I - . I 0):: , \A .I' ‘1‘ \VI “‘1", ?;xj' "I; I J .J , I.- I I '3 . .~ . J J ‘ -1" ‘ ', .J,
, ;, i‘;::.',.l_.;&="? 1“? 1—1" -. .- "n.¢~ 553‘ e" $Sélﬁ-e-r” , -I,.‘:J"":-° f,'.'- V ' " ‘:-- - 0 .b. ‘4
J_ {II - :._<=:.J .9 f k 1;; .4} ' ﬁneixmv. .J~--". *7“ _J ,1 - - ~\ , _ ; _ I
:I _’~ -3 5:23“ . ~I .. 3"" 1121. 3’1 \ 'ii‘ I ‘ {Q in II' ,0 .% I r ‘ ' e‘- :II'II,‘ J . h.'%_ , *W - ‘ ‘ ‘. " IZV
_ I ' ' lad, ,. f - - _l , ‘ .1 . . \ , - .‘.~. — V’V L" .'° - .'
s «J J , . J .. e . .4 r. , J r-P r , . . - 7 x
V‘ L2“ ’1‘ ‘2 ‘ “__‘“, l- 'V . . "I 1‘ ‘ " “ J 0 l1. 1 ‘- I A, I a J' ' -
V b ¢ \_-_\‘_‘ 0. 31:54 ' " J 3 57 VI‘ ' , g _ ’- . ' - ' '-' ' . . -.. - .
V ! 1 " "Ht? - «(7' 3 a w 4*, - ' I , ‘ ,' ‘ ‘
—-— v " v ’1: ' 't 7’ '7‘ ' I 5% VI . _ ‘_ 7‘ r- ‘ I ~ ‘
' -4534-«2‘TF-1'2'ge“. " " ,., ’ V—
‘ "L ; ‘ II' ,3. I‘ ”I"; LJb'I‘?" I ?‘??.QJI, [1", 1"} ,) h I ' _ ' ' ' _ v L -I ,
'3 "-g,‘ L ‘T \‘J’ ', , ‘ 9' :23; ??“ﬁ 1 3 ' '. A ' -
V . -, “ " "s V‘ . 2 7-H; "‘J ‘33,; s ". ' "'7 '
.1“ h...‘ a ‘17.“. 71‘ -~ 2 .I i 0‘. Jr. :‘ : v. ’ v *2 ' -. ‘5 '1: T. J J, ' ‘L T, . -‘
,III U I" '35 'IM- _ -.. ‘ I' “f 7 }€" I ' ’ .. I. :, _ ‘ . ‘ . V‘.
E 1 I‘ A , -7- . , .I- .‘y. ‘ I‘L-qr ’14 II ,‘ A ‘:" V ‘ n
F: .- L», ll 0 :10?“ 9, ﬁgs? 1"} ",3; ‘gﬁjn . - " V' ., , - ' ,
I_ ’ '3‘ _ l‘L '7‘ k‘: “ ‘ . V ‘9‘. . § '1 ‘ '3 V I , , .'
: ‘ n,_ \ _ _d "- ‘t K -‘
‘ -\_12:‘; ‘- 3“ '3 ' \‘ " l .r ' '7‘ r I I‘ \.'j.“- ‘ V" .
y‘"-“ ' ” ' H I;- V .(~ .9“ 1" ' ' ‘ ‘ , «:1'
_ I 1 I _,I ._, J ' ix I": t L t; " , II " .9; ..- I I . . ;'
, V; ' V , _ 1, ‘ ‘1 ' 61 ‘ ' * " .si
; _ ’ ' J-.' ~ ‘37 i ' . fr ‘ -' ' ‘M .I‘z' fat .‘ 0*
L- - 7 J "5&7. k, -» - ‘. r" , ' ' " _ ‘ . - 3.1, , ,. , . ,,
5"». ’ I I ' ' On. A ._‘.’ ‘ -
t " .‘-— ' r—r ' - ‘ ' ‘ ‘ v' ‘ ' r _'.' ‘ - ‘ .
J ‘7, _,_— . ' -
' 1 ﬁg: .. ‘ . 3 f , . " ; 1:. — Ii ' V ‘
f.) I | “V " - ‘ , r > V J I A \‘ . ~_ a :‘f‘ "D a *I P. , .—'-’ . > A A .
V .w » _- J , . . ._ 0 _, ' V . *‘__ _, a ' "1V 9 ,-
‘ ‘ -'—.— , :JEJJ-‘sz’ «15.» x - , J - - ‘ ' - ‘ w ..' .' . ~-4\‘-}- ‘ - CV - ... ~84?“ s' ‘
“. . , I —-' Kk‘tLZTV. ‘7“ , , “ - b ‘ V_>~ “—.. _ ‘V A V J' , q: .. V , v.5“ ~‘~. ‘ 1'.” :L Y “hp. ‘ , .
; '7 6'.‘ ‘ - ‘39“;5“ "'- - * ' '- : . 4 er. J ' ‘ , V _
‘ 4, - ~. ‘, . ,.-.--:. #13:? ..~""”‘ .— .- . A, , -' i, - VT??? '. " ' -
‘ :T‘ " . . ‘ a -‘ .7 ‘ ' - ‘ ‘ .-, L'J‘u.‘ ,J":v"'-h".h -. ;T: ::—-‘:Tt:'_c ': ‘ ‘ H . ' 1‘ - .79‘5x'l' ’-
’ .. "-‘-. _~ A Q . n’- . ' ‘7- ' 5 .‘ 7‘ ‘ ' — "' I_ , _:::/‘ 4is£ff.r:;~t\a\;t ‘ .‘ 57‘]. ‘3' ' ‘ v‘
w. J J V , ,_.,,_, .*—~~—-/,V, _ » ‘
b 1‘ 2 “ .. V *- ' . ‘1 - , . - - T 7 -<'~"‘:‘:‘.,‘:?‘v“ — , i .
V ~, - ‘ z n ‘ .—‘ ' ' ’ ' ‘, .-T __ \E‘T' v v u
“V '.‘ " ‘ .7 .-‘ ._ . ﬂ" __ .. IV V " '1" f". '2 - — >7:>:~.'_—;'\'::""-§37:: ix, ~‘—« I
l _- - ,~ ‘4 ‘ ‘I : - ' ’ 3". . I . . JlIJ‘ :l. ' I. ‘,~""\’—r I
I V . In, .__ I v ._ . , - — ' V) 1 .’ ‘ 4 ,I.‘.. I' , ’ . u : || I
.. I :J‘" 3 I h L I9? ‘.‘ I‘ II ' ' ,I .I ‘ I :w“ I I I‘I , 7’. A I_ " ‘
g -V‘ ;5 mg. 0 . 3 . . , . " I .. 9.7:; J , ‘ I I» _' , _g
.. 3‘7. -1 x f. _- " ‘0’»?! r. , _ 2 ' - 3L", ., _ ,, -' , ,, ' . 5} ' , '6‘"?
- -— r’ v. ‘L V, . 5‘ :I' ‘ 3‘ I I _ . '. fi‘ \' ' ' j .V _JI ‘ 1
_ _____,._H \, ,--,___,_ _____ :Il‘ﬁvi' LVV, ,“ . ‘7 ,. '. ‘”‘(;< “I . ‘ , -‘ -‘. ‘ . u ‘
, c' L f 9‘ --\V F ‘ ._ -' If H xJI :5 , u L ' _' .. #5:, i ‘2)“ ‘\ f ‘
, . I I .. . . ,1 VI r 5‘
_ 5" Legend ' c; II _-o~ —, . __ .. ‘ - I a ‘I‘l I I. ‘3", . . , ‘ . ‘ {71:} 1; A4 L. V a
1 4 ' “ “F "" A ,’-./P,, 1‘ ,2 J
p”. .‘-‘ ‘ ‘ . ' -15 . ' 3‘- ). V
a ’ - , t V _ , 4L , _ . ~ ‘ > . V

. ‘ I I I I ‘ J '—v ~ -- - _‘r ‘. . - ‘ . ' ,, Gib » A ' ~.. -
~ [:1 Fishing Area (HIStOFIC) A .VJ:,.~V~ v.“ V , .. - _ ' . if 3 -. , , >
:' ‘n 5". ‘ n. 3 1"" — I ‘ ' ‘ l -- 0H 2 ‘ X _ ' ‘

; r ‘ .I ’ , . . - -. ' I ‘-' I V b I‘ v -A.‘ 1‘ V x
- 1-“. :V/ - . . 3'4 , 5.3:. a ' . ‘ ‘ 3“} ~.4 ‘ ,3 5y" " 1, '
;, Fishing Area (Current) , , . , ‘ V : _4 1‘ ,um V, , , , ‘
A * - ‘ l ' .\ J -

y . . ‘V ,. ﬂ ‘.. V 7 _‘7I k . V . 'J J I
' , —=-=—— Ekwan(exnst|ng) , V . 3 . J - VI 3 2 A. -
- 1 - , , , , J ~_v Jr _J - "~ :; ,. VJ.” ,-

n . Ir’n ' y" L:. b, ”to I- I - . ‘ I I -" I ’ I. M >4 '7 ’W‘ .*) '
_ a a o I 'j . - ,' L . *— '9‘ , I“ J . H 4":2: 4". 3‘. -_T$ . I V,.J a.‘
, Horn River Mainline J. -.. J ._ , gr", . . , , _ r- - .lf.. ,2:
; I1 . . y, y - h N A .___,,_,_ — _. '~.
J , - . , ', _a . a ‘ ,, , V >1 Vin: —. _,...__.. —V.
. PF—J ’- ‘f .’ "T J. _ V ,' : A‘.) 1. J _ .. 51f. I... I I _l- . -. , ”m . _I: :7; - , ﬂkﬁat‘1_«):gs [ ‘2’. . ..-">._“
,' ‘-' ' - 1.}.1. . £0 _ J _ ., . L _ - .7 .J Juk __.J:, .‘ -_ __ =-,_ x m 53., , J ,; . ».-#l,_‘ e «1—. 1412’ ?_.Jsﬁ J*_‘.$s_.«l.n‘.'_t b‘,-;_ .1
DRAFTDATE 10/19/2009
(:3; F is h I I1 A reas SOURCE
_‘ g Dene Tha' First Nation, NTDB, GeoBase, TCPL
FIGURE NUMBER
.» 4 - 3

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study ._
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
w; ‘ ’ ' ‘ ,' ‘ . - ‘ —‘*:"':'"W- \ ' 'A" ' J“
/\ ; :x 5. I “I, ‘ I’ 7 I . 1 ‘ T'
’7’ r \‘ ' . . 4' t." l ‘ I 1 k ' l] ‘ . v ‘ l / i
.. " t ’ .v ‘
\ ,4 . / I _ f - ‘, . x
- . 4 r, [I , Q ‘ 4
"u ‘ ‘ g‘ ‘ , " L » i» V . ~
. \ , ' \ﬁ " ’ ‘ I t -
- ‘\~\' ' . ' b s. l: ' I ‘ T“
.,A\ 4“». ' . 0.x , \ c ‘ I s ‘
‘ I ‘.‘\,~ ~ “ ‘2 l I \ t
. f \ r r ‘ ' I, t (
‘ ‘ “ Il‘ \ ‘z 1“ ‘ | ‘ ~ . / ’ . ’ é v; _ ’ ‘ . .
' ‘ \‘ \ 3 ’ ‘ u - z 1‘
x ‘ I 4’ A , ‘x_ V I I v / x.
" ‘V ‘ Q \ \ / ’ ‘ I I- f / f
\ ~- - ,4-
\ .: x \ \[-\ ‘\ . / Ii ,2,n*5 ; ‘
x : x \ I J ' ' ' o f \ ' \, ‘
~\ -'-—‘ N f‘ ‘! / r ‘ ' -
7 f 17$ \4 ‘1 f \‘ ' -' ’4 / .’ .
.‘n ‘ .t“. . ‘ ‘ _.
x X . R, I , ~\ ‘ r v.\
. , I . ~ » . - _. f
r . ‘ \ ' ,’ x
.V ‘ / ’ . k ‘ r I
I , / e / I -
I I. / A
' c': . ‘f w‘ ‘ J -
‘ ,‘ ’ \. ‘5’ + \ ‘
. .7" I ’ ' \‘ 5‘ -‘ 8 w
' ‘ ‘ T ‘
’ - r ‘ ' ' .1; \ ‘ .-‘
‘f ' ‘f f, ' f . ' Q 0‘ J,
/ > . - .2;
‘ ‘4‘ . . '. t’: .5. ' I. “ ~ ‘
NIH“ . / p ‘ ' , O _ .
Jun .1 A - v __ ‘
\\ / ' ' s' 3 \‘
. / . 7 '-/4- ‘ ~I’ . . ﬁ
. c’ c j 2 ' ‘ \ \ '5 I .
- r - ’ : .- ' ‘ I 1 L \ |
.. I 9/ ~- , - L \
,- , v w ‘ l A. Q
§ ‘
L
Plate 10: FlSh caught along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
i -
7‘95? *1 - "3“"; l‘é‘s .:
”'34:. 2 ; :rw 3: .
’ﬂ” . ’ f C;;:;’ ..........‘.‘.““‘ ' .
-' a , ’r .5.“ ,... "‘-~‘.‘.\‘s\\@ -
0 ug p.35»; 33.“. \‘v. .‘1 ' ’v
I- ' ‘ t ' . “ ‘ *' ‘0 ‘ ,-, -
' ‘ W Avid“? $évré§§im 4‘3.» \ E
, - W ”L .&~ _"nrw9.j‘ 335 \‘X‘ A X , \
2M" , - '00., #:‘s m ‘ . f‘\. o_. _ )
w y ‘ﬁo 'éé‘.‘ §‘ ‘5‘ - ’- ‘
v * . -‘ - 1' x
. M "V " r‘\ .g: ‘ss* \ \‘ A ' \ a v .
.~ .490 .‘ ” L 23““. 13°93 “w“ \ - '.4 :I
.t 1 W, R F ’v ‘}*\ K . ‘\ \‘g‘ N \r i .
I'.-¢;I*. , «x .‘ﬁmw V wxﬁ‘a- x - .p " - .
”ﬂ 4‘; .- .Fy'.zip. \‘ﬁv \\\¢\‘o\.$$‘.."~‘.‘ ‘ W , I
7 I” j/ $1” #312: ?FR " V" “~“:~“:‘3$‘~"~£‘.'~‘.s‘r‘ .I’r‘.
, v.75/ . ﬂ 3... “L ,.‘,f_ £11."? A?) -~ ‘o‘~‘~“.\‘\"‘m h.‘ " “J?.r'“) . - I ' '
. :9: 1-3;}; . 33:4. r J 1:7,?11'14, “ﬂ \f‘w‘cf‘gzﬁzguzg 4.3;. ‘ :3 . J
"r’ j/y/ 55:; .' H‘r’.’ Jr. ‘ " . 'a‘§‘§"."o‘. - 4" - ’ '
:5 4.“ , .. .» r ’, r p _r-\. 6‘ " \ I “.9 U. C. . ‘-
. rryr’” — , 7 . - “$1,? "Ha; . C ‘n‘.:§:.:o.:o.. . ,
,EL', , . _ 79:1-” :I "?t-rt-t'r:;1:‘ ‘ '9. \m‘bﬁﬁp?
4.,- f . '1.’~;, 1‘ JF:V;- Vc'f‘h‘lrtrr’ﬁ‘h “,6“ - ‘ :V\~ “\‘O.:. _ . V”.
’ r ' . «“W’ "'-"v MK O'o-‘u‘r'» \
67/ ’ . 3‘ -’ LN,- * ff: Striv'vﬁ‘r'r’ 't‘ "’5': :2: ‘x i ;
-1. w . . m r . - ,, - - xx“? '
~ ”.1" ,;-':;::’k1~. 1' . ? \rigtr '- a .16.‘2::'.>-\;~;- “ - L
ﬂ ‘ 9.4M. .9 '3. 3‘ rt \rv' . ‘ . “ 0'6“...“ - '
0 '_>"r-"‘“n “C 1 '1‘ R“ F v1?” '1"... . .x‘ 'Id‘h'c’ ,
914'... - ‘. ‘I': "nz'ﬂ‘A ,‘ \1 m :- ; “ f. b ‘ -- 'x \ 0‘..':.:0.
,y':' \_L 1‘1““ m g ? ' _ -. ‘ . ' “ﬁg. ‘ x _
.0, 9' , x a 1.7 .. \ g .0... .‘
?:O" m. .r" 5 -. ' o\‘. ' ‘ ' ; 2:55. ’ -- ‘
Sw £3: “' ' .v. ' 7‘9}: ‘3 ’ ML} ;
5? ‘3 T. I’ ' m“ ~.‘ ~‘ “I-I°.‘.'o' - :5" L
’ ‘5‘“ ~- .4 181:9. 12.3:- ‘f ‘. “‘3‘ .335" .
. .-._‘ _“ - 'I‘L“:."- . 9. “\::. I'ﬁ 1? . _.0. Q _ - -1
I Q - P5. \ K5: ""5' r4, ‘ko .7 X f- \ ) - r... ;
L _ L . _ - , . o ,_ I r _ ‘
9 5‘ {'9 ~39 -,;:‘~;.;-. , :3222'4'r'r' , ' "31-24- .§ ? ;
i‘y.‘ .‘Cﬁtxiﬁ‘ ﬁrr'ﬂy. '1" ‘ ' , ' v: . ’ «‘0 f; 'A 1
m: k.}t;<r$~ _ rt ' r .. . ,. _ ,3 r , ‘—
w; wct» ’k u :5»- »; mm: .
‘ . I ' " ' x k‘ _ ‘ .- ‘F .. lo.
fi-l-‘Is‘z. $3} gxw‘r‘au 6 : - I
P.?‘o‘ﬂa ‘Ct:.{.-\‘~;~;~‘:~i~" . ‘_ ' . ~79 ,
9......“‘{:_ -\._,. ‘I . \ a -‘ I': .
?ow'o‘es- =4- ‘ sat: ~ 3: ‘.~
."o.°.'-c‘c. :; _ ~Z~.-—:=_:: , » a , , I
P:q....‘.“‘~ ’ ‘q y as v . > 1' . .—
P’D.%‘.§:::" 4...; qrs. :- O..:..... ~ ' .l " 'I ’r o
9.3.. 3.~'~'-.a‘-‘.~:-:.-2I 51.11:...- . .. I7 ' "
Plate 11: FlSh caught along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.

'Iii DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
' Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
.._ . ’ , ,, , ’ ’ V _ ”0"” Rwermain‘inepipe‘ine
‘ 4.5 Gathering Areas

Aboriginal knowledge related to gathering areas encompasses plants used for food and
medicinal purposes, but also vegetation that supports the animals which DTFN hunt and
trap. Gathering areas identified in northeast BC can be seen in Figure 4-4.

f Berries

Numerous types of berries are found within DTFN traditional territory. Study
'; participants report the occurrence and use of chokecherries, blueberries,
' ' raspberries, cranberries, high bush cranberries, huckleberries, ‘muskeg berries’,
f saskatOons, strawberries, and moose berries. Robert Metchooyeah said that
I ~; "you pick berries ifyou are hungm anywhere you are. ”

f' In northeastern BC, participants reported berry gathering areas at:

' 0 Along the winter access road to Fort Nelson (Louis Foumier)

"‘7 0 South and east of the hills near Tooga Lake (A. Lefou)

Z 0 At the conﬂuence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River (3.8,
Talley/A. Talley) .

: 0 Along Kotcho River (3.8. Talley/A, Talley)

Berry gathering areas that intersected with the Project footprint were reported
at:

' 0 Along the winter access road to Fort Nelson (Louis Foumier)

V. J. o Trap Iine #756T001 (3.3. Talley)

0 Along the Little Hay River (18. Talley/A. Talley)

. During the Rare Plant Survey and the TLU Fietd Visit for the Project, participants
f r identified numerous types of berries along the Project ROW including: high and
. . low bush cranberries, northern gooseberry, Saskatoon berry, wild raspberry,
[ buffalo berry, black gooseberry, chokecherry, common blueberry and wild black
. " current (C. Chissakay, R. Metchooyeah, E. Chonkolay, 3.8. Talley/A. Talley).
V' 1 Medicinal Plants
' In addition to the various plants used for subsistence, DTFN participants also
i reported the use of a number of plants for medicinal purposes. These medicinal
.- V' - plants include rat root, spruce, black spruce, willow, balsam, birch bark, diamond
willow fungus, juniper, mint, pitcher plant, and caribou wheat.

DENE THA’FiRST NATEON

Aboﬁgfna! Knowiedge and Land Use Study .
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeline

Interview participants described a number of uses for these plants including
treatment for congestion, cancer symptoms, stomach aches, headaches, sores,
and diabetes. Several participants noted that medicines grow better in wet areas ‘
or lakes rather than dry ground, with particular emphasis on rat root (Lucy
Foumier). William Yatchotay explained that different medicines grow in different

types of environments. For example some grow on high ground and some grow 1‘ ’
in the muskeg.
Participants reported a number of specific areas where they gather medicines in
northeast BC, including: '

0 South and east of the hills near Tooga Lake (A. Lefou)

o All over BC up to Fort Vermillion (A. Beautieu) .

0 At the confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Ketcho River (3.8. '

Talley/A. Talley ‘ '

o Atong Kotcho River (3.8. Talley/A. Talley) ,
Participants also described medicinal plant gathering areas which overlapped or "
intersected the Project footprint. This includes: ..

o Trail from Trap Line #756T001 to Fort Nelson (A. Talley)

0 Along the existing Ekwan line (R. Metchooyeah) 7

o Trap line #756T001 (3.8. Talley, A, Talley) .

0 Along the Little Hay River (v. Talley/A. Tailey, 3.3. Tauey/A. Talley)

0 Along Metlahdoa Creek (18.. Talley/A. Talley) "
During the Rare Plant Survey for the Project from March 13 -- 18, 2009,
participants identified numerous types of medicinal plants along the Project ROW
including fungi, common juniper, ground juniper, wild mint, tamarack, birch and
rat root (C. Chissakay/R. Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay). On a second survey of .,
Rare Plants from July 6 -~ 20, 2009 participants identified additional medicinai
plants including wild sasperella, heart leaved amica and peat moss (C.
Chissakay). '
During the TLU Field Visit, DTFN participants identified diamond willow fungus,
Iabrador tea and mint in areas intersecting the pipeline ROW (V. Talley/A. Talley,
J.B, Talley/A. Talley). _

I DENE THA’FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TrensCanada Horn River Mainitne Pipetine
a Trapping Areas '
t a Fishing Areas
‘ e Gathering Areas
, “ a Travel Routes
: a Sacred Sites
‘ 6 Cabins, Settlements and Camps , _ _
‘ 4.3 Hunting Areas
. DTFN participants reported hunting numerous wildlife species throughout DTFN territory
including northeast BC (see Figure 4-1). One participant noted that he had hunted
every animal except for three, including caribou, grizzly bear and woiverine (T.
Didzena). To emphasize the point when asked which animals he hunted, Abraham
. Talley stated that "1‘ hunt eve/yt/mg.” Participants reported that virtually any animal
that can be eaten is harvested
Participants noted that moose are particularly important to DTFN culture, and when a
moose is killed it is shared amongst the community (Lucy Foumier). Eric Kolay reports
that the best time to hunt moose is in August. Lucy and Louis Foumier also noted that
there are generally less moose now than in the past. In addition to moose, participants
reported hunting caribou, bison, bear and birds.
Current and historic hunting areas in northeastern BC reported by study participants
include: ~
0 Along Hay River (P. Ahnassay)
0 Around Kotcho Lake (8. Martel)
0 Near the BC/Alberta border, south of Hay River (C. Talley)
0 Beaver Creek (S. Lefou)
o On and around DTFN held traplines, including #756T001, #755T015,
#756T015, #756T016, #7S6T017, #756T014 (C. Talley, 3.8. Talley, W.
Yatchotay, A. Ahnassay, S. Tsonchoke)
' o Hills hear Tooga Lake (A. Lefou)
' o Shekilie River (3. Ahnassay Sh, S. Tsonchoke)
. 0 Along the Kotcho River (R. Sutha)
0 At the confluence of the Hay River, Kotcho River and Shekilie River (18.
. Talley/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, S. Lefou/T. Didzena, V. Talley/A,
3 . 34

1 ' ”.m—W ‘*‘"" ; 1-1,. » 1. 1 1. r‘x. » 7|; .v- 1. .1 ~ - - -~ - ~—‘ :vgvi 1; :- _ ~ t 1: ;;... - r W ._- --?:-' ‘ ' '
1 "6:" 1 3'7: 1- a .. v‘ .1 x11 .’ ~_ 1.1 ”15 . .1 ““14
11-. 1 1.»- 1 11a 1, ”125%"..111 .11 1 1- 1 .’ - w 1 4‘“? ~11 4 ‘1“: r-‘a — "
. V ' 'a' < 1‘ ‘1 I ‘-' N ' ' V .. 5 - ' "1;" 53 3 ‘ " "ﬂ ‘ 1“ h' f .' t. A' ‘ L r.» ’ ' [M1 . ' :5
5 ~ -. b‘w .y 1211.: ,- ‘ .- .“r, s 5% '1 v1". 1 152'; "1 1 *1 1.1 11’ .1 1": “~ ‘ -* 1* :~ * 1' . {-1, ‘ 1’ Area of Interest 11
‘ .1 " 1 1 1‘ ’v’_;"'f‘1 {inf 1‘ ’ ‘6) f 111‘ l.‘ 1|‘V\ n..'.{‘s ‘11" |$ 5) V. ,V- ‘ 7‘9 3 '.1 1“ :y‘t‘ '} f 1).. ‘ 1‘ 1“ 1 .Jf ’ ‘1 J. ‘ L ._
n I 11% 1 7 1 a (I 1 1‘ rig v! ‘A. ,A n ‘_ ~ 1 n ‘, ; ‘ ‘_' ‘ . . ”I ’ .' ‘ ’4‘ ' ’ ‘ 4". ‘ l i." ’3 I ." " Ir ‘ ,".’ 7 I Q
~; .1 1 \r» J 7: 1 » 1.” .1, 1. 5 ~ 11.9 M. .1 1 1. ‘11 ,1 ,1 a u 1, .1 .11 . 1
,x ‘1 ' ‘ " 1 r 1~" ‘ »- f'». 3"“: ‘ .< 9 4 .~ ‘ - ‘ 4 't ' ‘r 3‘ 'l ‘ 1" v t 1 2 . r1
KL ‘ ' " '~’ J r’. ; , 1" 1-; 39.1": On - 2* m 1.1.1.. ﬁr“ S‘ ' . '. “4' J'. 5) '3 .‘ ' J11
#213 ~ ; —1 x» .. 1:-94 — 1110.1». n. 1- -« ,1 ,1:
1 - ,4», . - - v 1; .~ W 1». ~ .3. .‘ .-_. 1 .‘e 1... 1‘ l. - 1 1‘ 4 - I 4.9 m , . 1 1
1 EN ‘ ‘ , a ‘ 1." ‘ L“, :2 O. f‘ ‘2 ix. 7‘. ‘a \_ .‘f I . 3.. ( J‘S" ‘. ‘l . J I.”
" ' 1 .. r ' . 1- é'Y‘ : --— , 1. 1 ,\ _ . . . '1 1' ' ' : ; - ~
1 . , . -1 *. . ~ .- .-1~..~-.». 1.?“ . ; m > 13“?" 141112112911...1:.1‘211111‘11‘ z .; 1-3 .
4-: 7 E” r 1’ ._ ". ’1 'P' .‘1 ' ' “ f I 14.- V‘ " “ ( "“A" ’ 1 «' 4)} h (1' W “‘59 I ’ Y
‘ I ' > "(’1 1 t I k! ’ -. 1-5-:V l’. ?‘1 a 5 1'! , ~' v '. I ,.' i“: 1“ "r "5 $1“) \“-:‘1_.,.'~;
‘ - - " " '4 " 1%: ' cf?“ ’ ‘ ' ‘“‘ .4311“ "13“.4'1""1;.,'1'7,"’1J J'Ifqiof\“ﬁ’gyf'f’
' .1 ’ '9'" ' 1 ' € .- [v ‘ 1‘"... 1' vx- T 1. ‘o - ‘ - - ' " ' ‘0 5.4“'& 6.0 4‘ -'"“'
1 ., _ . -13“ J . t «1' a) < .; 1 1y - .1 '1 “ x 3 ‘ (“1‘ ‘..'§ 319 1.! 6
1 “ , 1.1m 1r 1., - ‘ ' ‘ ; 4‘ ' ’“-.. ~19 ¢ ~;w:x- 9". 2 ,
‘ '1 1'5 2‘” -. .s“ *w’ﬂ'. f 3'; "‘ "‘5“ 11-- -t v‘ “11' ' " ‘ -. “Kr . ‘ ,1 W§€¢<1-o,1~i+“v ,1 3‘11? ." . ,
.,».- 2’61 ?»1: cu; 2.1‘. r.‘ y ,1. . J ‘3- r; (35%." 1 ‘ : ' :11: «-.1<."11\ ~~
‘ 1 ‘ _ J, “ V . ‘. ‘ 1 1 . . 1 ‘gi , r» ; 0' { '.- 1 ' ..
‘ ‘ ”3:. AW "‘-,“ “ “ff 1/;‘2‘ ‘ ' - J. «1"; ‘ - . '1: .41»: .A ‘ . ' .‘ J» ”i 1"- ' "n" ~‘~‘~ ‘ x
. 3"...“ 232?: '51. — '11 ‘1") .4 ’3’ p .‘ .:'; ‘f. .' ’. \‘7' ' ' 't -23'.‘\.1. Q .? ?_x “4‘55: '7 é 1‘ ,1 ‘
_ , 77. :1. '1. ‘_ -4|“ 1' J, I '3 k. u“: l u, 1‘ 1’ l 11" I 1 'A I‘ - 1 '| .11 ‘ I .r k, . w .‘ \“‘_“'.. .
- ,' .. J ' _ \ ,4»? ﬁx. '1 '1‘.‘ ' 1. ’0’ v ’ : -..\ \ .' 742"“- . ‘r ' " ﬁx. 4"" “l‘
1,: " .1; “S f»? “?:?1; 1- «5:? : ‘ . ’ ' - ir ~ .I' .r‘ ' 1'1. ‘1 '-   ’1“? r 1 g 3- " - - 5
m 5—; ' 7 1:. ’ J Nat ir\:\ . - . .1: .V ‘ . . ‘0 ’1 ., ‘t- ‘ ,1 ' ‘1‘."". 5. . I I 1‘ ‘
.v 3.593224 - ~12» ‘ .- a ‘ a . , 31.1.3.2; .: 94:11:? : -- 7'
" "1-. '- ,_ 3: ‘ - .. 1. 1 1 i . 1. or-w _r . ’1 " ‘
' '- 4- '. 1 ‘S' h ‘3‘ '1 d" \ ._‘ I. ' ‘ n! . ‘s‘ . 1": ‘ r‘ v -‘§’. \‘ ,-’ 7ll :4 #-
L 1'" ' "' '-‘ H ‘ u '-' ' ‘ -" ‘ 3* v- ‘ ' "l- ‘ ’ t'? ""t- " ‘ -. ‘ » "K; .
?’3. 1 :1 ;' .* .' ‘ l , 4' ‘ 7 7 1 _ '._ ‘3 (¢va u “‘ 1 , ' . 5" .5 " -." ‘
“1:? ‘ ‘ 1-,” __ _. _ 1 ¢‘a‘z \ J. ﬂ; 8. 'h“ . ‘iy . 12’,‘ ~.. ' ‘ — '4 :'- A ‘ ’ ' ' "/V
1 ' :3. .-‘ :: - :1' _ ' . A . . " - :‘v -" a V132: . 1v.-,* ‘ " '
\ 1 :4 -’ r” ;:f;:.‘¢“ 1 1 :2; » ”ﬂ“ . __. '11 . ‘ " 7'3}: ‘ " 1-7 . JT‘TR‘ ’ ' '. 7f
3 ‘ £5: ‘vi‘w "“ "i - , . ;' ' * 1:“ 1F" "'
I ' J 1‘ - I k\.a'-;{~Z“1 ‘ ' ' 7‘ .‘.~’ :‘I. ‘J ‘ ‘ ' .z‘ .._ _ ‘(. f; " u .
.. ’ a: . k ‘1. ‘ " “ .g~»;H _ .. .f-n‘. ‘ “I J -1 ”F'g‘q ‘ ‘3'- :*_
1 . z ;- ' :34» “s. L - ~ 1‘ ~» ;» «t- 5: ' _
1‘ v ._..-':'-"-V-‘.‘ 3: ‘ -I. "arr"; ur; ‘ ._ :f‘ ~.'.' A . 1 _ - :‘ a .. 't.‘ - _'-»
x -' ~11; v - =y~~ ., , ~‘ 1 : 1.“- - = 1*“ v1- ~
1- 1»...~ _ .. ._ ,3, -, . 1 1 1,... .
. .3‘9 . K ‘ *.. —: . ' .-- ‘ "".. _ . II'- 1'
f ' ‘ ‘1‘. ‘ |_ k-1 ’\ \' ‘ »' 1 ,4- '1 1‘ ‘1 5. '_~' C." 'v. . V . . 1’. ‘_ ‘9‘ ~
ﬂ:1_:‘--‘- £§Jg§§;_ i 1 ~/ ‘ -. v‘,_ ,7. ‘ -3 "-'."¢ - f»). . ' t l. - a I .v '5’ " 'L V -1 l
’9‘. *' H: . 5*“;1 - ‘ - ~ 1" ' ,‘d If ‘ ,._‘ \ .4' 1 . ft 4‘ A —.
v _‘ ,4“ {?‘k g 1.1 J - - . u i . 1 ~ . ~ 5 1 1
L '7 " ‘ J&Lu ‘— V." ' .‘_‘ " N. ‘ - — ’ ‘
1 1' s ‘ - - ',‘.‘- ‘ ' “:1 r. 1’ . “~‘~ ‘ - a 1 4:1. -_- ._. _
3va "‘ﬂ I “\ 4am] 1 _ \ \ﬁ1 ' -. . .""0 h. ' \ﬁ, ‘3 6:; 1
‘1‘ ‘1‘ 1 1— —‘ x , . 1 s
1 1 1 1 . ,- o O? 1 1; 11 ..
~ -. -»2:* . a 1'. O L - 1‘ »----..- .~.« ~. r:- » 1 _,,
Ar _ “ - f -»» _; '6. *1“. ~W r" .5»; ., "w
. r.»— =_‘._»": _ :‘. x .‘ooé‘o. . - *1 . : 2.1-"
... . “ : v." 1-“ " 1—1-1‘ _ . :-“" '1? 4/. ‘5‘ ' t....¢~‘.'$ "‘. ‘..."'~ , . v"<\' '
1 .‘!,.-~'r‘tl o;f:.-‘,"" r‘.-—- - ‘ ‘ l "‘ ‘. ..';‘“9. . r',’
5‘ V > ‘-"¢1‘_:7 ' ‘1‘ - J ‘ ., .- _ ~ 1 . l . l ‘
x s .._.- _, ' 4 . ‘ 11' ' ,
1 »___; , “ 7 u; . w _ f- . "1..._:_+---:~:_ 
*‘ 1/"..- 33:: ' 5".“ !_ . J ~'r\.,"‘.{1!' £~ :‘5'3,’ T “
. 1" .L_ . ’I,&J 1 1‘ r .l' __ '.‘ .1 ‘1 l ‘u 1. ’ . .‘i ; 1 .
‘ ~ .. .... ' ' r‘ ‘ x '9 .
‘ 1 l ( ‘;'- Jr." _r f . ’J. 1-. ,f 2“. ., ‘4' 9‘.’ I 1. .
1 ‘ ~ . ‘ ‘ { ’- 1 1’ 1 . ‘._. , I
1 7“ . . 'lolf“ :4 > ‘V \‘3.f' K -i j' A ".34“? '9 3‘ ‘ 1 . I :2
1 1 ‘¥ - , 1' I _ 1' — 7 1“ -q‘ '. ' ‘ - .
‘ I k 1 “ . n '77 ‘ _ 9- t1" ‘ ‘g . ! 1 I I
- .‘ ‘11 “ :1 ! ._'-_» _ ‘1 #_‘—_ :1 ,4 “fgv 4' .. ‘
1 5 ' E ‘ J, " ; . 1 “.3 ' ‘
‘c=~. 71». - ._ v -' .- r 1 '1 1
l‘ "‘ x . . ' ' .- " " -‘ _»
~ . IL- '0‘ 1-\“ . r ‘ . -__‘ 1’ ‘-.>“‘ "71 ( ‘1' 1 x 1 r_ " ‘ -
;-- w- 1 L ; - . - .
é Ku‘a, 5“" - ij‘ 1. ‘ I f“ “*4
74" ' ‘ “:1 ‘ . 1 1 ,
1. -—.‘,..»—,_' . ‘ _ “' H v. 151‘...
.1. ._ r 1 a1-
‘ ' "‘ -1-“ -—— _..1 " ' ,' ‘ .1.
1 M. ' ' ’ ' ‘ ‘ - ﬂ '- .
1 ‘ J . "1— - - « " 1' - ' ~ > 4
r , 1‘, ’1 _ . .
1 ‘ 5» - ' 1 ' ' ‘~ “:7 '::::T>‘—:1:f_ ' - . I " '~ .
I _ - . . 1 f. . _ H r _' ‘ 1 ". - r __ r ‘ ‘ L‘W.:"—_1_;._:i:1‘.q_~ 7' . ‘ ‘ -v - .
,1 “(1 . ‘1 . 1" .— ; 1 1,. . ." ‘wn »;.:;\1117:;:::;~\/1‘ » , .
in “1; ' ' \‘ > . cl ‘ \1 w‘- ;}r;r>r“‘:‘~. \»- . 1
‘ ‘ c ‘_ '_ nt" - \\:T:;_._.‘_\1 I
z ' ‘ ' ‘ «‘1 _ ‘ ’ . \::;:._—j:::~\\k‘ ‘ , .f
>7- ', ‘ t - ‘ _' - ‘ ‘ -\:;‘_{—:_, ..
l , ’ 17- I L V ‘7‘ ' "., “A ' I . 1 . I '- V . | ‘
a.‘ q. - ‘ ' ‘5. l. ‘3, I q. , . I‘ In 1 ‘
513;. F I: ‘1 ' ' 1 ‘ . . -'1
‘ r-T.‘ '\ -!—'~1» 7 1 ‘ J‘ - 1 1 ‘ » ‘
P1 . ' 1
4' - - , . I (I |
1 . Legend x---_; .,:.,- _ ;11 . '11 1
' : 7 _ > L.~'_ l 1' D _- A __ _ _ ; ,- ; 3‘ 1 V .
;_ W Berry Gathering Area (HlStOflC) . v; f _; 1, 1;
. - I -- ‘1 ( a . _1
1': “ 9 1 . 7 _.‘ ' ff ‘
.- ; , Berry Gathering Area (Current) _.. ; _ 1 ' «
I". . 1/ - .-- ‘ . . ‘ 7‘ 1'7 ‘CB.
. 1-1 - PlantGathenng Area (Current) j - ~~ . 1 1, 3 . :1
’11: m Medlcmal Plant Gathenng Area (Current) ‘ ‘ , 1' ‘ -- . ; -‘~
1!‘ ‘ V ‘17 I H ’ ~” ‘ k "" '1; . 4- -‘ 'ﬁ—k “' ‘
. - _ . - , , , 1, >
I ‘ ' ' " ' 1’ ‘ ' . "i" 3.". ' "-3’.’ " ’ ‘J. 1
==— Ekwan (exustlng) « . . r - 1 - . , -‘ e ,1; 1 1 _
\ . 1_ . .
- w - 1- » ’1‘ 'J' 7 x 'f‘ 1 _."\' 2.21}: ' ' IV ‘ >
— Horn River Mainline ‘ -; ' " ‘ .: ' _‘ -' 1
; 1 , " *— 1 " :1 ; ‘ ' ‘ - — —'
1'1 . . -_ 5. ' ‘,.~_1- "-1..1'»
r _ ‘— . x 1 . ~ 7 1 _
1”." '* ,1 ’ 7 ./ .1; ‘ .1 __. .I‘. f -‘r- 31;." "7 - - _. 1.3:. .x. _ . , ’ 3.. j ‘1» . '- 1 1. ~ ~ ‘r 2.95:1 '~ ~. -‘ n...
i; P Iant Gatherin Areas SOURCE
. g Dene Tha' First Nation. NTDB, GeoBase, TCPL
FIGURE NUMBER
J

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn RiverMainIine Pipeline _
4.6 Travel Routes
In the past, Dene Tha’ people were constantly on the move, searching for food.
However, this nomadic lifestyle was not random. The seasonal migration of people
followed very speciﬁc patterns throughout their territory (DTFN, 1997). Sylvester 3; .
Seniantha remembers travelling from Hay—Zama t0 Ketcho Lake via ‘YndIEn traz?s”with
his father and grandfather. His grandfather would break trail along the way and they
would sleep on the ground on beds of spruce boughs with duck feather blankets. He 1 ‘
explained that "we don’t lea ye any traces on the ground ”'
Several of these historical seasonal travel routes took DTFN people throughout
northeastern BC. These included:
o Hay-Zama Lakes area to Fort Nelson (8. Martel, Lucy Fournier, S. Seniantha, R. "
Metchooyeah, D. Martel)
o Hay-Zama Lake area Via the Hay River to the Fort Nelson River. DTFN wouid ..
stop to visit relatives in two historic settlements located along the Fort Nelson
River at Kahntah and Fontas. From there they would travel to Fort Nelson (T.
Didzena) 2- '
o Hay-Zama Lakes area to Kwokullie Lake (E. Kolay) 7
0 Sierra High Grade road from Fort Nelson (S. Tsonchoke) _j
0 Historic Trails leading into the area of the conﬂuence of Hay River, Shekilie River
and Kotcho River (3.8. Taliey/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, S. Lefou/T. "
Didzena, J. Danais/C. Talley) .
0 Historic trails to and from Kotcho Lake (3.8. Talley/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R.
Tsonchoke, A. Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, H. Denechoen/T. Talley) 7
I o Kotcho River (3.8. Talley/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, R. Sutha/R. ' "
Yatchotay, S. Lefou/T. Didzena) ‘
o Shekilie River (5. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay, S. Lefou/T.
Didzena)
0 Travel route northwest of Ketcho Lake towards Fort Liard around to Fort Neison, g! I
Kantah, Fontas and Hay Zama Lake (A. Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke) ' 7
0 Historic Trail from Chateh to the Little Hay River pipeline crossing (S. Lefou/T. .5 -.
Didzena) ‘ ~
0 Travel route from Chateh to the southwest of Ekwan Lake back to Long Lake ,_
(Rainbow Lake) to Basset Lake to the Chateh/Hay Zama Lake area (H.
Denechoan/T. Talley) " 3
53 .

E GENE THA’ FiRST NATEON
. Aboriginal Knowiedgs and Land Use ﬁudy
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
The trip from Hay~Zama Lake to Fort Nelson was described as taking six days by wagon
i trail (8. Martel). Currentiy, study partictpants describe using winter access roads to visit
relatives and friends in Fort Nelson. These routes are currently used for hunting,
:T" trapping and gathering purposes. These current routes also overlap with the Project
‘ : ‘ . footprint.

Travel routes that intersected or overlapped the Project include:

. .. 0 Winter road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (P. Martel, A. Ahnassay, Louis
5. Founier, A. Talley, Lucy Foumier)

~ 0 Trail to trapiine #756T001 (c. Talley, A. Talley)

f; '; o Trail along Kotcho River that follows the river to Kotcho Lake (A. Beautieu, S.
Lefou and A. Lefou)

o Hay Zama area to Fort Nelson (D. Martel)
0 Historic trail from Kotcho to Fort Nelson (T. Didzena, R. Metchooyeah)
' 0 Travel route along the Hay River to the Shekilie River to Ekwan Lake (J.

Ahnassay Sr.) .

5 0 Travel route from Rainbow Lake to Kahntah via the Shekiiie River (38. Taliey)
I 0 Historic trail at the Little Hay River pipeline crossing (J8. Taliey/A. Talley, A.
'i""'~ Talley/V. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, A. Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, J.
Danais/C.Talley

0 Little Hay River (V. Talley/A. Talley)

o Trails on each side of the Little Hay River (3.8. Wasp Colin/D. Wasp Colin)

é ' 0 Hey River as a water travel route between BC and the Zama Lake area (V.
Talley/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke. R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay, S.
. Lefou/T. Didzena, H. Denechoan/T. Talley)

0 Historic trail at the Hay River pipeline crossing (1.8. Talley/A. Talley, R.
‘ Sutha/R. Yatchotay, A. Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, J. DanaisXC. Taliey, H.

" ' Denechoan/T. Talley

o Townsoitoi Creek (3.8. Talley/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke)
: . 0 Historic trails at the Townsoitoi Creek pipeline crossfng (S. Tsonchoke/R.
' " ' Tsonchoke, J. Danais/C. Talley)

0 Historic trails at the Kyklo Creek pipeline crossing (1.8. Talley/A. Talley, R.
- i' Sutha/R. Yatchotay, S. Lefou/T. Didzena)
0 Historic trail at the Sahtaneh Creek pipeline crossing (R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay)
54

""‘— “ ‘ ' ’ ' “—"r ‘— ‘ .“ f.*"'-'*'rf -. :_ "L: 9": g . 1‘ j’ _ ‘ 1 " ’9'. ‘.r:..7. '.-£:T..*9: zf’if‘.“ 'W.‘ m;- 9
r I£‘_ _ V 9 x If- i {T ?&3‘?‘ V W . 9?. , 'I u 7 I I’ll I '3‘ Y ‘Ly; ‘ g}; V»: 'I j - a EI-ﬁ ?.A . i '>
5" “I 5.. ‘7' t l. .5 $\‘- ﬂ } ‘V‘ {t “ ' ‘ ‘ * 9‘ “y ‘9 ' z ?ft-f % V Q‘: . 3 ii ﬂ
m ?'4% g ‘. 3",»... i" t ‘7 99.9.9999. ,9 ' ' 3' . 3 {£91}. 9' ‘9 9' -9 Daze} . #9:? 3:91 Area of Interest i 9 _

.1 9 I In , .In..., , , , ,‘It :I. ‘ .99 .\ ,. _ ' 99 -. ‘ ‘ 9 '5‘ ‘ , . '1 i9".’9
.lg. 9. ~ 31,29, 99* ‘ '9‘7‘913 )‘9 Mr‘ .r I 9753 .zL-gmrw .9? .1 _ I
‘ ' 99" ‘19" :9" t. ’0‘." 99 .1 .w- [r -" u \ .4 93.9; 5 .9 g 9

. 221%?! ; ‘ 9 /‘ ('- ‘ 9' {Giff ll -' aft‘é- ‘ 25‘. . ‘ ' ‘ '9 ‘1 11, I 1 '1‘ i "“

.‘ I “91‘.“1' l ’I a (fr 9‘ ‘ 9'.- _I 5",???- "\:\ OI .3 , y l ‘1 9. l, ' ['1 J J / ‘ ‘ ‘
»-\ ‘ V k. II V , r .I ,1“ ‘ 9;, .-' , , I l I I I v ' ,9."I .1 ‘

5-39" 9 ”9,339, 9&3} , - .9 l .1 9 . K ,..-., i ! J .
r ‘ 9. . n: ‘— 3;], ‘9" :1. _ "k’j -; 9‘. ' ’ ——~_,. r’ I ‘ .9 |Q- ‘1. I . b J r . II. x | . I I
.9 93* IT"; , _ f“ :3 j.” ‘ ‘v‘ﬁaﬁs‘ ,3)”: 1 . l“ "#3 1’} ‘. l '1 I' , f t z. ‘ ‘
. ’7 9"» 5" ' ' r «:93 Q ,9 “"9194“? 4: - AMW “4' ’59? 9934??“5: '9 ' 79“" ' .
f ‘ , - 9 ’93?“ - ~ ‘ "" 9.. '9 r. 99;, 59033919 ‘ i ‘ 945? 299" - 1 E . .
' I," 2 .1! s W . ,9 , V.“ w )_- 97 Lk‘ﬂhe‘b-‘Y {'93}. 9x9 ~_. 5, no}; . 9
. . , 49 / ' , _. II "ﬂ“ﬁj ' ,‘ I 9‘ . A .' $\- ‘ '39“ ﬁhk‘. '1 .‘ “31‘ I? . ‘8‘ ?.?‘f:_ ‘ ’rf ‘ ‘
-- 9 «9 5.6: ,- ~9. --. A f. . 9: . 1“. , .
. 1‘ 3’53” ‘ ' 1!} 3 C In. ‘ 9 ‘9 $ a t I. 2 3;” 1"" 1‘" 1‘ ‘ “ 1‘51 7‘ X7 ' 9 L A 1
" -9 frr-Lﬂ ' I 917‘}! 9 ‘ ._ 9:»- . 15-13;? 3.3.159 T7 - , , 9 ,.9 .0; -.—= - x g
= ‘4‘ ",9 9393+ 0 9'-';~.‘-.’?‘1 ) 9 a 92', '.’T’/‘.'-‘ .‘0 :“1'533? "- 19$ ‘ " L '
9" ’Lu ' ”"r.-—.-.‘—- " '1 5‘ j ' ‘Y b 9 ' 9.. “ 'I ‘ ‘ \(é ‘ 1 "'7': 1".“ ‘\ ?x , _ . --
J. r r -— 9 .é'rx‘r ‘9 9} ' 9‘ 94 {ii . 3.9? - . 9-" ‘ 9"}. 9:11" .. . 1F“; ' 9 - _ .13: . .
' t. ‘- . ‘ , ‘ “I I. “‘7 ~v’» _, .4 . ‘ HI I ‘ ~‘ m:— _ _. _ ‘1 I .9; 1 -..v 5—“ ‘ I . l. . II
"Ot:£;.wz%gﬁt.5- ,3 93‘ 1.. 9-1-1} - I 4011 , :I::J_-_> "IET‘ '57:? ﬂ?“ ' aft II I ,l , - - I II I‘? - . VI 1 I
1.. .2- ”; ""7 "‘7' ”“9: 1r '79 9”.”99“ .897 Tn” --_-.9’<s;g:_.:- ‘9 ‘ .r 39:: , .-:; 9 , 9‘ ~ 3; . 9
— - 9 49;; /§‘ 9 3-“ ’1 ~ '3’ :9 - ~ .- 4 ?" - ., s~9~~ma . 9;, - ' -
n ‘ , J. .::..v ‘ .7 V". xwr . wk 1‘). , , 1‘: 96—3 ' r] ?r , \r‘L‘. J?! > I ‘_, , -', . , .
1 9'; 3337/ -. ’9 e" +91.“ W ‘ , W3“ ”-"9‘9' 9 ‘1 '- — ”9'3 - .-
- "' ‘t". f .7 - . 1;, — v I ~. '. . ‘ " '- r9" . ‘3 ‘ ' ‘ ';--
. ‘1 ‘ .I9‘:I=i:_?ﬁ‘:?"f‘ '15'2‘”? 1—9 “96;" f, 9.. ,_ $5.4": -.! '1 . GE 9w:.{=i~/q‘\.~‘ J ‘ " - r , .9}. .;-‘ ' '
" . ' M‘“~a§ .~..- 94 ,7 1:71:59? r31 ." 9 99 ’ "9.93.2.9295—‘wsé—1 I , ' ' . , A ' F 1
' - St?" .- ‘ L59“ VC- .; 5‘ :15} “‘F-J‘ :3? ['I' Zigg- . — . “X. f: u -1,' ‘ , ' - -
. ‘1‘- «"1” ~33 . 7 k 4. .1, w 4 “~11: . - X : ,— "35:“. ,. ' 1.1; . ‘ . ~3-
' M?VJS’JF .3, ' 1 3} Tr" ‘- ' - “ 1". ,9“. 3' 'y f" ‘ 7‘. "1'9. '9 * 1. ,_ , , ." .
“ ' 95:99.03 W‘g‘g I 1‘». H ' L" V : $99 ”.1. 3'. 4 n. 5734‘? "'ﬁ ' _ ’ . L . ' ' ~-.
999-1599: 9» 9 " ‘ 9-9 99* 9': 9 >9. ,_ J» 9 - '. 9* ' -
‘tw-v :w—j-{v ‘9 N. 4.1-5." 5°15}! T! ‘5‘... I ¢.}5'«.9,;‘:é?’ 3-- ‘L “'2, . ” ._ 99 ._
" ‘.‘ ' . *V '1. . ‘\' _ ’9 " 0:. ‘9‘\ . .’ 7' .
9' 9 9- ~. '3’ ”\x a F19. - ’9? ;\ "“10. 9%;‘5: V“:6'=«-*:+»‘ 5—- .9 -- ~
. ' ’99-— “ #9 s: '99- J’ r 919999-99- 99 9.9% y...” " .: a . “ -.- _. .19.
._< I‘,. j“ .I- , V I. 3‘, ‘ .r‘ . — " -‘ 7.. ' ' I

~- ‘_"Ix,9a‘r 1" hf"; : /‘ h~ _ ‘; 2V «V4 g‘ ‘ - \\.k‘ I - {f ”xﬁﬂ ': "w‘ T

__ . " Q‘ngkﬁg?’ -' M 1'“? - ¥?/m : ‘0 . . ‘ \\ av. 1:21.53. ~ “ n , I ' - .- _I_ :-—’t I
- ' 9’ x‘ﬁ-b l‘ 3" . r . '~ 1" 1 >7. 1'» ‘ ~ _-I.—_ - /

9. f;._~ “- 9/" f '9 -' ~ ’ - ’9 —" ‘ n" . ~-— 3 ' '
— -, : tv-_‘ . a I ‘ J ‘ I .1. '3. ’I_ - I . '—
-.9 =;;.»...,.9;T..,9«,:1-‘-‘;:99’ ”-9,! . 9 .- . ' 1’9 9 ,. “£3.99. 9 . ‘3 ‘ ~
0 ..-¢ 9—3:“:- 1’ .9 . r'9 L -:/I$=I AL “.735” I ‘ , -9 _
‘ - ~ r" '9 9 .. . 2 ~ 1- 93.9 9.49 ‘99P- - “ é . . . ,-
“ 9‘ - 1:52;” :43 . ' f9 H319 _9‘. f’q‘.\ 3. ,“ , I : " _ g-
. ‘ "‘5 ‘ ‘9: J“ "r 799. .- ‘f g 99 . s. . ,1 .
L \ ‘ ' ;‘-: . - d ' 5"“ ' $ . Ltd 7 \ \ ‘ ._ 1 i
. V . 94-.» - -- ‘i. 9. ' p f - 7‘ .| 1 1' ‘
- . -1~a~a;=.99$x:.9 «99: 3% "r - 7
1 1 I; . ’;y’l r- "V, 1"; ,ﬁzIIJ‘ ‘fC:;'r:l.-' -;T‘_ .‘JI' 3 l. - ‘ 7 I‘ '1 ‘ . I .

' . 9: “n V - '. ' h ’r‘. 54:7‘r7‘f 7.. ‘ 9 _ ft I “ , > ' -i f 9
r . a - > V“ V i” ';1 A 1-3 ' I: .-' '--—‘-:‘ ‘3 I ‘A 4L ' 1 ‘V _ . .

' ' A 9- -‘9 -— 9 9‘4 ' ,_~_..’ ,1 ‘1‘“ 9 .. . . . . i

‘ ' ~ I .‘ L- .- ' I; , I I_ . I I

a“ u ‘1‘ ~_ ‘9 i 4 ‘ . ”I -" ‘ i ‘ 'f‘ ' 1, '¢ . ‘ ‘ ‘ ' ' '-
‘. . ’ . ‘1‘ ., —’ .-> ‘ ' 1 9 1 ‘ v IV . V I 9! '9'. V , ,
' j‘ ‘ I‘ , q . 7 9, , I - _ ﬂ_ 9 i 1 . A .. .
I II . 0:! 1 A I "f." .9 _ :_ V‘a‘ {‘9 I. .3 1 I . .‘. ,
' - 1 - ‘1- J: - 9 . ~ ._
\I VL..~ ‘\ -'_II_‘ - ' I9 “-1 ' \ . *1 I
7‘ ‘ ' .' . "1 .‘ , ,97 " .' F;
.l' ‘.
_~ J‘ v TI"; :9 9x: J. I I I.
9 .- -""- , 9- a -. I -. —‘
. _ : . V V , n I_ II I “I ‘ I

, 7" < .“*‘- ' 7 ’ ‘ -1"- -‘ ‘9 - l ' ; — 7- ‘ C. [

htﬁ'I li:- ~tr-I Mi., ' 1-, I' r x I
. ' v ‘ I. ‘ 9 7 t ' :‘- . 9 . I 1' ,. r I.
' I I I 1 - ‘ - I . ‘ 9 - 1 O: t - V ‘
. "“L’k -~, - ' .- , . > - , . ,— t.--
> ". , ?:I r " T; 3-1, “I , P 9 . . I" 9 _9 _
.' v . I I- I I I . I II I :T—“.\ 1:9- II: in _' . ‘ I ' .. I' I’_I°f . . . ‘. , §
"— ‘I ' I 9 " . ". - I 9‘, . '7 " ?de 1-? r 1' .‘7’74 -1 ‘3 —_:_:2—:—. —:~:‘7‘9“-:;:9 “. ;;~: 91,,“ _ A /_‘ . 1 ' 9- ‘
‘.- .II '_9 I. ‘ I - 4 (3 MI ’5 :-- ‘9}? / ~-. 1, _ 1":;.'I."~: .1‘:;-"_..~'.;- I J I-..
‘ . , ' . III '._ V _ . . 1‘, . :5: 9“ I -
..__ . .9 . 9 " '9 .'_;_ .. 9
’ 'V‘ 7‘ - ‘7 . - ‘:_.’::.T.:. _:_—_.".T-. _, ‘
.‘ ‘ , , “ _>' AI II ’ﬁbj‘c::_;- ¥>
, _ -1 , ‘ ' 9» I 9 _ - . 1:9 . 9
"‘ Jr; _ 1 1 ' . . ‘ - ...“ 3
9' _. - V“ n I ‘12:: —. . v, 9 ‘ J I V I. I ‘ l
I -.‘.‘ 12'. u. ‘ ‘ 3'. .u. 9.. 9 I_ -’
1 . “ n
4 - —— ﬂ ; ”"0. “ I.I.
Legend - . . . ,m,9;.5
L. "" 9 .‘i‘ “‘9 ‘ “f ‘ ‘ ‘
.‘ -, V ‘ - I ' _ ._-‘ . f '. I \> ‘1 ‘
......... Travel Route (Current) 1 . 9. r ,‘ g
._ . V. 9.3.", ' 9 " . ' _.~
.. ----- Travel Route (HIStOl'IC) 9- 9:; _ 7 1. 9 9 9 ; .
t. v ‘ ' ‘ 7 ?:9 ’ ’ P
.y . . ,- ~.- , 9 . up I. .39? ". I L
r_‘ --- Water Travel Route (Historic) ;~ .__ . ,I - . .
. , —. l... I I II‘ .1
v I a ‘ I. ,-l‘4 r L, I dl I ‘ I 'I ‘I I I r--—
9- — Ekwan (exnstlng) . . ; -. . .. . .9 _.~: .
J: ' , -. l“I ' ".9 , 3; I ’ ‘3‘ 9I
u I o ' ,iy'n- ‘ ,".‘.' 1;" J. ' .~._ _ fix II 5. ' ' ) ' _ ,‘ I l, V ‘. \I“.‘ ‘12:} ,
— Horn River Mainline I - - 9 -. 7.. I -. I1}- ‘ _ .
L -) ' 9- :,',.., ’ ’ ‘59.; “-999: ‘ :1, 9 9 9 _,;_9::1,".-:::9‘:9 99g" 1,
y 9 ' ' .24? A .41- _ T ' ‘ 1;; j:_:i" ’i ,. .1 21.5. 9 9- ‘5 .‘5 1- _ 1 £3... ,-' _ ".2 . ."fn 91‘. 4. ' .':..- - “.1 7;.E_..,..,=‘_11.. - :
|
DRAFTDATE 10/20/2009 9
I . t. R t SOURCE Lick
I rave & lu' lg ra Ion ou es Dene Tha' First Nation, NTDB, GeoBase, TCPL 5 9
FIGURE NUMBER 4 5 9
3:23
’ {3:59

GENE THA’ FIRST NATION

.1 Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study

w...“ _ TransCanadeHom River Meiniiee Pipeiine

4.? Sacred Sites

DTFN participants identiﬁed sacred sites during interviews (Figure 4—6) that overlapped

or intersected with the proposed Project. These sites were identiﬁed as sacred because

they were either cited as burial sites or ceremonial sites.

Participants explained that when people died while they were out hunting, they would

A be buried where they passed away (D. Martel). Robert Metchooyeah said that people

were usually buried on high ground and near water. Peter Ahnassay reported that there

are burials throughout DTFN territory and described some traditional burial sites as

being in trees. Syivester Seniantha said that there are too many burial sites to identify

them and that they exist “all over” the DTFN traditional territory.

1 In northeast BC, interview participants noted sacred sites located at:

o Conﬂuence of Shekilie River and Hay River (B. Martel, Rt Metchooyeah, S.
" " Tsonchoke, J‘B. Taliey/A. Talley) A

o Confluence of Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River (S. Lefou/T‘

; Didzena, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke)

o Atong the Shekilie River (18. Talley)

; y o Thinahtea Lake (R. Metchooyeah)

' _ 0 Buffalo Forks; where the Hay River joins Kotcho Lake (S. Tsonchoke)

0 Between Kotcho Lake and the BC/Alberta border (J. Ahnassay Sr.)

0 West of trap line #7561016 (E. Kolay)

~ No burials or ceremonial sites were identiﬁed during interviews that were directly
impacted by the Project footprint. However, during survey for the Rare Plants Study,

DTFN participants noted spiritual sites and grave sites at Moss Creek and its tributaries

(C. Chissakay/R. Metchooyeah/E. Chonkoiay).

55

'ﬁ— -; TV - J E“ ' ‘E _‘ _' ‘7 . ~ "‘?*'—Em: - ~- 4—"- .. 77 :7..._5_‘,4”_,. n ,4. ’4 > ‘_ _._. -.
71‘3“- ‘5 '3. .i , . arr F. f} ??:?A: ‘s’r. P l ‘ - . , F .‘J 7; : ‘1 ’ I \\ a ".5 fin my; 40“, $1 4.: A W ‘ ~97" )¥'—~E'“‘ I’"ﬂTrW.. 32-5-5? .- Esq
E E 1-an ., . EE555 . E a E EWEEj E “1301 E h
E 30., 'E. 1 Lf‘ 1140‘." w‘l \3' E 1.)... , , E51131 .E \ .57! I E f. rea 0flnterest H
?‘K‘ " —~ A w" 9m? 5‘ 1'35." E' . . r E *. s. * :I {E “1’ ,- »E r
L“/ . 15-" Q r “c ' 7!, #371 ‘f' -;.Yt.\ -19 b: A‘ ..- qJE ' 1" IV . '3" (I, 7L 1 1* :j ’9' 1) ‘5‘ !]
Fa?” E E " r» ER“: - ~ E I&‘ 1- g . 6 . ‘, 1E» E} 1 i
r E 7- .T.‘ ‘ “'4‘?” "mar“, " '3'": 7;" ’i A. j ‘ I I 3 i. 7"“!!! \, {I E
E . '4‘) 01:,» 5 ._- E m ‘- 9 ,
Er" = 3/ . «"423 1' 3‘ semiw‘ 4" ‘. Rig; 0 .1 "le. “1 ‘5 E; .9} I
‘ 1.7;” ' ' - IT'- " '5 V" ‘l ' $1.. V . ' h‘ - .3 f
r I ’E . I —--r-.- . 4‘3 . \- 1: ‘ ‘3 1‘ “(L n). 51:“: {F} ‘ _
.' :,4 “'3 ..i‘@ g . . « =‘ . I4 5‘. 54'4““; . ’ 7 ' Ev
. _ - I _:E .7: E: E 35m 5 E: v x
E I Z’~:,”_‘.— ‘ ‘ ' .-‘ l 1 -. 7 , ... z ‘ I 0-, ' . “-f VIII 1:, ".4 I ’ .... ‘ I I;
-: T" ‘1' * ‘J ' ‘- '3‘: I 3% J 3 ¢ ’ 0 r “'41... ,"f 'r ..ﬁ‘ ‘7. (— 7 ‘2 r
_ ,1 ‘7 5" .3. ?WQ‘?‘ ‘ ‘3‘ H. I . ﬁ 1 ' r 21 m I 1‘ . . .‘L' L” “'4 N E
"r: — It - m\:@ ‘1 4 la! y I 1% 1‘ 2, é a -
|XC‘I‘E‘? “Q,::":‘=.:_ ‘2” h, --.-=sr='-*L} 7-- ' ,5 l" I 2:,1/_:§',‘_‘.‘_‘, ’- ‘ ~ , E 5, 5 “r! I
_.__ , "5%:- ~ . _____,, ...... _ . .2. , _ | ' " 43;: 5123‘! .i, ._;. ‘ ‘ Esx ‘ E3:
E851» =~ . E: 5. :«E E 5.! ; a E ~ . .. , ,. 5 ~ \
_—. ,_, :57 ‘1; f a 'g ‘. <&» r E 7,. — "E
,, ’55.:~.. ' . “‘5 :55. . ->. (:5 +1 "*5.
E. ..._ :ﬁ. 554:. F5..- "Q; 315;? .5537 . .0 4-; -
‘ ‘1‘ N5: “ *-'~ -— ..‘21 - . “E 9' +3" . . . i
d ‘ ii?“ ._ IX; 2“: -~‘.‘-~ '! »:' . _”:;"'=;’ ‘73.. a I‘ 2., - «,- ,. , — - . 3.;
‘ _ J... ‘ ‘~ .19.: ‘ .b' H ‘ E;‘—. J :3! ”- .‘i"' [P \L.‘ ~‘1 V I
4.: HE‘SEaz-‘Qag F7 ""-‘- 1:; "7" 4’3 ‘ . ‘ '
L...“ 1“ ‘1 c: ‘ ‘1. r .‘ ~—_~_EfE j ‘ L .!\Lj;?;::;' 9.: A : 7’, v— - -
sLEQ'E‘. _’E%J ‘- 5 ‘4‘: ‘ ,0- ' —. h ,‘r . 2:35 4 {‘T: 1‘ )‘c—J ‘ 1 1
~Ex, ,4.-...~.—:E~._r.-.._,.. -.- E: 2;; E4 ». a .
m 1:. $\- 1‘ 1. 4': Hr. _ a iu‘ \ ‘ __ El - v. ‘
EW‘»;5 'In - '- "P r .73- ‘5 _ i I 4
-« ,. -—~ 5‘ E 53- 3 ~25- - «
'L->___~ ‘ _‘ If}, ‘4 A“. W ') V — — " .7 “.1 51: J ‘ . _ 1
— -. .-., 5’ ‘fth/“. Q 3“?” t‘ ' ' ‘ ‘9
,_«_‘ ".4‘ :_\'\E;z:fz/ 1" .E-E fﬁ- ?%Wf": ' "315». 4...- r. —
'__ 7".;-_1 - .W. ‘ 01 E" ’55 — r.»."..r . -. ‘
r 1:31“ 5 J. . 5,- J , J ' - - E’ . . _
-.7;~.:J»‘~i=’ ?- .zi E: 3“ i. ‘ ~ ‘ . ,
. ‘_ a 7 f " 7 §A#“‘ j... -
E. . ‘ . V . F’ 1,5 E ,5: . E‘ . r" 7 J5 WI.» “-1.5
' ‘-‘ a 31:13’. 0,7- U; I ' E " _' \:.~--' ‘5 {a A " q . _-
"II -‘ ‘ I. -“3 ...”,J) A ",7 ‘1; ; r“ a 1 I ’ "Iﬁ 1" ’4‘ LP: . ‘ ‘
‘ ‘ - " A I ;~ ‘. .‘_‘.‘ , ' V ‘V l
J ' 55‘: .‘5‘4‘ ‘ 'P :11?! .4 5; 5""; ”,1 Ea ' E . ' - I
if ‘ ‘ - ‘ ‘ :E' ‘L ..l- -..* . )' ' -
-0 .‘ ifv‘-‘ :5 '~§—p 4, "3‘ :‘f A}? 3% I, ”
‘ v ‘ _, I t" ”9.5:, .4». chi 0‘; h ﬂ : ' .
-.‘ > , o ) 4 v t “"l ‘HV f...“““’ u. ‘ E 1" ’4‘ I! ' I . ' '
J‘- ‘ ‘ 3v ”“3 ‘ A, 4'; 5”"; 1 -
f ‘_ K "53"?» 7 .5-«5. “ {gan' E I, “ ‘ -
S . ’ \_‘ " z—A- .‘ --- i; 1r, n _‘ .E..\IT;T:;.:'-OE J. ' ‘ 1 ‘ [
’ ’ " "l ‘ 4‘“ "f x . - 1 I
, ...- .41 ‘ 11; ~ 7- qr .~ . ,1 51.9. if} ;“ F; .53?“ .(- " ~. ‘4‘}; 1 l-
l u l; ”- - , 7' , I ' ' 1 '5 '
l x A '.. p -- \' .
! , _ ‘ ‘_\_ ~ ‘ - > -‘ ‘ - \x-q‘ _ _ 3‘-
L" ' , ' .. "V‘ -- 1... E 1 . ' . x
», . H 4 'ﬁ”' 4“ __~_c . I
. ..5 E , . , .-- -- a .
W _ .-- - 3:7“ ‘ _ _ l v _ I ~ ‘ . ‘1:
E‘ _ 3-7, ‘,-__-rv .. ‘ . _ ' ' r. ‘ _ 4 a,
I ‘ — .'_" ‘~"'— 7 -- .7 ‘ E .- ' : c” .
. . 5, - ‘ | ‘ ‘ 2"!“ \v‘
~ ' g -' , 1. ~_ E.
‘ ’ . . I A' E‘ til 1 _ ‘E
v r v. . v . § . r ‘
. - ‘ -,:\_: - 77‘ ; :V V ~T K“ A , im ﬁ’é" " 1 " J
“ 5. ‘ r \n 1’ 4;? »A . _ . E 7' 5 '3, I - >1“ ‘ h
u .“ ‘ _ it t g ' j ‘ -.T:i‘~-‘- . u "‘- :v...’ ”ﬁri-ri‘I—‘i‘; :;~:- —".._. 7"— V _' ' ‘ »'-<. ‘ . ... .J‘ﬁ5‘. ﬂvv'f-r‘
1’ r-"‘ ‘r -‘ d '7 ‘ ' '_. .314“) 3 —- 4 0....“ ," ‘ ’ 4_: r- . \ _ ' _‘;‘ _“‘ ‘- 4 “.~‘ . x
7"- ' ’ _‘ ‘_ ‘ E ’1'." * "“‘7-‘-~a.':,‘\__;::\‘3‘ J ‘9’ ,'
‘ ' 4‘ Y ' ’_ ' ' - ?V‘v51,.:;:::“>'=‘; '
-_ A . _ ; ’ . 1 . ‘ ‘ 3'; ,_ . f -. . - _ n) . EZ-jftftffs;__lg -_,--Er—-: . ‘
E ‘«~, ' . - 2' w E ., .5. * )7"?
V"- A ‘ p' ,k'ﬁ-t'l' ’ 3 -, f _ _..I_' _ ‘ I
1 -. 9* EIE‘E f: L" J’. J; J" . ? I 7 ‘ \ .- l ‘-
b 3‘ ' .;‘-‘ E '//;k
EI l 71 ‘ .4 ~ . .‘ "1 ‘
. Legend ,3 E ~ _
r' ‘ - E, .— 55.». ~ —~ .--” a . E X» v
{I ?‘O‘rovq K 5: 7' ...-5 ” .5 l ‘5 ‘3 ‘ ‘x I
E - t. -- --"-‘ - ‘ ' ‘ <13
E .3514. Burial Areas .. ~ A .15 ~ ‘ a E
{a J" 8:“ '1 ' ' . '7 2“ .J‘ / '4 ‘
,, l. , _ .- . v
I - ~ I‘M ' .E ,, E -v _- ,
. , — _ - .1
E El Ceremonial Site EE-oE:a‘i~*‘> .- . E .- - E-
, 1v . J- ‘ 4’ .. 7 _ a .. E
'! 5‘ ‘ g .‘ z ' r I " ‘v 'V . .-v .
; Sacred Site 4 . v . * .r E ' : ,0 > ‘ ..
, > . u - _ _‘ I ’J‘ ‘ ‘
\ o a L I. .' I 5 '1 A , ‘, ' ‘
E Ekwan (exustmg) ‘ a ~ . . - ‘ - - E »;a H ,, 7 ‘4
ﬁ .- E- E . A A' I "'2. " - I . ‘ ' “ ‘7' I
— Horn RiverMamlme » ‘. , _....; ' E . E ..__ z" 5 .. 3 A 7 gm; EN
' ‘ ‘ "7 E E , " '0 ‘ " 4 ‘ ...;— ﬁs *
* ' i " -.- m _, - . t ‘ '
7W :4. _ - ‘7' r» - .. ‘ : .7 I I . l , ' l" I ?E‘ ‘a-q ‘ > 1 .\ ~"‘“"‘. ' ‘ .... I f- ' ”V ‘ ‘ ' I “'4
_ .34 - 1.. . . _ ’ .. . - .... 5. .- -J _7 :5 - _ 3... J 1. ;'r‘..-. u‘ 4" .317 "'4“: 1.2. , 3353‘ L3. -3 i‘
‘ .
DRAFTDATE 10/20/2009 1'
- . .. E A .. . . .7 _ .5 A.....-..._--...-..-......-.-- --.”... ..
Sacred Sites SOURCE
Dene Tha' First Nation. NTDB, GeoBase, TCPI. in
FIGURE NUMBER L
3:3:-

GENE THA’ meet NATION
‘ Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanade Horn River Mainline Pipeline
4,8 Cabins, Camps and Settlements

DTFN interview participants also identiﬁed speciﬁc sites consisting of cabins, camps and
I settlements (Figure 4—7) that intersected or overlapped the proposed Project.

A note must be included about the concept of camps. DTFN have several ‘permaneht’
camps throughout their traditional territory (Bistcho Lake, Sulphur Lake) that are used
for youth or retreat camping by DTFN members. However, one study participant
explained that, in the past, most people did not have permanent camps or cabins.
Rather, DTFN would erect a shelter as they travelled on their seasonal rounds. Once
they were ready to move on, they would dismantle their camp and move to a new place
, in their territory, leaving little or no trace of the DTFN presence. He elaborated that
. there are campsites like this throughout DTFN territory, and noted that people are still
" quite mobile and camp like this today (D. Martei).

j . As a result, there may not be permanent structures or physical remains of cabin/camp

sites, yet DTFN camped (and continues to camp) throughout all the areas where they

3 travelled, hunted, trapped, ﬁshed and gathered.

Generally in northeastern BC these locations included:

. o Hay River, approximately 25 km west from the AB/BC border (B. Martel)

0 Along the Shekilie River at the confluence of Hay River (R. Metchooyeah)

. f o The area of Shekilie (Beaver) River (J. Ahnassay Sr.)

' 0 Southwest end of Kotcho Lake (5. Seniantha) .
o Trapline #756T016 (E. Kolay)

: . o Trapline #756T001(C.Talley,T, Didzena)

i o Trapline #756T017 (A. Ahnassay)

o Trapline #756T014 (S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke)

' ' 0 East and south of the hills next to Tooga Lake (A. Lefou, S. Lefou)
0 40km south of Tooga Lake and 75km west of Zama Lake (S. Lefou)

i i 0 Kotcho Lake (B. Martel)

o 7 miles west of the AB/BC border (R. Sutha)

, 0 Southwest of Rainbow Lake (A. Seniahtha)

. 0 Along the Fort Nelson River (Lucy Foumier)

:f o Confluence of Kotcho River and Kotcho Lake (Lucy Fornier, J.B. Talley/A.
Talley)

0 At Kotcho Lake (S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke)
i 0 Between Rainbow Lake and Fort Nelson (G. Martel)
1; 58

DENE THA’FIRST NATEON 5 j
Aboriginal Knowiedge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine
0 At the conﬂuence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River (18, :
Talley/A. Talley, V. Talley/A, Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, R.
Sutha/R. Yatchotay H. Denechoan/T. Talley, J. DanaiS/C. Taltey, S. j:
Lefou/T. Didzena) _
Cabins were identiﬁed either on or near the Project right—of~way at:
o Hay River, approximately 25 km west from the AB/BC border (B. Martel)
o Trapline #756T001 (C. Talley, T. Didzena), cabins identified were within 3 "
“' 5 km Of the PYOjeCt
o The Little Hay river pipeline crossing ( V. Talley/A. Talley)
During a survey for the Rare Plants Study, DTFN participants noted cabins and
settlement sites at Moss Creek and its tributaries (C. Chissakay/R. Metchooyeah/E.
Chonkolay). : ..
59

‘ . ‘.- :"ET-iwl 1... -. ...‘ What's (”"7 gr. 7'0” ’§ =- '\._\ *Wk 7 W -. *- -0 ' , u w , 5 ' 7““ T"; 1"- :75: . f 5;; ‘ | ‘ "3" ‘f- 4i gms:gtgg_gt'
t mlm‘cﬁ’; “ Q I ' ‘ly .£§u4’ A 7* #1“ RR‘Q-"u- :5 y (5 3|]; 3“ ‘3. ‘1‘. 31%??? NE 77:1: ‘ , . in—f‘d‘: Z“ . :4.
‘ I-‘_' .I“ ' . ' “ v~ .‘ 7 . ~ K ' A’ ‘ I“ '4‘! I j I " ' W -‘ " .8 W ‘ v ‘ " A j" - . m
‘ A ,. ,. 1x. - .. ,Ia,‘ V -—< A I .‘ .. . ‘ ., , -.- .. "v u , , .
‘ -‘ ‘ . Y 0.; :«gg (:91 A, J ‘3», {4 ~53? I} T; ,1 ; 1. E , l l J73“ kg“ m ,0 $31 3 ~_ 5 v..- A C Area of Interest 4,
- K V .' .‘ , h". , " ‘ ,. " .r ' ;’ ‘. ﬁﬁ-l" .’ . ‘ ‘ ‘ w v _" - ‘ , 4 ‘ ’ ‘ .5" w -: V r ' '. ‘ - i‘ . v1
' ‘ J t; ' 'V 5' i L "’2‘ (1%; I ,4 ." ,f ?K/ V;' j 11, I‘ ‘ l! "'1‘ ,‘2 ’3 ‘H j‘ tkur f") U, l '1 t ‘7 . 4} ' ,I. "I
' . t:- M ‘ “ " r? -. x r” 4C L '23:. 4“ * t r L “0'? '" ”i 2 ‘3 '3’ ' b t r0
‘ ' LL :1 {>10 ’ ' '-' ’ " 1’?" ‘ Thai 21‘ ‘ . 1' '-.-. a c: ‘2 R43 (.‘P]“‘" w - !.. 3 .44‘ 4‘ - i
l ‘ [ﬂux '. ‘ " {ﬂ ' $35.35“ 3% - xﬁﬁh“ ' J1 J' .113 g > ”J"! '1 i
'1.‘ iii #1“; ”ibmﬂrﬁzw 7 "* ‘3 ‘ 74:" H g ‘5‘ ."J 7' - ' : ' n . “ ': :
‘ -;" , '; I ‘0 7"} ’3‘ 'é‘“: ‘1 1:???“ﬂ’ j”. P” ‘1“ ilkxf‘én‘ .t*‘]l "'0 k L“ a ' 'J «‘9 .- ’ a I .f‘ ’v i
f- ' - -' A - .4 ‘ Av, “/7 '.V'r¢~ =' -- _. h ‘, V ‘ » . \‘._ c.) 3. ‘ ‘ .‘ "-} ‘
, - o q 7' v ‘1 ‘ . ‘ 1‘ K. ’ 7' . V _- . v- ‘1‘” ﬂ:- ‘.
y," 9: ’ l’ ‘ V 7-1;: ‘ ”I h R 1' \ h:- '- A i\‘\‘ ‘;V J“ (4* Ikﬂ 4° 7.3."; I?! I . 2 I
, ' ' ’ ’22,?9‘9 ‘5 ’l 1‘ a -‘I “F ~ ‘J , 1" ‘ 7': ~ J‘A“ .54 A 'g “ V 'ﬁ. : .. ’11-;
w ' ~ ,' ~t ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘72.} ‘9 ' $ 0 t ’. "‘ k2“ . 4 ‘3‘“? V safﬂ- Q - “1535 ' 7‘ 5“; ‘ ’
~ .. I *1 I ,1 A .1! u. ‘ __ , 45,.“ n rag. a , M n
. . L 7 ; _ ,_ K“ “c: j) | ‘ w‘ .314 ‘1 A 9 .J. 1,, ‘0 F- ‘.x .0 ' , a , ‘Q‘ >% 13". " I'x " ,7 ‘4
"~ , :éLJﬁ‘E ,. “1 L1H. '5. :0, :-:~’ I 3,», ,5 3."...31. ' , 2:;«2 _ , ‘K -- - 1 0 t,
-, A, , *Jr 3.31 *5 1"} K .‘r w" 0 r. .; ‘2 " 5i _ «‘25» k * ‘ ' .1
’ 1‘ ' :10“. J_ ‘ r 3' W ‘ . ’37-" ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ I. ' 2k~‘f'_<a , -, ..\. \ ~-: ~ ‘ . ‘
ac .0 ~'- Pym: 1c? * . f" 1 .,v ‘ F: ‘n 'r' {fin “ " ‘ ' i “:12: -- e
‘ ’ "‘- ’ K3553?" 1"‘773‘. ' ~ :45“ ' >2 "47/1; ' "\‘x‘ ‘9’ 7". — - - '“
7‘ ‘m.;_‘._ .‘ —‘ ~~ .15! ‘ , r .—- g,‘ > ‘ v, y, .. TT’,‘ - \L' ‘ , — . ~ \ -
1 ; ”le "‘ “*3 .. ,52... 4£ 3}" - . 1" .‘( J- n ‘ 1";- J ' "' '
‘ ' - . ’ 3;: ’ .:" ' ‘* 4 ;; .__"-' ‘ -~,; “Wu 3; L." 5' f. ..¢é‘5~‘g7"‘-;r:; .1 _ .l _ ,4"L"“7' . I
r ~ ' ., ’ 4w 0.0.“ 1 ‘J‘ y. I ' V , "3’ 1‘" 1' L ‘1
: .‘SM: ‘ A ‘/.‘_"'\-‘.' . , “,7 ‘..—- :5) ‘ }\r__‘:( ,9: 3 FJ 1111‘;_-7( ‘ .1: v , 4):) .
. 1- I _‘_‘ _ ‘ . . —‘ ' . L34 . L V .7 .‘“,'4A _ l? I;
1 ‘ -' - _ - .7_._r- , w ..‘ _, .“ ,...r_ > -—f°.x » A
5 - ‘Z‘xiﬁk'f ‘ “ 9'7, ' - ,—~"""Q1 __ g " 3'7”",ng -w—v... -"’ x w L
‘ f .. ##144527 ":1 Ex w? .1 ~‘~ r. {‘2’ ‘ 0‘ ,, ' " '
E ‘s ‘ ‘ f. '07-" ‘ 5‘;:J:.L‘-8“7:L - - ; 4? .43 ' ~ ; . l, - _ , Ft? 5‘.‘ 1 r .z A'-
f " ' i: ‘84.- [.15 -- .716]: ' t! L?!” f
w ' i Tk‘tﬂryxv-ifg‘L‘r'gug" I, \ 1: '3 ,7" “34"- . ‘ ﬁg” ,4 3f?! .‘ ‘ _7 ‘ 7. i
‘1 .' ﬂ _ _ - .' .WJ‘I,‘ L .1 _ "5" " ’ ' ' '. .' .. _> I . ’1‘. . _;,.:';
.- ..’ *..'_ F15}. 4| 3 -_.7 ‘ “'0‘; MW”? ‘ ,, . _ ,.
‘ In», ~11: “‘3 g\__ l-T-‘w l" \_ , ﬁns; " ‘ Q7014: T juggig 0 ,Q',."_,AJ;
5' h 39:5 IV ') ,7 . '2 71V 1“» '2: V ' ‘ ‘ “1
'71 ; ” -;,¢ 1%" i » 0
‘ _ b “.1 ,.2 3L _—.;,4 ujjf:/p_ “V 1" ‘1 —‘ -- E‘ :f'/? ‘
u ‘I -I":'-" -.v—" ‘-““L:' ("I l g' “ K "“-"“-?«c , x; ; ‘ "
‘ v‘ - —.7 . . ‘7 ‘ v 1
; LV‘F‘9‘~‘.—’T\f) I k} '4 ‘ . ' ‘ .-
‘ "l“ Ax,‘ - ‘1’“? —: —' r ‘ — 3'
l _ “z": ‘; '_‘._ .d- . 5" .k ."K 7 I
"f“ ' ‘. “— 1.4%" 7 f; :‘ . J » 7-" *- ' "“ ' '
0 g. *5. ' , w» J :=_ :r a u, ,, a -' ' , ._
‘ j ’J " ‘V A w . ' ‘1.“ .3): fa
‘ ‘ l ‘5'“‘4‘ 4: n—xr , ,1, 7‘ 2" " ' > 0
. ‘ . ’ ’ ‘ ‘ , ’A '[lJ {I v ,
‘ r; > ' _ 3‘,“ 0 '_ ?.?- r ‘ '1. .. '1 .1. '1 1 .
i , . - .‘ .' ~ _-_-‘ 1 r . 3
_ 1 ‘IJV ‘ L 1 y‘ > ‘ _ ' ‘ A ' {M?- “Mr“ 1' a ‘- ‘I J . .
, _:‘.I:“ L ‘J. A ‘y .\I ‘1 ,.. "F x." 9.:14J‘.>.79 ’
. 4‘ ‘_ ‘P~~_ > ~ ‘ > .3 -': :u :_ . "V“ . V ‘ ‘1‘ '
j 'v. 5 1 :2, ‘y, L .50 0 ' 5’ ‘ " -‘.,~ ‘ .. ‘ ‘ 1|:
‘ J": L ‘1? 1‘ — ‘1‘; ‘ ’~ .a’ ‘17: .7 ~ “X ‘5 '1“ , ‘ '_‘~‘.‘J . » ~’ ‘ , l! ‘, ,5
r 3 "s 0 ~ 14 K L." ‘ I "' . . A K ‘ ‘ 41339
'7_“_‘ "‘3‘? ~.—_, 7 ° ~ , ' ‘.... _ ‘
:r- 4‘ ’3 P . 0 .- : -,'
‘ : >-‘ __,m ‘ 1 ' r“ " ' »:— ; ,,
P L ‘ -- ‘ f l 0‘?-
0 a 0 ‘ _ . ‘2‘. -..‘ ’5 ,_ .-" ‘ J '1 .5
‘ ‘V’A «:4 _" ‘ _ ' -"‘ '
. 5." ' ' - ,
1 ‘ ,‘ 3.; * 3
tt-S I f , k
,. 3* I x 7 j» fr \-_ ._' ,: >_ ¥ ‘ i . . > x
7"..- ‘ ‘ - 1 9. ,‘ _,-r’ . . ... -0 ' j-" " < '- ‘t “31.01“: i: ;: .-_\_ﬁ 5"“ ‘ ' ‘
L '7 "-1:- u Lag . _7, ' - ' c": ‘ ‘ ”A ’ '4 W» "ﬁx: xilifgrr;14“., .
- '*-- " \2 ;‘;~-;,_;,-‘;; \
‘ ' ' I ‘\ jg“: t_ﬂ—x
~ Legend » 0 4: =:ﬂ—__.
o’
- Cabin Area (Historic) ; ' ’ - ‘_
,_ rv'vv . -. . ; _‘ ‘-~“ ‘
.332.) Cabin Area (Current) 1” g, . - 0 . ‘ , .1
.g ‘ 1‘ . V f ,‘V _ , . - f ‘ L1
7 I‘ . . . '55-" . J. . _ ‘
a - Camping Area (Historic) r? . ; ,0 ‘__ l f ‘2 _v y; , "
. I , p 7 . , . . ,
.vx L“
* - . , / a
_ - Camping Area (Current) L _ ‘ _ 4
‘ z . - ‘1. 3 » '-_', ‘
I \ . (,‘ "I F : , .‘
p . . v1. , - 0 < . "7-- ‘.
: gt - Settlement Area (HIStOI‘IC) .. 3., 3”, ' , ‘ -, ,
. ' ‘ y ”:5 > V , ‘ ' - - ‘ ‘
L: ' ‘ ‘ _ 4 | .‘ 5’”.
Cabin & Camp Area (Current) ‘ . , V ‘
O ’ . . ~ ‘ ' _ > D ‘ , ‘ A
as Ekwan (exustmg) ‘ - . , : . A ‘ ‘
‘ ’ ' v, .“\ 7* ‘ V»
I u n V " ‘~ I '7 - -v‘ y." l . ‘ -
4 _ Horn RNer Mainline ., 7 2 ‘ 0 ,; —-'
I ‘ ‘ , ,0 _ t..- ' ', —
--: rr 1 -* ' ' a A ; A , - _ f ., ~ g _ n: , y 0 "2a.; 1 ‘ _ “_—*‘* —"—'— .
DRAMA” 10/20/2009
Cabins Cam 5 & Settlements ”“05
3 p Dene Tha' First Nation, NTDB, GeoBase, TCPL
0 FIGURE NUMBER
cg; 4 - 7
\ .

DENE THA’ HRS“? NAT¥0N __
Aboriginai Knowiedge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Ptpeiine
4.9 Future Use Areas ~ 3
_ ' None of the DTFN interview participants expressed the intent to stop using their
traditional territory in the future. Further, the general sentiment from participants was
fear that the land would no longer be suitable for the exercise of Aboriginal and treaty t
rights for future generations of DTFN,
To ensure the continued use of the land for future generations, DTFN participants
identiﬁed areas they would like to see protected for continued and future DTFN use.
Sites in northeastern BC include: .
o Bootis Hills (P. Ahnassay)
o Shekiiie River watershed (P. Ahnassay, R. Tsonchoke)
0 West of Fort Nelson (R. Tsonchoke) é "
0 Area between Fort Nelson and Rainbow Lake (R. Tsonchoke)
' 0 Area from Fort Nelson east to the AB/BC border and from the Fontas River
Indian Reservation north to Trout Lake (5. Seniantha) .. ..
Areas intersected by the Project include: .
0 Area between Fort Nelson and Rainbow Lake (R. Tsonchoke)
0 Area from Fort Nelson east to the AB/BC border and from the Fentas River
Indian Reservation north to Trout Lake (8. Seniantha)
Curtis Talley said it is important to protect any area along the rivers. He explained,
’54/009' the rivers [should be protected]. ..because there? water. Where there 13; water, -... ..
there are animals. ” '

DENE THA’ FiRST NATION -
Aboriginal Knowiedge and Land Use Study .
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine
Tally, H. Tsonchoke/C. Chissakay, J. B, Wasp Colin/ D. Wasp Colin, C. Talley/J‘ "
Danais, H. Denechoan/T. Talley)
0 Around Kotcho Lake (S. Seniantha, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, H. i g
Tsonchoke/C. Chissakay, A. Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, 3.8. Wasp Colin/D. Wasp
Colin, 3. Danais/C. Talley, H. Denechoan/T. Talley)
Speciﬁc areas reported as current and historic hunting areas that are intersected by the g ”
Project footprint include:
0 Winter access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (T. Didzena, S, Lefou, A. ‘
Lefou, 3.8. Talley, A. Talley, Louis Former)
o Trait along the Hay River to Kotcho River to Fort Nelson (P. Martel) 5 .
0 South of Mobil road ((3. Martel)
0 Along the Hay River (5. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, S. Lefou/T. Didzena, V.
Tailey/A. Talley, H. Tsonchoke/C. Chissakay, A. Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, J.B.
Wasp Colin/‘D. Wasp Colin, J. DanaEs/C. TalIey, H. Denechoan/T. Talley, R. a
Sutha/R. Yatchotay) ' ~
0 Between Hay River and Kotcho Lake (D. Martel) i .
0 An area west of Hay Zama, approximately 15km on either side of the AB/BC :
border (5. Lefou, A, Lefou) i
o The area from the southern portion of the Etsho Escarpment to Fort Nelson and
to the east inciuding the Hay River/Kotcho River/Shekilie River area (Lucy ~
Fournier) '
o “Horn River Area” an area ranging from Kotcho Lake north to Estine Lake and
Kwokullie Lake east approximately 50km (B. Martel, P. Ahnassay) .
0 South of Kotcho Lake (Louis Foumier)
0 Around trap line #756T001 (C. Talley, 3.8. Talley/A. Talley) '
0 Southern portion of the Etcho Escarpment to the Fort Nelson River and east to
the Hay River (A. Talley) - .
o The area of the Little Hay River (3.8. Talley/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. f
Tsonchoke, S. Lefou/T. Didzena, V. Tally/A. Talley, H. Tsonchoke/C. Chissakay,
At Seniantha/C. Tsonchoke, J. B, Wasp Colin/B. Wasp Coiin, J. Danais/C. Talley g
H. Denechoan/T. Talley, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay) ?
o Aiong Townsoitoi Creek (3.8: Talley/A. Taliey, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke) 3
0 Along Kyklo Creek (3.8. Talley/A. Talley, S. Tsonchoke/R. Tsonchoke, S.
Lefou/T. Didzena, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay) "
0 Along Sahtaneh Creek (5. Lefou/T, Didzena, R. Sutha/R. Yatchotay)
0 Alberta trapiine #88 around the Ekwan Meter Station (H. Denechoan/T. Talley) 3- .-
35

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
A Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
‘ ‘ WWW
~ ' ‘ ., UK . + 2< ~-
: 5 I" 'Fﬁgﬁjﬁ 'K:
7" f - " 2   K r", u I
'5 l' . ?r . I 5‘,r. ‘ .
.5: .3 3 .‘a” ‘-_
. . //' ~ ‘ . ‘ .. :ﬁ';- '
V, 4/ ' 7 : ”t; 7" ' ‘
k 43-7 7- , ff?
_ \\ k
h “‘ Ti
‘ V \ ¥ -
' \K \ . .-;—_};_/
. \2 ~33, I ( I _ ‘
__ Plate 12: Beaver Lodge along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
__ l ‘ ,7”, V
/ J \ v
I‘- i’ ‘ - ' .
. ‘ .. _
;‘" , . 7 ,
I ,
, Plate 13: Game tracks close to a water source along the proposed Pipeline route.
15; 62

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION -
Aboriginal! Knowledge and Land Use Study
. TransCahada Horn River Mainline Pipeline ; g
5 Changes in Land and Land Use
DTFN participants reported severe! general changes and observations about their -
_ traditional territory during the interviews for the study.
5.1 Increased Industrial Activity
A common observation from participants was that the amount of industrial activity has i
increased within the territory. Sylvester Seniantha said the biggest change he has
noticed is the impact that industry has had on the land, and speciﬁcally on the animais
that live there. Sylvester described his trap line in Alberta, saying it currentiy has three
to four hundred well heads, two to three hundred pump jacks and four large gas plants. '
This increased activity was seen to have a detrimental effect on his use of the land. For a Z
example, Sylvester noted that squirrel dens are often destroyed by logging or land
clearing activities and a decrease in the number of squirrels results in a subsequent
decline in martens (S. Seniantha).
Harvesters (including P. Martel, J. Ahnassay Sn, G. Martel, A, Talley, B. Martel, S.
Seniantha, T. Didzena, 3.8. Talley, W. Yatchotay, S. Tsonchoke, R. Tsonchoke, S. Lefou,
A. Lefou, R. Metchooyeah, C. Talley and P. Ahnassay) reported an increase in cutlines,
pipelines, oil wells, forestry activity, etc. in DTFN-member held trap line areas that have 5'
affected their ability to hunt and trap. Abraham Talley explained, “ There is 2‘00 much
activity for the animals 50 they all lea ve. ”
Many DTFN study participants also stated there were notable decreases in animals
including moose, other ungulates and furbearers throughout northeast BC (G. .
Ahkimnachie, A. Tailey, Louis Foumier, P. Ahnassay, B. Martel, S. Seniantha, E. Kolay,
G. Martel, 3. Ahnassay Sr., P. Martel, D. Martei, S. Tsonchoke, S. Lefou, and A. Lefou). 'j
The decrease in animal populations was primarily attributed to the increase in industrial
activity on the land. ,3."
Many DTFN participants' concerns were focused on the cumulative impacts of industrial
development within DTFN traditional territory, Speciﬁcally, participants commented on
fears for the younger generation as the changes created by industrial development are '
changing the DTFN way of life, noting, “I pity them ’cause there Wi/l be nothing left. :3
Completely nothing, nothing Ieﬁ”(S. Seniantha). - .
Some participants commented on the decreased water quality with the advent of
industrial activity (8. Tsonchoke, R. Tsonchoke, P. Ahnassay). John Ahnassay Sr. said i; ..
that in the past DTFN could drink the water directly from the rivers and lakes. He says
' 63

; -. a a DENE THA’FIRST NATION
. Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
that now he has to bring water with him when he is out on the land. Gabriel Martel
reported that he now boils drinking water from the rivers and lakes but can still see
" “oily stuff” on the surface after it has been boiled. Jean Baptiste Talley reported that he
‘ can no longer drink the water on his trap line (#756T001, intersected by the Project)
because of the pipelines running through the muskeg.
” Some of the DTFN study participants expressed concerns about industrial accidents and
how it related to their personal safety and the increased risks of consuming
contaminated wildlife. For example, Sylvester Seniantha described blow—outs and leaks
of pipelines in the past. He reported a pipeline rupture a1: a creek crossing and noted
that he later saw beavers on that creek but was too scared to risk eating them. He also
H reported observing a number of dead birds on another pipeline. Jean Baptiste Talley
‘ said he is concerned about a pipeline rupturing and poisoning the lakes and damaging
~ theland. ‘
I Incomplete or insufficient reclamation efforts by industry were highiighted by several
~ ' participants. For example, Robert Tsonchoke said he had concerns about reclamation,
noting that there is still obvious contamination on many reclaimed sites. He worries that
y . companies do not do a good job of cleaning up. He was also concerned about moose
. licking salts off of pumps and other industrial machinery.
2 Stephen and Albert Lefou expressed concerns about not being properly notiﬁed about
' the development on their trap line. They said that a seismic line was put in without
notifying them, Additionally a pipeline was put in two years ago and they were not
notiﬁed and about one hundred of their traps went missing.
Some participants expressed concerns about increased access into their use areas from
' roads being constructed (Gabriel Martel).
Robert Tsoncho ke said that "700 many clear cuts are making the an/Ma/ habitat
disappear. If the habitat disappears 50 wiI/ the an/‘ma/s. ”
Betsy Martel described a signiﬁcant decline in the number of animals observed on her
I trap line in Alberta, She attributed this decline to the increasing industrial activity in the
' area. Eric Kolay described the effects of industry on a hunting area near Rainbow Lake,
' saying ; “There has been a lot of clearing there. [tgjust not the same. ”
' Robert Metchooyeah described the clearing of trees as “interruptﬁngj ﬁfe”, as it takes
away the cover, security and food for the animals. Robert Metchooyeah also showed a
; ~ recent picture from the Project ﬁeld visits of what looked like a hydrocarbon or oil slick
;; 64

DENE THA’FIRST NAT¥ON
Aborigina! Knowledge and Land Use Study __ __
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine 3
on one of the little ponds near Cabin Lake. Robert was unsure to whether or not it is
natural or manemade. “ ‘ ’
Gabriel Martei also reported changes that he attributes to industry activity. He recalled
that in 1959, there were no cut iines and only bush. However, now he says that the
noise of industriai plants scares animals away and he fears that if there is more
deveiopment, there will eventuaiiy be an extreme shortage of wiidiife. 2
Thomas Didzena expressed his concerns for the environment. “Even if I didn’t want
. them to cut down 317 y trees, what ‘ can I say? If they cut down trees, where wf/l the
animals go?” ~ .
5.2 Harvesting Restrictions E.
The common perception among DTFN Harvesters is that harvesting, including hunting
and commercial trapping can only be done inside provincially~regulated trap iine areas.
However, people recall how DTFN used their entire territory before the imposition of :
trapping restrictions. David Martel reports that the Dene Tha’ used to trap throughout
their territory, all over BC and Alberta. However, he says that now they have a smali
trap line area that they feel they cannot step outside of. ‘
Abraham Taliey believes that DTFN are only “allowed to catch one woiverihe and one
Iynx because of “restrictions". Although Abraham hunts caribou, he beiieves caribou
are protected once they cross over the B.C. border. ‘
Robert Metchooyeah described his father telling him about the impositton of trapping
regulations in BC. From that time on, they were told that no one could go outside the '
boundaries to hunt or trap. He says that the boundaries “make the trap ﬁnes 1/er '
crowded, and make 12‘ less likely for anybody to catch ahyrhmg’f E .
Prior to being assigned a trapping area in BC, Thomas Didzena’s father would trap ;'
anywhere in British Columbia. His dad used to tell him about the days that he could trap 5 -
where ever he wanted, but after receiving “5thth authorfm ” that all changed. 5
Participants also cited ﬁre arm restrictions (P. Ahnassay) as an imposed government '
regulation that prevented them from freely using the iand. “In the pas; the fathers
would take their sons out trappxhg and hunhhg. The sons were taught how to use ﬁre ,
arms and how to set traps. Now they need a permit . .Long ago, people mm 2‘ need to
he taught about safety ihstead they were taught to be careful and told to watch. " He
65

_5 DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
5- TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
believes that traditional hunting techniques are being changed because of the influence
of non—Aboriginal peeples. ~
53 Lack of Financial Resources
‘ DTFN interview participants cited lack of financial resources as a reason for declined use
of remote areas in British Columbia, Alberta and the NWT (E. Kolay, A. Ahhassay, D.
5 ~ Martel, G. Martel, 3.8. Talley, J. Ahnassay Sn, Lucy Foumier, S. Senlantha).
For example, in the past, Archie Ahnassay used to hunt around Amber River, north of
' " the Hay~Zama area. He does not hunt there anymore because he no longer has a
1 vehicle to get there. When he did have one, he travelled all over the land. Thomas
Didzena also cites the issue of the lack of vehicle as a reason for lack of travel. Many
DTFN peeple do not have vehicles due to lack of ﬁnances.
. Up until the late 1980’s David Martel supported his family through commercial trapping.
' This is not the case anymore as the low fur price and the high gas price do not make it
worthwhile to trap. The cost of living now is so high that David would only trap for furs
if that would bring him money.
David said:
"Once I grem I went to work for selsm/t unti/1974. [/7 1.976 I went to work for
the Alberta Forest Service in forest/y I stayed there until 1991. [h 1992 I" went
to work for the hand, driwhg vehicles. I??? still there, It’s too had I d/dh ’t spend
too much time with my fam/J/y as they grew up. [tie a sad thing, but if] stayed
wzth them [23' probably be on welfare. That is the /est th/hg that I wanted in my
life. If 1' stayed with them, I could he ye supported my fam/Yy, With fooo; by
. huht/hg end trappmg hot that doesnt hhhg in much money. You either starve or
go on welfare. Like a lot of people say, in the we days it was good but it was
" hard work You cou/d feed your femﬁ'y end you dfo’h ’2' need much money. Now it
is diﬁ‘ereht We don’t m0 ye around and we he ye houses. Whofs 90mg to pa y the
power h/Yl? Whois- gomg to pay the electric Ml? Today even/thing is at your
ﬁngertws. You can buy anyth/hg you went. but, if you don’t have money it’s hot
at your fingemps. So, in order to get it; you he ye to work. But wark is not an
" the land. That is the sad pent We e/l he ye to work or we starve and g0
' hungry ”
.. 66

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION :5 '
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study __ _ __
‘ TransCanade Hom River Mainline Pipeline ‘
Pa rtlcipants also reported that declining fur prices are causing DTFN trappers to trap
less (P. Ahnassay).
Eric Kolay, Curtis Talley, Gabriel Martel, Jean Baptiste Talley and Lucy Fourier reported
decreased beaver hunting because of the low fur prices, Specifically, Curtis Talley ‘
stepped trapping full time in about 1994 because the price of for dropped too low,
John Ahnassay Sr. believes the younger generation has lost interest in traditional ways
because they don’t have the means of transportation to go out. Sylvester Seniantha
says trapping is now a “waste ofgas", because there “aren’t any good areas left,” and
all the trees that protect the animals have been removed.
Sylvester Seniantha also reported that after the clearing of an area, the mink and the .
marten leave and all that is left is the beavers. This is evidenced for Sylvester only 1
trapping a few lynx and a few beavers last year. This decline in the fur bearing animals
has been incremental over time. Sylvester says the 19605 and 19705 were good for
trapping, the 19805 were okay and since then it has been ‘irea/ bad’f
67 .5

- DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginai Knowfedge and Land Use Study

TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine

6 References

, Bauehard and Kennedy Research Consultants. Dene Tha’Presence in Normeastem 8C.

Prepared for Caliiou Group, Calgary Alberta on behalf of Dene Tha’ First Nation, 2009.

1 0 Dem Tha’ First Natian. Dene Tha’ Tradt/ona/ Aand~Use and Occupancy Stud» The Arctic

Institute of North America, © The Dene Tha’ First Nation, 1997.

. Goulet, Jean-«Guy. Ways ofKnowmg: Experience, Knowledge and Power Among the Dene

Thai © Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1998.

. Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. First Naabn Proﬁles Dene Tha’ First Nation, General
Information, Registered Pcpulation, 2009
httgzzzgseSest.aincinac.gc.ca[fng[MainZSearchzFNRegPogulation.asgx?BAND NUMBER=4488L1
mag
Robinscn, M§chaeﬁ, Terry Gawﬁn and Gordan Hodgsom Mapping How We Use Our Land.
Calgary: Arctic Institute of North America, 1994.

Tabias, Terry. Chief Kem/s Moose: A Guidebook to Land Use and Occupancy Mappmg. Joint

' Publication, Union of BC Indian Chiefs and Eco Trust, 2000.

. Garvin, Terry and Ncrthem Forestry Centre Staff. A Guide :0 Conducting Tram'tx'ona/
Knowledge and Land Use Study Northern Forestry Centre, 2001.

; Raberts, John and Pameia Wiﬂiamsen. Fifst Nations People, Second Edtion. Toronto:
Emond Montgomery Publications, 2004.
Vaﬁaska kis, Gail Guth ﬁe. Indian County: Essays on Contemporary Native Culture. Wilfred
Laurier University Press, 2005.

.. 68

......._ DENE THA’ FIRST NATiON
_‘ Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainiine Pipeiine
While participating in field surveys for the environmental assessment of the Project,
participants reported good habitat for and/or signs of animais that DTFN hunt inciuding
moose, caribou, black bear, grizzly bear, deer, and grouse (C. Chissakay/R.
Metchooyeah/E. Chonkolay, E, Chonkolay, R. Pastion, R. Yatchotay) along the Project
ROW. .
f; During ﬁeld visits, Ricky Pastion made the following observations regarding caribou.
. "Caribou ha ve been pushed fowards extinction from human advance and
. ._ activ/z‘lies such as p/pe/ine roads loggmg and poach/hg. These kinds of
: Imerrupﬂbns will not only damage caribou habitat, it will bring increasing
' " numbers ofpredators and motorized veh/t/es. Caribou 1L9 unﬂke other mamma/g,
'  ; they’re specfag and the y migrate throughout northern North America. ”
36

v
i
f—
I m 2 '
\ - I 2' ‘ ; V
. . _ ‘ '1" \' 2 2‘ 2 .‘3, Aw I. ,
. . . . - 22 ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘(’ A": '( . " ' 2 ’\ " | -' ‘27 N ' 2' " ‘f ". 10
. ' 2-: ‘ “ '.’ 2 '. . ~ 1" 7 ' ‘ ' ‘5' v ‘ > ‘ | I I' 2 .
. 2 , 2. 2 ..2.>~.-.~ <2 <2... :~< ~ 2 > 2' .32: 2 . 2. - .x -. Area of Interest
‘ AK ‘ -“‘V x -2 . 2".”2 ‘f 2 / ‘ ’3 "\z’ - ‘- ’22 ‘/ .- 2' ‘2‘,“ I. '—. ‘ I\. Is '2, ' A. ' ,2 '2‘ 2 J" '\ "'= ’ ‘\
_ , 1.7, . '.- . _ . 7 ... . . . , . ‘ . ‘ .. 7 V _.'\._.»'._‘ ‘ ‘ .. . . 2. ... .- y ._ .. .. . .» .u , ,
2. '- 2%.“. “2 '2, k). ‘5' 3:2". I. A ‘ . . 2 .. ’2, 2,. \‘ ‘~ "1 '-,’ :2”. .2', ‘,/4 9 .‘. ‘ x” 2.3 ,f .. “ -. \4 ‘. '. -. :4, :2. r». .
.2) ~.'.\,- ‘I ._ ‘. a 'I.\).‘ F, ,x r ). , .,‘_ ._ '2, \'1\ -, ,:- ,22 ,Vy-x )1», ~_ 5-22\ . .kv‘. .. -.\. \ -’ 2. '.‘ ,2.’ :3 ,.—:_/2}- ,- . .
.‘. , . . ,2. ’ . . , .' ., 2. .' »[ ". .‘ 5‘ _ ,. . . ,, ‘. ".( .‘2 ,,V V. ‘J. 2.‘ V. :7. \ . 2’ a 2 . ,.\ r. .~ \V‘ 2/ . ’ -.'-. .’~. 3 .- p7 . \
V .2- -I ’\ >2 x - )I‘\ 2"\ f" 1‘ -‘ ‘.2’\'/' ~‘ " ‘ . I’ ,-':‘ .\. /\. X . , ’- . 2* . ‘, Jr" ’2'. .23. )1 \ . ‘, ’2‘ x ‘2: ‘ ‘ ‘3 :’ /< >2. /V 'A ’ A2,! I’ > V ".' > 3‘ . 2‘ . 7":
“r ‘ ‘- 2’ . ' 4 ‘ ~'~‘~ /\/ ‘ "3/; ‘2 " r2 ’2 I'.\ I" "/ > . "x > :2’ I I. 2 '~ 'v 2 "‘5,“ ' Z-f . )~ '. .". ‘ ,’ - 1' , 2. I; y, '-. 3- .T
. . > ,'2 V, ‘r' ,_ r ,I‘. V'.‘ . .‘VV 2." . I: I. f. I \,~/" . . ‘ ‘ . \l ‘. - ‘. ‘. ‘ ~ 1 ‘ lu‘ .' ~ , ‘z : .Ia ' .\ 2 2 ‘1, ..' .I‘ V . a . . , 3...“. .1 ’ c .
’ . .' ,I 3' ‘f gk‘ X )\ >‘ ‘ , '- .‘ " x - 1' J" t‘\ \-/.\ 3*. F ’V 1"" . r \ - 2 ‘ 3'. ,‘ - )‘J ‘. ’. .‘f . ‘r ‘I\ 2’2 \h ’ l‘ 'K' ) " ' > \‘ f ‘;>“.I . ‘
V 2‘ 2, 2.1 2/ ‘. . 3.‘ -_' .52 .. .,\ n‘.’ .N .' \. 2). 2," ,_ ’\/2 f2 ,, V. ._ * ,4 ‘, . ;. r. 2, E. ”-2,. . 3. . - IV- .. -._, \‘ 2,. 2 ._ . ‘4 , \,/‘-‘. . I .
. _l‘ V , . .‘ ‘. .‘ 2 /.\ 2“ 2 .. N .‘ } XI . "2 .\/. \l'l 2' ,'.",X. r. .' ~ I _ . -. _ \ I, \.‘L \ , )\ 1-2 , l . \- \ '/ _. .' _, ‘l. \_‘ . I‘ ". / .‘ .’ L‘-
. ' ‘. .' 2, - ‘ ‘.‘ ‘. . _ ‘ . ' . 2» . ‘ -I l '. ' . s ' ‘ . I' ‘ \ 2‘ .2 ' ' ‘ ' < '
I \ .' .1 . - .‘A_ \'. ., ‘_‘ 1A .' A. . ,'~. ‘,' \I\V_ .. y '2’ ’V , ,l‘ ,\._ .' . -_ x «_ ,4. ’2 \V .g ,\ 4,. 7 , .. 2.1 , .4 2 V,. }_ I A ./\ ',\, ,
,. . f‘ ﬂ _ VI ‘, ‘2' . ‘1 )_ X _ 4,. . \ )x /\_/\.\._‘,I ‘. \)1\« X(‘i‘ 4’ l V . 2 y, .12 .I , 5', ,\ l); .‘ \_,. \ . . )\ 7'. ’2‘ )2. f. .- 2. .\«2 ‘-./ ‘2'. ,, :3,- >\ 3‘ '2‘. ,1.
’ , ‘. - ._ I - , ., ‘~ -. 5 ,. gr *‘ ; , ,2 . . I - ‘ 2_ _, ‘- . ‘ , . , .. f . , r ' '_t . - 2 - . r :_I'. - . ' _ ,2 - .' g ' . ,‘2. A
. 4 a3 “f“ .2 ‘n :2, / f. './ f2. -\-. , , ,- ' . ‘ - ‘.‘ \ ’)"-,\-l, )‘ 7’. .“A ("x I" r ' ‘2 '\‘I -2 ‘3] ,I V V ‘ '>‘. 2 ~ \ ‘ '2’". .' > K) '2 ) " ' \ M -/ " 1 ' ' I \ ‘ ' '
2~ ,‘_~ . n ‘ .' x . ‘2 ,h. )2, ,r _ - \ -~_ . 2. I ‘.- " (A 7 ~ ‘ ‘r: . . 1‘2. 1' ’-\."‘C.)‘ I I- ’i,’ ‘ > ) .'. . ‘s A " > ) . - ' 7‘2 ‘2 V ;' ‘\ j' " ’ -"\ ) ‘ ‘ ' 4 ’ V' ' I“ -
I: t". , . ,. : ‘, - , \_, » . x 2 . ’1‘ r\ “-_‘>-/\" 2.", ‘3," \f, . ; x} ‘I‘. _ ‘ .".' . .. _ ,2 V, 2. 'A . u" .2 V. -\ 1‘ \. ‘ ‘.. V-‘ '5 . _ ‘. J. ‘. x" ‘V, '1 ‘1‘. V y' ' ‘I ~ _\ I k, \r“ “~ B I
> ' ' ﬁ. ' ' ‘ VI ' ‘ 1‘- v ' ' 2 - ' ' 2 ’ l‘. \ 5" - "2 2 . 4 ‘ ' V > ‘ I ' "J V 3- .‘. If ' \ ' I . . I ‘ H. \ '- A '
" ‘- \ '2 ' " -'\I ' _. ." / a I \ ~ - ¥ ' ‘Q .\ '\,'~ 2 2 . -. . 'x '.. .._ ' .‘ ‘- x ,
2 A ,. ,_ \ ._ x . '\ ’2 _-\_ i \, 2 I J . .. . , r .‘ : ._ . , , ,-\ . . . , . .. A I , ,
. - \ ’ .’ . , . 2 -' ' ‘\ ' l . .. ) . _ r ‘,’ . ‘. , 5‘. ‘ 2 \ ‘, - \ 2 , 2 ' \/ \
K i" ,. 5‘. , ‘ z“aa\ \_:g 3.. .2, .~ 2‘. >,,;\\;/ /\ ,>.‘5>\_ .\ .7.“ ./ 2" >\ 5‘ >_.Iy\~-~ ‘. .f‘. 3' ‘.’\/ ’ _. \,;%,V ”‘2’, V2 . _ . K; ., r, ,v. ) >c «I 4‘.” . ./ , 2. '3. '2‘ r
’V '7 ' ‘. I x/ " ‘2 ‘ ‘.7 . " ’ ,>. 7‘ .2‘. \ ‘\ ‘ ’ ' \ ' -. ." A' I “ ‘ I‘. ). ‘ 2 ' - ’- ' ‘ . '. r". ,I'\ 3- .'\ - ‘ ‘1‘ " 2 ’2' .- , - 1’.- ‘- ’2. \ I
“I ' ' \ ' 2 .\ :2. - .' 2 , - I ‘\ K2 ‘ V \r J, , _ ,_ II, - . 2 . I . 1. -. ,. . .. \ ‘. . 2. .’ 2." . _: ‘. x . -. 25.- .- 4., I. ‘. . , ' - , . . /
'.2~ 13>, I \ 4 X "2“,k ‘,\ 1' , '4 \ \ ﬁy‘ \ 7“ I), \__I1 \4 .>‘ ) :, \/\-. 1". V)_ >\_4‘3‘,. 3 .A~._ ‘.‘ 2.‘VV:\ '. . ". ,\ ,, Y . , \ ‘ ,. \2/ 2.’ \’ . ." .’2 ,‘ K ; i U, . 7— \ , . ' . .
f ‘ .2 \\ \- - . \ 2‘ L\ M bf. "A‘ O. .2 , 1‘;,\ ) :2.’ U. A‘ f“ . .’\ ‘r\ > \ \ “. . ,_ , . VA‘ , , -'. '. )5 2. ';< 2._ .. .x' . _). 0V ._ ‘.',".’-7’ , “L . n
' r ’\ ". K '. I * . '\ " ‘ / 3. ' ,\,‘\ /\ . 2 \ ' 2 ' 2 ' ._ .\ 2, '. ’ 4 . / ‘. . ‘ . \' \ ‘, .|‘ A‘ f. , . 1A, .' ' ' ‘ _ / . ' .v. .n n )_ ’5‘ 1'2 . - , ' - --
, , K". —"~ /\ ,- ' , _ '\ a ‘_ ) -'». ‘ V 5‘ _ .“x‘ A f 2". " ‘.’ )\ 'r' 1- ‘ r'. 3‘. .' \ f 1 ', ' h’x’ '. "L - ‘\ ". ,’ ,‘ u) 1". I ‘ " I , ‘. I ' l'. "’ ' 4"} ’\‘ " .
.' \‘v’ \ K )\I ’\ . ‘. I". IA...” *1 \)u' I ‘1 N" ‘a :" )2 ./ '- H‘ ' ‘.' ‘, l‘ ' ' V“, ‘>’ \_ ‘1 2““. .‘. .I’ “- I .. ‘ ’ \ ' 7‘ I ._' .‘y.’ ' “2. ‘- ’>\.> 1" ” ' I \x‘ 1 . ,-I I ' .‘\ “' v .
.- x" 2- 2.2. A 3.2 . ~ I .’ -,"_:<"'-z ;\ '2 I. 2' 2. '2.‘ ‘2 "2/ :f'2.’ a .2 , 2- r2. -’\'- .2 . . '. ' -‘,~2 .2 : :2: x; \
’ 2 /'\,-"~' / . A. ,--.x -..- .2. . t. .- 2 -- ~.’ 2» 2- ‘ ' ~,. 2: ‘3 2- ,- ‘~,-‘.2: : 2.42; .- .
.' ‘ ' ‘ f v . ,‘ "v ‘ ' ' \ "'- " ' 3' ‘b’ - 2' .1. )l‘ - ": '"2 .‘ - "x ‘ ' . ~ : ‘- ‘ ' ’2 "2 .‘ ': A '2'” I C l- .c‘I . ‘2 , 2 ' V ' ‘3‘ “ ‘ '
,‘. /\, a ‘. - .\./,‘1 2 . ‘ 9‘ \ }~ .' . . V ,' , _ , \ \‘V ,1 . , x ’5‘ ’2 ,_ . ‘J \ , V . ' 2 . .p _ . 1-. ‘ ._ 1 4 _ a _V \ \. .- _, -. , . . . . 2‘
, A " A I’v. ‘ ,‘\ ‘.- ~_ ’ ‘ j l. )\ /'_ - . )\, .’ \z ‘3. Av .' 2. f, . ".7 ' K -.\, ., . ._; .I/ J -, ’ Aa7_ ,‘ ,‘ _ \ 2 f ‘. 2 , _ .7 ' J \
5- i t '\ .\’A‘~‘.I\ F ‘ ,1 .‘ r . 2, ‘ ‘.’ \1 *.V_ V. :.‘ V‘.‘ :2 ‘ 4\/ ~. \.I' x) \.,I _ \ 4" ) ’1‘ ’. ‘ 2 , ./ 5“. ‘.’ I; 2‘! ’ -.2 . 1’ ". ‘ ~ ”I ‘ V,\ .‘ )1 > L' 2" .. ;'-.J I.
3". ‘5“ . .f ,2. ’2 '\-.' — - 4/ '2. \ 2’ ,2. ‘_, ‘I. ‘3. -‘. ’,\ - 2‘ >I.\_ ‘2; ‘ 2 ,‘I‘ A_ ,- .2 ._ '/2_I ‘.’-“ ‘2‘ V T" ’. '2‘ 2'2. 2‘. ‘ ,‘M, :( 3. 9. \ ,—\,\ , . ._ .\ .‘2. \
~ I .' ’ ‘(X' V ' 2 \ ‘ r“ ‘5 . ’. ' ‘ ‘ ‘. ' l-l . V ' A ' ,'» ’. "‘ ’ . , ‘. ' ‘ ' \ ' . ‘-' \l ' ,‘ ' ’2 / ,' \ .' ' ‘ I 21‘ > ‘_ .‘ ‘« I ‘ ‘1 ‘ .ﬁ“ ' r' \r ;. . ‘ . \ _‘ \J‘ ‘. \ s u ‘ r \ _'_ ’ 2“ u. 1
AV? ‘ ' U \\ X x“ ‘2: ."V J' V“ V 2‘. . f . ,‘V \a ._,I 2., ax \/ :_ p. ‘4 '-._‘ ’. .\.. ’7 I . ‘5' ,_VI .' .X J .’- .' . ;. VX\ [:- \ .2,’ “2 .1... T‘ ‘ ._V 'f -. .' .~ ,I‘ . H‘V' V", \, - .' .4. 2.) — K , ,.l K ’. ‘ '0'". / . ‘. , . V3. \,. \. .' \‘. .«:'\
‘ /2."‘ «"V 2 ‘2 ,. 2'- ,‘7 2”~""~ ~ ‘v' '- 12$ )2 f2. ’2 '\ "2) " .‘ ' .' 2. ’ ,» 33“». ... 2. )f ‘~ ‘ ‘2 ‘ -‘ ‘22 ‘ '- ~. F ~ A: ‘ 2’ (1V .2 >‘. .‘A ,2 ,I. J .. X/V p? ‘. 2r. ‘4 3\ ‘
' )3“. . , f.- r ‘3 .\oL\,‘.'/\:_\r : , A‘ A ’5‘ ,/“ 1""; ’ _ l} "/ ‘I :,' \,\ f2 ‘ - ' )s‘ \‘ 2 “x‘ ' ' > .‘ ,’ '.'\ '1'. ’\,( ’, ‘J . .‘ . K K 'A' ~5~.' ‘\ '- l4 .’ ‘2 y -, ‘ __ , "._ "» ." ' «r 2.. «f ' 5," "‘;.' >I‘/\' LK /~",’:\>\9 /\’ \ . “)‘J.\../ 2- .\ {,2‘; 'x
1-. I I .r ‘ “\I‘ ‘ J'h». ,- .“..""‘ “ '.'\:‘. 2..- ,. . 4 '2. ./.- ‘ .I 2 . ‘ .2 2., I‘. ‘ . - I - , .. ‘-..I\« 2. 2 . ,- v .\I2. ' , .- ~.
1“ 1. '..‘ ‘ ‘. .v- .) ‘. . . _ . ,r \ ' 2, »/ . 2 A _-x, A .. . . , ‘.‘ , ‘,:2 .; 2 y - '2 - 122/.1". ... . . - , _- _ _ _ . h . \ - : \2 .— .2 .. A 1-_ A .,I~. I" ,I‘i . 2,, 2. . ’ \ 3.; §- - - .-‘. r \ I
, -.,’~ . f2; 2,;'.;../Tx 22. ,:«:. ,. /..:\,. “V 4». '2 2 . 2 '2 2 v ' ~. . . / .- ~ ' . -’2. 2‘ .— 2/ 2 ’ 2: 2', ,2.’ --, \ >2, - .‘I. k». ’2. r2 ,4._/.,;.~., 22,. 9/3.. #33... ., I1.
2 .. 2 f 2. , ’ «arm . ;' r . -. »..‘~..‘\ . 2' . 2 ,_ . I. '2 .n .. ./- . I..2 f‘ .' :2' ‘ ~" L.‘ 2/“ ‘2I ' 2' .- ‘I . "2.. :
"\,,~ ,2. . ,_ W2. ._ _.‘2 .- 2. 3‘ ”I. 7 -, ., .V)/ .L ., . ,‘_ ’- -_ _ _ ‘..-_ 2., _ -. :A ,___.V 2.’ J . ‘ v-2,“ .-. 2_ ,.\ C ..' /../’3 .2 .2 \. A: Wx/Y _ : X,‘\;’K,’v-\)’\Al. ;._
‘ 2 ' /'\ I 2 '\ 'I‘ 2‘- ' \ ' ' 9 '~ \ ' )‘ ‘~. " ‘ ' ' \ ‘2 ‘K ,- :2 ' ' A ' W ' . x " ' ‘ 2A ' . 2 f ' ‘ " . ‘ ' ' ' 'l J ’ X ’A ’ ' “Y ' A | V '\‘ \‘I ‘ . ' '
\h ". .' 2‘ ‘ ‘._ ~.' } 7>\,«\ 1.. ' V ‘ I I ' ‘. ' ‘2' .' ,'\ 1‘ -, A ' '2 I K., ‘\‘ . . y' : / 1‘ ' - . . ' ,6: .2 ‘ ‘ a " ‘,‘ ‘I 1' ’. )‘ h. ‘. / ‘._ J. “ ',‘ ' 'r‘ ’,~‘~ .)'\ l‘\ ,"\(A . 2' “i" - ’ ‘< ‘\ \I . ' I-" 's"’\ r ‘
x V. ,. .-. . ~ 2 , . , , , I .r_ .2 . \ . -. : I ‘ , . , . . .- \ 2 ._ 2 -, V . - . .-.. , . , , _ f. . . . , - L n . 2 \ 2
/.‘ 4 \ .‘ . . " y_ -" 2 2 ' .’ ' ‘, . -.' .ur -' N ' ' ' . ‘ ‘- ‘ ' ' ' " x .' 2 U '2 V' ' ’ 2 ' . 2 - ‘. ‘ - , ’ ‘2 . \ ‘ ’ b - “I ‘ ’ 3‘. r‘ ‘ . "‘
I ."\ / . \V /\_ IL\. ‘ “,1 ./ ‘V.' ’ ' n . _.’ ‘ 2 -‘ ‘ 'Va. " . ' 2' ‘ \ \‘. ' ‘ ’1 _'-I 2 ‘ ’ ‘. ' _ 2‘. .‘ ._ ./ ‘2 '2‘ ‘ . \' “ . _ 2" l. ‘,' L- " ' . .' _’2. . " ‘ II..{'.\~/t.’ l , \ I ‘1 . _ . 0‘ VJN‘I‘. 1" hr ‘. t I ). - l
\. ..\ .2, 4 ,. ‘/ /\/\- . 2. - z . A -. .-2 ~r . ' . 2 - . _ -~ ,. - - y . 2 . ,. 2, . , ~ . . s 2 \
. .‘ ‘: 2 2’ \I' x «I ‘ ‘P E: /\ . , I 342.“; " ,2 2 ‘ . . . ‘ . ' ' 2‘ .I" ,"2 ”4""""“ I. . F- -. J ’. 2‘ -"’ . 2 . -' is '2. '-'I .- ' I. .' ". .\4 ‘. I.‘ ’ ‘ ""3 r ' / ," / \~F\\ ‘ I.‘ 2‘ ' “ \ f\- s“ . *1 D l
, . . . , ,- , .22 2, , . H ._ , I- . , . . I. . ‘ I .V . . . - .. n 2 , 4 . - ' . ., ‘- ~ ~ I . a , ‘2 ‘ ' _ ‘ ‘ . ‘. 4
.\. x 1' \7 ‘. K 2}, X’ - >f\.’fA\/\_ 2 V , \I . ,’-, y\ «)R , '. I, .>/:. \ ‘. _‘ K“. . ,_ .‘ . . _ 5. i . . ,. 2‘, 2 , . 2_ , t ‘ )‘ .2 ’2. ,2 .' ‘.' ‘, r 2K2 2:. .1?” 3 1 f V .,".. '5.‘ W" , ,J \“ .__- \,‘ \\ r, .\ 3
,2'. I y , ' R. 2. ' .. ,3 -, ’. - ; - 2 , . - "7 -‘. r n. -"‘~. “ I‘ \,‘ ‘. :2 - i‘ .‘ - . . “ ' . 2' ' ~. -.-'- ‘ ‘ 7. 2. 7'. 2. . . ' - ‘. 2 J N »‘. .I . I"- I ' ‘- '2 2' ‘ '3‘ c -'2 :— - -
I. 9' .l‘ A ‘ ;"“7‘ \V"\7A\\I \" \ ' {\l‘ >. .2 "I' ‘ " "I A t" “I \"J¥\ . I\ V [I \I \ ‘ '1 . 'x I“ ~ ' '- R I‘ ' ' . ‘ .‘ /'\ - u .A y “K ‘ I" l ‘ Z'. ‘ Ii ' ‘ I" ‘\ :3. '4 "‘2 \ f‘ .’ ,V ‘ >‘\ \/\ 2‘.‘-' ' ' \ 'V ~"' “‘6 \s ‘
. , . ~2‘ , .. _ ._ . 2 . . , _ . ~. . _ , .’ ‘ V: . 2 . ; 2, .- - - _ . , .. , V . 2 2 .‘ - .. ._ ‘ _ .,- . ‘. -. .I .. _. . _ . ,
:2. A ‘..I2 ’ x2 - 2 ~2 .- r 2' x 42 . 4. I » . 2 - - , » . ., 4 - 2: ~ ’\-’>’;\ -'>f.§\;.~ 2:".1- 2 2/2 :2. :2
. 2. .' ; ' ,2 2._ r‘» . _. . 4 '1‘ .. ‘. I. x .. ~ ' 1 2 .1 v ‘ _- 2 ’ < ‘ . - g. A '. '- ' , ‘ ' ‘ , ‘ . '2. . ._ _ ‘ 1 ‘ .' .. ' ‘ , * . . ‘ l . '
‘. , ' if . \_' \x‘ _.' . r" .‘.V '\'.I v\ _. ‘ , “.‘_".', 2".2 ' _ . . .- » '.‘, , -. . .' ‘ ' _ :,_ ’ / V a . 2, 2‘ '. 2 . 1 ‘ . w . V." )‘2_ . 1, . . 2‘ \h L" '~. l". ‘.'\/\ 2. . \f\ ,V.’ 2 . “V. 4‘. 1.‘ V!“ ."-_.’
.2 5.. .N. ‘." -\ , :_, XI " -) ,V ,2, . ~. A ‘. t ‘. 7‘ . ,. _. .' , /-, V .‘ _ r.‘ \ . , .. -~ _. “ '. ’ 'x- ‘- .' f. , 2. ’2. . ‘, . " ’\ , I. .' {A . k - ._ 1". 7'\ 9.2, f .‘ f \_ _ ‘ VJ' ’5“ 3. . ': >‘ .‘ /\_
_ ’1‘, . .. n, , \f , . , _- . ./~ . ,1 ~. . 2 . »_ . . . ,II, , , - ._ ._ . . 7.. ~ ,3 ,I *. :_ . - 2. ’. : -4 - : ’ X 2. '2 ( )3 x - -\;'x 2 ,‘ . ,v‘ I y \ , A —
l' ‘ .‘ x , ~ ’ \_ .y \ : '.' \ ‘ .' ‘\‘ \ 2" . \/ ..' A. 2" \ ’. .2. ‘ , . I ‘,' __, \.’ \ :, _.‘ ~ I . . \ _ .I- ~V2.‘ , " 3" ‘-V / ‘. -\ ' I \, '\.’ 2 V‘ II x ;-, ,'\‘ ’\ \.,,‘ '\’ ‘. ’ \‘. )'
,’ 2,. [.2 f2" 2- . ~\~2 ,. \- f. 2». . x2 J. : 2' <3 , , .2 - . 2 X‘ 2 , - .2 :‘ i. ..u'\’ x I) . . .\ - 2 f 0\1\ \ \- -\ 4 2. , -2\.-.« ..
- . .- \ - ‘- 2 2 . ~ 2 -' . ‘2 2 x ' ,' ’ ' .- . ‘- ' ' - » I '2 , ‘ . - '~ ,- ~ ’ ‘, , .. ' \ 2. "2 ‘ ' .‘ "I ‘- ‘ ' , - I". , r v' W ‘. '. _ «' .‘
._ ) \ , . . _ . ~, ._ . ., . , -. - . , “> . _ . . ‘ A ‘. ,2 y . . .,_ ‘ . ,;\. \/r . . _ . ,_ , ‘\/2
—2 . \ 4 . . > - , \ I , I \ 5 . . V, . I V n ‘ l - . . . . . . \ 1 ‘ I \ . 1/ ,« ~ - . . \
, .\ x , P04, 2. . .1 -, . . r, _, . , . ,. . 2, _ z. - ,. 2- , _ . , 2 - ‘/.,."2 r . I \ 2 .',.( .- -_ - .‘\ ' ,,\*\' . 3 ‘ 2 t,-. '2 ‘ /\.‘2..
'. \ 'Y r'. W ‘ . ‘2 2. \ - x, ‘2 ' ' ' . ‘, ‘- . ‘ . .‘ ’ ' ‘. f ' . . 2' I 1- . '- I /‘. . -“ - . ‘ ' - \ A .\/\. ' - )I . "
_ '2‘ I .- I. .’ . '\ -"I . v - f ’ 2- . . , ‘ ‘,. \- , 2. . 4 - — 2 . ~, 2 .2 ,- ‘. ’ ~\ . - ). .2 ,t'.:
) . I . 4 - . . . - . - > 24. I . .2 . , . _, .I . . , , . . - .. . . .. » - - I. 2 . - \r 2 - , .s. 2 ,
. \, ‘. ( fx —. ,. —. -\, 2. 3/ \_ r . , , _. . _ r.. ‘, _ . .. ,‘ V ., . I ,. ~ . l . , . - . , o. / .-\ . 'i .
_ .2 _ _ . .2 ’. . , . . V . . ,. _ ‘ . . . , . , ' _ _ . . ‘ . , . , , . . ._ . .2 _ ,. , ‘ .7 ’2‘ f, , .
l ‘ ‘ . ' . It \' "'r “‘2 ;\ >‘\ :1. xi ' "\'5 \ " .I \\ " I“ 3‘, ‘/ ¥l -.“/.‘ "h 3 >2), x 2. K "2 -\ A -\ ‘ . a r I K I a ‘v - x "“ ’\ i ’l ), 2., ’\} \I’ Rl“: \. l}: \-‘ X J ‘- \ ‘;W'- 5‘ ‘ I 2 ' .'F ‘ “""e A.
. .2 2‘ . . . 1 , _ ._ :f .> , . '. . . -.- ’ .‘ ,-.‘ . , 2- 2 ',’ 2 ' 1 - I V. ' ‘, _ -. '. - '5 ._. -. , ‘ . , , 2 _ , . . , - -‘ 2. ,
.’ ‘ ~,' ,-l 7’ .V x L’. V.I2. f4). 2_. ". L 'J .\A'_, .\‘ Y. .'. .\ . i" , I, l ‘ I 2 ‘ / ,-\ 2‘. ,\ \ 2, I . ‘. '35 2‘-2. 1 ., 'I x 1‘2. . ‘ .\ ‘ x. ‘ 1’ x " ‘.' / ‘v\ .' ‘\ ‘ ‘a- ." 3, ‘V‘, ‘. ‘1, >. ’3’ p‘{ \ .3, h‘ .'\ 3 \ 4' ‘7‘ .
‘ _’ ' _’ 2,2 _’ ‘ ' / ',\‘ l‘ " ‘ \_ , ,(.’\.1' ‘VIV > ’.' . . ‘ f. V , | / ’3’! \( A —, r. ,' "‘1 . ' I ' S ' . >' “ "_ 3 .3, ‘n r 2‘ . I. ’2‘ 2"‘3 _3‘ V - - _ 2‘" ‘4‘ .x‘ ‘: 5’5} ’ ‘, 4‘ K A - l ' . -> ' .~ 3‘» .‘1‘ ‘ ‘-
, ‘..' ‘ r ‘3' \.'\y >/ , . '2, 2‘ , 2, ' "_ -' u, '2, ‘,, . 'I, Ix, ,\ .‘ ,‘2. . \l . ‘. ‘y —x.-\ 2 . 2'. I ' '. 2,! \ 2 ,o. ’ '2. 2‘ ' 1"." F' ‘2.’ ‘ ‘g- i «'2. ( ~‘ ~ An; I“ ‘ ‘ ’ \. - ,-,\ 7- r‘ )h ‘N; _
\. ,'-. [I Mu‘ , ._,I 5, > ‘. \V _, . _ . V)\ . . . ~ . > l" >\ / H \ \ , \ . ’. ‘ .x .‘ ’ ‘ ~. . ' . . . ~ . “r . f . ‘ \' .v . ‘." ., .’ ?x ‘ . 3‘ ”NV" ‘1 5.2.. , 5‘ . _ »"-.
:‘. " ' ’ .r'xl '2 - .' ‘. '- V I /. '\ 2 '2 4' ‘ ' 'L-‘.’ 4 \ . l 2‘ /\,; ‘ ‘ I} I\ ‘. . ‘. '2 .- .)' ' ‘ " '\' '- 1‘: 2..- -"‘- v‘ t ‘ ,V\ ‘ ‘t ‘ ‘ . 2‘. 2-. . -" "- ‘. ' \~ \ . ".
2' ‘-/‘- -’ .‘I. .- .5 "—2 I -. '. 2 - . - ' .x '2 ' . -'~’ ‘ ) :/ )2 r2 - 3' ?"2' ‘2 -' >. -. M ..I-~ ‘/~. ; -‘ .‘I- ."2 A '- , «3"‘5‘ 2“; 2 : '2. > -.I'..--' 4*. ’
>’ \I‘, ‘3, El -‘\ A 2“ , I‘ x I‘ " . t ‘. n’ .' b." . . ‘. l. 2/” ,f‘} I .}"\' I \I‘ lX’ >\ I" )2 -/ .". 1"‘.2 ‘ } f 4 \- 2.7 'l ,. ‘3: 3. I" . 3‘ ‘ V “‘1‘! h“ V“. ‘> ,‘ i'v i'2 "_ : ’\ “~ 1 l‘v‘ " '. K ‘ ‘i. h \\ ..\' r' k: 'I- .2 ‘ "' hk‘.
.\ 2‘. ,‘ l" ‘4_ )_‘&;~ .’\ . - f" . ‘ . ‘»,' ‘ \ .: ‘.\ 3‘ 1'. Sim.“ ,’\‘ f\,, ‘< >//‘./ ‘3; ",I‘ ./I-. >2'\~,'\ ,' T \ '2' ‘ 2. W” ,_ ,'~—. /“"\‘~\\‘/{; 2._ x a '2‘ —A. 4' ‘. ‘)‘\"'.\/‘\/ V‘lf}; ‘7'. .13 2. -~ 4" f. " *I\ . .', . -' s ‘
' ‘- f V .' \» -‘ 3f 1 "2. v' " . r' ‘. -' ‘ . '. ‘- . :' . . \. ‘ ‘\ ’ ‘ 3 ‘ ' m' ' - 4 \ » :I 2 y‘.‘ '. f- — ’ ' r ., - », ‘.2 ‘ ’ 9 r ' ‘ '\ .l‘ \ - . ' ' 1‘ , ‘2. ‘ ,-. ; . ‘._ .
x . . . , ,. ¥.- . x . .. . , . ,. ,f I a , I. ,’\, 1‘, ~.. . . . ~ , . 2. -. f . -. ,-_ . f— . 2v , \ \. . 7. “X,I .._ l2 -
'. . I». , -. ._'. ‘2’ . V -_ . f‘ / . , . . ._ . . "k ) .\ _ , . 4 . a . x \. _, . ., k - ‘N - -, , ‘ .2 ., , . . \_ _. J, , -- .\ _. > , \, _v .). \. .3 . . _ > ‘ ‘1 . ) _ _ . . ‘V ’ .2 -.‘
. . , I . .. / - - . . ,‘. ‘ - - t .. \ 2. - \ -_ ,. )\ a \_ \ .. . . . 2 ..\ ._ . ~, , _. ‘5‘ _ . . .1 . ,‘ \' . r . A n‘ ‘ . . 2 . . ,
‘-, ,2 ‘. ‘ ' -‘ - -v" '. ‘i ‘- ' ' -2_ . . \ ‘ .' \ ' " - j. ‘ .b‘ .4“ ".' “2‘ \ 2/ -._,' 5’ \ .\ ,I. ' | ‘ ‘ , 2 ‘ ‘ ,. - - ‘ , :'\- ' ‘ 2 \.' '0‘ . ’ ‘ \i « J.\ r' 2 .' ‘._ ,' ‘2’, ‘.' '5‘ ‘2 \ ‘ L. -
II“. ' \ ‘Il‘ /~‘ 2' K» ' K‘ " “>9 ‘3 J‘. x'. , ' - .‘ ‘. '\ ’ i‘.‘ «‘2' .‘. \-" ."., . "\I' -‘ l". 4% " \l \ I \2/ . 3' it. pf '~ " ,“ n’.' 'f‘ ' " ‘ ’ l, ‘3 'A‘, ' Vs ' |'\ . ' ‘ M." .2 ' 2. \ '\\ \ y ." ". rt. ‘-\‘," ‘ '1 - . ‘-. '.' .' N ' .‘_ “ -‘ ‘.-.
. ,‘ .-\ A_ . . 2 . 2,. . .._ 2., )2 . , . . ,I. - ‘ , \ - . . , 2 \/‘- , 2‘, ' _. . . . 2. r. .. : 4 ._ , _ - , “ ._ . . f , ,. ,.,1)\ .2. . ._; ~,- , . c 4
2 2i {1. ’)< f ’\)/ 2 2‘ \ ' 7 2” ‘ . -, ,I . . - 2‘ ’K ’ . ‘. ‘2. . 3‘ ‘ ‘ . ," {5) \ ' Y‘._ I . . .- . .’- ‘ ‘,-- 2' - , ‘ .2 . -. V‘,‘ r . - . A A . x1, ‘ ‘ 9' f," ‘, A . - \ ‘\ ‘ 2 J \ .
/ ‘ V ‘- . ‘ "- ' .2 ' ‘ ' 1' ' 2. ,' 'I. U , ' ‘.' 2 , 2 . - - ‘._ . . ' ,' .' .- 2 . 2. - 2 ' - .- 2 ;.‘ -_ I, ). n I . 2 _f _ '\_ \ , 2, . ‘ . ' p ' 2 - ‘. . - . ,A I~._ y -
:\ "~._1)‘\.-’ K'. > ‘-.‘ l. . }. g x, 2‘ rk- 4‘ » ' ‘2 I) 3’ I .\.I ‘.’ \2 )x 1': "‘ ~\',\;I' >" '. - ,2 ‘. "r. / / " ‘\ ‘h‘ ’ z" I‘."\’ ‘ 7' ’I " ¥. . x .‘l . " \'- ‘. x' I 3‘} “- -‘\ 1 } x" ' “p“ ' ’)>.'f-\f Fr \"2. X‘ \A- " ('2. .
. ‘ I"! \ -: ~.. .-»-,»‘.-2‘- «4.2 .31.... r. 2 :-~ -. 223 ,2, 2. .y .- A - , '. 2 .,,. ., , 2- '. ‘23" 2 ' ‘. ‘2 2 '4 .. .N‘v'»: 2’5.) ‘ ' '3 ‘2. ‘- 2.7-. 2-. .~
I“ "I ‘ ”)2, 2’ 'V' A ;\ “\ " ’r‘ " ‘1‘“ " "'7'“? "— " 1; 3“ ’ﬁ, i" ' ‘ ' \XX " ' 2' --~ 27”}. K ' '2. 3 h ' "x ,v‘ ‘ " " r" r‘ ‘\ I l‘ ’ '\I‘ ) '- I > R )‘l r ‘1’ ‘ 'l 2' "2 3’ "'1 "‘I “1 N): ’ '2 2 I ‘
l‘ ,'. , . . .2 - 1-2.;_-__-4a-_ . , .> _ v . I ‘./ '. - ‘N . 7,». ‘ ~ , . » >2 ‘J. '. - .2 .22. 4 \ , .2. ~._. ‘_ . V .. . _ . ‘ 2 .. . ‘ ,. _ ‘ . . -V ' , . . t |
l .3. L. 2. :\ :5. '.‘ _, r’~-~’~.' \ . I .‘ .2 )\/ ‘\‘~ ."- .)" , .4 ." \. ' ‘. “\ -.; \ .f ,p ‘ ,F . ’ V .\. .‘. , ' f; _> n' . _\ ’ ._ . - .‘ \ I \ \ \’f x ‘ k t ,‘. ‘ ‘x. l) ) . 'J‘) r r .1 .6 ‘) _\ ,‘ x " x\ «‘4’.
‘1‘ 2 , 2.-;«-2j. . .‘. . I ~_\ 2.22 K .2; \) n.2, ’ -, 1 .xxg-x : . , . "-.- ., 2, )1, 2.. . , . . 2 . 3. mg 8.‘ '. A . ‘ .- .2'2 . , 2/3,. ,.\ .\,-. RX. \
.' “'11:.“ x. >2 2. 22. 2 "- . ‘2 ’ .' 4'2, 2“ \‘A'V " ‘ s' 3 2‘ \, 3 .I-. V '2 . ‘. ‘ g '. .2 ,‘I. -. ’ 4 ’2 "2.2"‘.‘ ‘ ”“- "“4‘ 2 ‘2'2- ‘ ' i '_ - \ 4 "5 J ‘~ ‘ ' . 2 ' \\ .’- . .7
/-- 2 .2. 2 3 x- . ,-,I- 2 . 2 \- \ ,\._. \ .2 . . . \ . » ,.2- .. .. y, . , , -25.. \23- - 2
\ 1"." "- X 'I“ f“ 2 | "I- i I I .' ‘ "s I". ‘ f ' ' I ‘ I ‘2’ \' ‘.“L~‘:‘V 2. ' k» ' m’ ' -" -. ' '. ‘. Kr. .2 ‘ ‘ 2‘ I ‘ . I‘ ' ‘ l \'l ‘ > ‘ ’ 3‘ ' K ‘ \ F q‘ 4 '. .7 . F .\ a 2
1M2 , . 2. .2 -. -. .- .. \ 2. x2 ,. mﬁ—Vr » 2 - \2- .2.- . .. ~2 ,2. -. -2 2‘ ’2, -, 2. - 2.. . ’2." 2"“.X‘2. - ‘ .2 -
>’ ) ‘ "' >2 "2 - "2" A ' " " ‘2' “ ' 'l ’\ '1 x X 'I‘ AV"??? 2- . ' - ‘ " ‘2‘ "y. - “,' )2 " X Z ' " -' A HGK '2‘": ‘ 'x\~" \' \).\ ' '}l \-‘ ‘ ’ N - .
. {a 'r- , , ~ . .' ‘2‘ ’ 1 ._ . 2 — - J: ,- . . '1 ~ ' . .‘ _ 2 . . 2 ___ _' .~. - ; . v -_ _ .' . , ~ " ' -.Vv _ ‘.' ._ ‘ 2 ’ - n ‘4 . ‘ ' -.' ~ _. 2 ‘2 ' _\
_ -‘/< ‘I ‘s ‘\ .2.V .‘ -_ y' a ' \ 2- ' M w . -. ~' u’ ‘ ‘ " . ‘24 ‘ ‘1: - ' "- ‘ A \ ' x “ I \ - . 'l I‘/ : .‘25‘ ”I ' f "VJ ‘5. I, l. \ I 3. J ‘ \ . ‘1 > "“ >\> ‘ .
2 ' ' .‘ . . , ~— ‘ :2, :. '. ', V , . .‘a 4. _‘ ‘ . '. , - - — 4 ‘- . ~~j, :’ ‘- u _ ,. ~ -‘. - I -. . 2 - I ' f‘\ ‘ . " .0. :
It\n/ ‘ ’ ‘ F 1' j: S, " ~ 4-. , , \ ,f ‘2 I 2 2". ,’ ." ‘. ___ ‘ 2‘. . ' Y .‘ ‘ 2. > ‘.' \, .' > ‘ , 2.. , I {I ‘-, ‘ . " \I '2. . .','- -' n I \ >>/ >))'{y:\A 2 ‘ ‘3'" /\" . 2‘ 4‘) 'r" ‘ v
. a \. x) I\‘," "I ‘.f““ \(21. ’.2 3‘ .:'\ . ' aﬁ’jl'f“;> _". “. \)-. .1, ‘1‘. , ._ I ~ . .‘ . .2 . v -~4 I '1‘ “ ,‘ ‘ \ fr. I > , “/“X \. I\\2 . \ ‘ " 1/; ‘ 2‘ x. .' ‘/ "J‘l? JK‘ \ ,l . 7V ’2; ﬂ) )‘ y }’>_ ’\ . .
‘ . .. a . \ . I , ‘ o _ 1 . \ ~ '_ . 4 . g - 2 , . ~ A ‘ ’ 2 I‘ 5‘ . . .' - ' ~
. V. ’. , \ . \ ‘. ._ _ .I .‘ _‘ _ ,. _, . VV .\._ ‘ V K .2- , ,\ . .. , \, ._ 3 ,. .\l .. . ,. .‘o ’9 . KL _ ‘, . ..‘ , . ._ _ . ,. a. , _ . a .
‘ .’ \.. r\ " 3‘. ' ‘2 2 ' \ ‘ .‘l' ‘3" ' )- r' ‘52 V. 'V u.‘ ‘ '1 ‘ .‘.\ 'X‘N .7 ‘f’ \"\ ’\'\"2 )2 >73. ‘ f X .‘X N; 3 s, .17, f . r'. r \ " r" ‘. ) ’2“ '— ).">‘/(Yr "H 2 '5' ' /\’/‘.' llK ' ' *~ "‘ . 2’2 ‘3; ‘V ‘ ‘ v'-‘ > '5! ‘
- ‘u 2 5-. -‘- ’2 ‘ -' \1:\ ‘5 Y/\.’ ‘2’ ‘2 "‘ "1”)": “a' .-. . ‘ . .I’. 2 X 2_.I ‘r 2- )2‘ l-."' ‘.=\‘ “ \ ‘ “ ‘2' )2" /' P A :‘j;\ f)"«?*g"/ “ {>1 3‘,—)>2 :‘x "' K ”‘1
K' ‘ -' \ a ,v' '. -'\ v '. . . ‘ ‘ ' ‘\I' .' ‘2 _ ’. -' '. I . ‘4 ' ‘- ’ ' K ', ‘, '-' ‘ ,' 2 - ,'\ ,' -. ‘ 4 ' 2 “ ' ‘ '. -'- ’ ‘ ' ' ' \ I . ' I . 1. . ' -2 ‘. 2 X I I‘ p .‘- 2
-- '.“ --.I ~ - . -. ‘~ IN, . - . - 2.-~- V A . -.I~ 2; , . ;- '. ,’ 2)., .'-.-2\ '-I . ,- . ~ .-. 11V , . \ ,-\2. \P-I- \ v.
V 2 ,I ' l. X 2" ’ ~. I ' ' ‘- 2’ ' ’. D. I.‘ / , ' .. \ " ' "r .' ‘ r. \. 2 r2, . ~ - ‘. -‘ ‘. --' ‘) ‘ 3 , ‘1, , 2 I. I 2 . ' 2 ,‘ fr ) . ' ‘\ I ' \' . 4‘ ‘- \v-r w--. 2 . .
4' \ ’ ‘ 2 XI .‘ '- ' r. 2. ‘K .\ I 2 ,flf‘. r \r' ‘ 3’ ‘. ). - A ' 'i‘ . . \ ’n “‘2 V ‘ - u ; ’- f. '2 x‘ \‘ ‘ ’ y ‘, ‘ ' 2‘ ."l ‘ \ .'\ ' ' \{l ' l ‘ I '. ~ ' ~. _r \ . -.
. , - _ , , _, . f .’ . _, - .‘ 2 ,‘ , , , . ‘ .2 ..' _. .‘ y f. - , , ~ _- , . x , . , . - , . . 2 . .‘ ‘ .-4 _. . . NI ._ . 5. , ‘
._’, \l pl Y @1132. 2. ,\ -\=./\VIV' ) 3. 2,- ,'\‘ [AV A ,I‘ it“- ,1 -‘ I .- \. 2 \I V. l): ,_ :4: .h-‘<‘I‘2 ‘# . ,’ )’.’,‘ , \ ,2 ‘_ ,.’ ‘1' > )\III - ‘I \ ‘ An: .)'_A'\_% ’lhl‘& ’\ 3‘, ,“ ‘->_ ' . “N." ,1 A 4 ,> . f). 21‘ I 2.
, 2‘ ,xr - ‘ A . , ., 2. - ». , I. ‘ -~\,,-\{- _' ._- 2,: . .. _-_ vx’S2 , ‘ I. ‘ ‘ a ,2 .2 2. , )- - t, ‘ . \,' - \ ~ 2' ,.
_ .p 4- -. . . ‘, ' -\ . _ , . . q ' . .’ I ~ _. V v\ , . _ ‘ . \ a . _ ,. R ..‘2. _ ‘ A . - \ ,I \ \ I . m ,. _ ,» r .,‘ .
‘ ' {x}; 2" \- - ’ ‘ k 2’ ‘l f‘ ' "(\r IA.“ l) ’T" f“; A, ) “2 " \I l > ‘m1‘2 ’- .I‘ ‘3‘ ‘I‘/"‘ ’1. f“ 1" f“ [A‘- -> .\'\ ‘3! X ‘ ﬁtf‘, <’\’:"\' t .iyll"?\§é! :’\ ’\ .‘\ x‘ l' 0 h ‘ V"; >\ \\ \ k'ﬁk .
I ‘ . 2 2 \ _ . .. “ ‘._ ‘ ‘. ' .' .‘ 2 >. , ‘H . ‘ ~ .‘ ‘ .‘ ‘. ‘. » ~. . 4 . - .‘J- .‘ . v‘ 2 ' t ‘ , i ' 4 ' ’
,\" IQ? 9. ’\ 4.: ‘22" \r)\ ’ ../ V; >2, ‘2 d .2‘2 /\ 6. '~ .’ ..’\- L" 2' - ‘. I. ,I\ '2. - \ z : —'.‘~ '--' 2.’ ‘-' ‘f . u, - 5 ' x. ‘ 2" "1- '2 )’ l. '. >\ t" '2 «’\"2 A. "3 J ‘ “ 1" ‘\ \ " 5‘
._\ 2',‘ ;' )\-’_ _.\( . /\ ~. -’. ._ y, \ I.)\. 3: I 2‘ . ._ '2‘ AAA. ./,; . A. .,_. .k __ 'k V,‘ . A ,\ 2. «K, 3, .‘f; ’4 >4\ ‘2‘ 5. 4’2 ,\ ‘I ’x‘. \ r \2} I! 'A ,_ . 1”“ 3 2. . . \)( V~ . ‘ 5. $\ K .’\ . 4 . . -.
I _' ‘ , , ;-. , ,- 2‘} r ."2 2, I 2 2 ‘. ' ,/" , . 2 "2 _ , -» '»2 ~.' :2 .2 '-. -. I. ,’. - . . - ', .' -. I ‘2 A ' 'v \ '. ’ ‘ 7, ' '. - - '. . I .. 2 2
.3" ’5‘" ‘ 2' ‘ ~v" hr} ‘\ \'\ 3 "\,’" IQ\ X ’92.; ‘3- "! -'. ’1‘. )x \f\ f. ,.’.- “. 'h 2' ‘ A" ’ \ .' . . \. "- ,‘. .h ' .‘- ’ u I' - v'v‘ ’ ‘. ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ J? ' :1 :‘A' I'.‘_ . - I.) ‘ ' ‘ I f‘ 3/5 ' ‘2 . ‘V'- '-\'>‘ I " ) ‘- ?\b": .“.' )' ‘
, \ ' I . I ‘V. ,, \\/ \. '7’ X 4' \ .2‘\ .' 2. /-_~. ~ ,2 ‘.’ ‘:' l. ’\ 2. .\._ ." ' _ , _ , ' . . ‘.' . “. A _. \K‘ .,I .,_“ .lj' _, \f ‘.f ~~ . N l» -/- ,’. A 'p‘ _r‘ /.)/ ‘X‘N‘l " K V. A p I - _. - \ , \ . ‘- ~ .
‘ \ 2., -‘2. /I_ ,* . , ‘2" \‘p ‘ 1, ) ’ . ,/.1 ,' K 1‘ _.--.-_"V2 ~ , ‘ r '_/I‘ ' .' v .. ). f ,2_ )\ 7. '\,,' \V .4 . ' \.r\ - ’~.\ 2‘ \ t,\ ' :I\._; ,c \ -."'x' ‘ I '\ ‘ _ {-Q‘ _I‘.".».. '\'. \ I’ )‘l “ \ \._’ 2 ”I‘D ‘, , ‘ 3‘ . ‘5, 3H”
. . __ ‘n . 4‘ . -_ ,‘ _ ‘ . __ I. , ' - , , . ‘ , , ’ .1 _ -. ‘ ”I , ‘ x , I . ‘ a . ,_ , . , . , . .‘ ”2 2. . . . . , _ ..- . u‘ _ _
2 .‘. "‘1 ‘. >““'—a ‘ ‘l " “I ‘K 5* "‘- ‘i. ’4‘: .‘K ')‘ rvak \) “ .'. ,4, .2 r“ .1 u’A' .' ‘. ‘ \n"‘: I '\ "I f ’ ‘LII " r"\ \\‘g “2 ". h/\ ‘I‘ 't :5 .' ~"‘I‘"\ \A' ‘¢'-‘ / I 1‘ "”‘f‘ .\"‘\/ VI‘A x" I '2 f’" .\ I ~ ' ' ‘1; ‘- \l%-’ ‘V "A \i'
J . .. x 2 M-v- “‘1" ‘- -» , 2. .- 2: .-~2' ‘. :-' .' ‘2 2‘ 2‘ "‘ . 2. -. ‘- .‘ ._ ' . ~ .2 ‘- ' - ' . 2 . 2 2 ‘- :- , 2 2 -; ' .
_ x I . -. “21’ ._ .' ”A /I‘ ‘r _,’ _ VI \‘f ~\/ \‘ \I. )‘ ,2 r. -V )_-\ c. - » . -‘ ~_ 1‘ _' ‘f. ‘. 2' {1- \V , ‘ . 2 _ \ﬂ '.\ - -ﬂ” x ’3' .2. .V ,' ‘ ,2 . 1 )‘.§'- 2‘}! 7v ‘: l.’_ > \ ‘. §\ /\ - .3‘. ' . . . «'Ag’. ( hi’ .,(J" I
f ‘) - ‘,.- ‘.. \' v ) '. 1“ l". - \ I \‘ f .' ~\. . .< ' '\ ) p - l I’. 2' - 4’ ' ’ ’ ,4 . ' _I ~ / </,\ I ' ,)\ /\_f ‘v"‘."‘ \‘r \\\.' Y “‘1‘, y 'f '- > x A! \- I . 3 \ ,N‘l“‘ I I .\ l ,’ I "’ "t'l’y /.&>‘
'2 -‘ “ ' ‘ ' '2 ' . ' ' r. ' , ' ‘ . .r '- " 2, . - - v | . , _ . I ‘ I . ‘ ' , ’ ’, ' ,‘ ‘ ' " ' ,‘_- " " " . . ' ‘./ . ' ‘ ‘. I . ‘.. ‘ .
\f...;.:‘ x /. .\ 1“. >8 \’.-\‘. \,-' .‘ \ \h :‘C-‘V -~O’x’ , I V . 1‘ \ , '2’ >1 ‘1 V/‘/ 2A. ,' \‘Vr,’, .‘ _.- ;>\_§,: 1. "X \. ‘. ,f‘ .. . ..\\>>‘ K.\/'~\ -\). ,on 2"" ‘2“ _.._ I \_) A V. K.’ 2... - .V 2“)“. , .5 VV, '.2 \ 4 . .
. “7 . 'V ; r.‘ _ . \9 _~,..\ . . .,', 2* ..- . .‘ ,‘ ,' _ ‘ _.’ |, 2 .' . .\ .3 '. l. . “-f‘ '—\ ., .. ..‘ A.‘ V'p ’-\_ \l x. - A. f‘ , _ ‘.'\4-"' _ . , _ .
.3..'x,y ~,I 2-: 463.,“ , W) . -. ~,, 3.; 2.‘ 2.. ,. < 3 ,\ \x. .2 -, 2.: ,. 2V. 2_-~ .- 2.2-]. \; .; .32. ,~. A. , «(‘22.‘ 2 3.) . 2,. > ,. ,m: , _, >93 2/. ,. E ,
I ,_ ; 2", \V l‘IJ' 7‘ )\ /\ \ . . . ‘ 2‘ . ' ' r .‘ .u' / 1 . I' _ , f I I ~.- "‘ “ . f '2 _«‘-_ _. " 2. ‘ . » ‘ \. IA I 2‘ . r ,J ' _ ' ‘ ;.‘ I‘ .2-" _ ‘ K ' ‘ f; .‘ ‘i‘ 7'1 ’ ' ‘—
, )\ . , .' _ \, VV \ \_ . r. -. \ 1‘ \ r .3 , x - . 1‘ - _ . I . 4 \ )-1’ x \ ._ ; A 'K, I \ H a x. \- \ > 2 I . I' .« ,. . ’_l {,. . f I cV I \ . ‘ .' _ ,
\IXI‘ — ‘- I" l' I ' ’ I \‘2 \ ' ‘. ' I ‘~ ' '~’ .’ \ '4 p- . ' I' ’ /‘ 2.‘ \‘1 ). ’7 .4. .- h. /2 - 2 ‘ ' ' '- ‘ I .‘ x.""~ ’\ I' ‘ " ' ’ \ ' ‘ ' ‘ — ’ ' ‘ ‘ ' ‘ X
./ ‘ ‘/2, , . ,2 /\»A V.’ ‘ Akr>h¢‘1\< ._ 12‘ ,' _ _ \‘ 32‘ . .‘, \ﬂ- ’/ ‘..2 \ r f" \\.\‘ V) _ I \‘rl 2. ,- ‘\.I.‘_,« .‘v ‘ ’ “n .V -, ’. -'\.:.‘ }\ >5“ '\(' - \" . (2—7::— .‘ . :‘R...'... .2...— ,. ' I p - ,- - -k\ ,3 ‘ .‘o‘\_' '2 I - f
l 2. J.“ ’- I 5‘ {x - 3. \.- ,- ‘3‘ h . .‘ ,~ ,- ‘ . \. "‘V' \I 2“. \\ / _ \Vl) / ." . t- .- , /~ .' .‘I'N ‘i y]. '2. . ..'\ , ,I'\. .‘ .' . . N, 2 l. \. .‘, \1 . 1‘2 .. 7 ‘.\ 3-. x ‘ _ ’. \' - ., . x
' :‘x ,4’2 v", 1'2 I‘ 1' .‘2 , ‘/_“>' “n "t ‘ ‘N‘. h .’ ".""‘ ’ ‘. X ‘2 1 '- 7 . 3‘ -r‘.’:“ 2.\ " ’ f -' \2 .I D) .‘ . 2". ’\'l " ‘g'I‘f ‘ ‘ -\ Iv -. “ \ .' o” I “QR , 54‘ ‘ '»3\;‘\2;1 ‘\ ' '
. . . v . . . . . . 2 $\- 2 x . . . h.) . - , g . . . . . A , . . . . . . 3 1‘ \ ..
”\4 «V l "I 'Yk ' k'2' ' "2' ‘ JV\ "a -' ' t~"- ‘b-LLMA ' {.3 ‘ ‘{ #;‘%.\u 3/. ' ‘24" A’ ‘ ' \. \' " ‘ 1‘ '. / ~ I' \ ’2‘ ' )' NA»; '\" .' x ) . ’. ‘I' I A ‘ l‘- ‘\Y‘\ \.\\/\ ‘ . ‘
\I 1‘. "..V p‘ l" .v‘, I " \ .2, '. I )5 A . . ' 2* . 4 ,5 ‘v _y ‘ . g \ ' ‘ ' \ '1 . . . ‘ k A 1 ‘ .\ ' . _. ~ ‘ .— \. . 3/ ,> I“: _ . _‘ '_~‘_V .
i" - ‘ ’ . ‘ .\ .' "\ ‘2 - x \f ‘.' \~«"‘ -, » ‘ /\‘> \ . \r V I \ ’ \ ' . - ‘ _ -. ' ‘ .' 2-, ‘ '. . y‘ f f ’2 A I § . ,2 ,. ‘ ’ -‘ VK», . _ ‘. _ , ‘lf- _ : .A ‘
. P. /-_ I) ‘ , . , .".-’\‘.-‘\._ . 2(‘\ \ \ ’2"... ,' ‘ ‘ -.—v‘ lxr‘ﬁsv '\ ‘ff. \\ "y. «‘.)(‘_ ’)\""_, . x __I .\‘4 _ 2. h. “ ," '.\ . .\ ' .\ .' ._ V. ‘. . ’. ’. “\ 1" . [>1 _ '\ \_ "\ (‘3 3. .i )( \.'
. 2 . 2 . - - _ I . - - ». \ . ' 2 2 -, v 2 - .- 1 ,, I -‘- - ‘ I _ 2 ' .
'2 >. V’s“; \ 2 .‘ ,I' A‘ - L'. )2 .‘ ‘ ,-. f _A, /\/ , 3:. '- f ' ‘. -. >_ L 1-. xx; '5‘ .A)" ‘9 - \__ - - ‘,’ ;. ;‘ ., ¥ .‘ - r \ ,r‘u/g :‘ \ \ , ‘.: 5 ,~ _ , ‘. .- .1 , ’ ~P , 11".“x .>.\‘. 2. ,€~‘{?\I ‘:- ‘
.. ~ "3/2 ,/'-- ‘v 2. I. I. - ‘. ..-/I'2. Iv I 2 2L. ‘ .25 ,.,~ 2 ,\. -.’ ‘- ‘:~' 5: "'o. I. a 5.." 9v"! ~.'. -. 2 2. - . \ ‘ \IV ‘\ 7' \‘r.‘2". .2‘" ‘2; > "i" «‘I {2
'I " . \. ,' -. .‘ ' 2. IV ) T- , k'. .7 "‘ r' _ 1“. . ‘ . \I x I ,‘J )T‘ ' K . .‘2 ". .1 - - 3‘ . 2' ' ' ' ‘ I". ’ ‘ ' ‘. ' 's’ ‘ A ' 2 ‘2 "2 ‘2' ' I ¢ ' ‘ 2 "K . ' '2 ‘
— 2/ 2. ’ ' - ‘ . ‘ . ‘ﬂ 2 2. , - . g , -, ‘ . - . ~_ , _ . f _ . ,2 I ~: - ‘ '. , v . -. /- , o , - .— . ’ \ . 2 _
2 IX 2 _ “.r . _ :K . . ,"2," ‘ 7,1, . \ ,' . 'I\'/L‘l). ,‘:,.’_ x" "I(x‘} ,‘_\;_ .‘ _ ,. , X3213". __, . . I '. .' JA) . _ 1‘ -)< ‘2. ‘ \“x ’2‘ i .. '11 ->, \ ., ._\_>{ :7}:)\‘_,V. 7" J‘; Ix. ‘ z- . . : y
- ‘ VV . . .V. . y», . . V. r . i». ,5: l. 4 Il-K» .“ v V K V ., .._ . . ‘ > ‘ V\ V_- . I x 1 . 5 3, 4'\ ‘. , ‘7 . \ . .-,‘I . 3. -' V-‘ . .‘I 2 . . . ‘, ~ ‘.~ 3. . V, ._ .-, “__‘.,_‘~.lu ‘ . ‘ '
’ ;-1 I‘ 2’2 —- ~ "2,". ‘2 "‘ .- ‘2 ‘I. '2. .‘ 3‘ 4/»3‘ “‘2 ‘>’ 4: >. ‘1- » n’\’ " .2 .I - ;-' :- >.. . r1 2- 2/22 ‘3'“ 2 “ ".- 2‘ {‘2'} ‘4"? 2-.7' \‘11322 - ‘
>‘ 5. ' ‘ .'. ..' \IIZ“ . . 'y/\- , \N ‘ ‘ _‘ ’2. . .‘ I .\'- w. \ . s . , ’1 ' . 2., ‘ \' \ 4' _ . '. N,‘ . \_r 2‘ 7‘ _.\ .. 2. I 2 A \ 2 . .\ 1‘ p‘ I 3(. X37 f“ ... ‘ r, V". \_ ; ’7 ‘ ix ’1“\ 1 '*\.‘£
. ' .' A ‘- .- , ‘ ' . "I ' . . , .‘. -' r' ‘ .'< ‘2 \.'\' ‘- ‘ .‘ r ‘ n . _. '. ‘. \ 2.' '.. l -, - ‘,. \ ' ' “‘ . ‘. , ‘ 2’" 2
1.‘ o\ ,\ }. ,\ 2 \ . \ s . ._ ,. . ._ I .‘ 2. ' . .1 “u _. \‘ m¥‘n _ _ . \ ‘ _ . ‘ ‘2‘ ' 2 kl \ . 2 ._ f x. 2 , ~.I . . F. 2 - I \\ 2. , . - . -, . \A.- .
z‘ t‘._ V,’\ ' .\.' ‘ \' ‘ .’ \’ ~‘ , ‘ \ _ _ , .‘ . . _‘ )- -.' ﬂ, \_ . ~ ’ .' K ‘ >'\ “‘2 _ 'u ’\ 2‘\;I \" R. ‘ ' ’ x \ . “i V"\ .\J‘-\ ~~'- » 1., §.’ _ ‘ \ .‘\ A. 3“ K ' ‘ I -‘
, . . ‘ VI. , A ' 2’2_ .7 2, \.‘ ‘ ’ .‘ I 2 ’- f. ’. '/~_ \ 1 \ »_ ',. , 2' ."‘ .’\ . , _- .~ ”-I". ' _'- '_' ,- , . )‘s .’ 't “K - ‘v «I 2 ‘f ‘ - ‘. ." ‘\ I ‘ '2 ‘. ,' . ' V'. '. ‘0 .2.‘
"\" .2 I 3 ‘q . ' n >\ \ ,- _I\ I \‘i: 1 ‘ I \’ :7 ~ . ,':\V_". .'\ I, - ,4- 2 - >5 V“ \ J" ' . ' ' /_ ‘ -l K - ‘ ‘ ’ '\‘.\, I ‘ 'f‘ .'. -' l 2 - R,‘ .l’ ‘ - \ ‘2‘ I‘
.' - , " . :n “ I) '7 .;. . '. ', I ’ . . \~ , .,, ‘ ..2 ‘. . . /' ..}.\ \ . ‘. I ‘ , ‘2' ‘ . .. I V . , \\ / M - ._ 3 . I ' “ .' 'N "_ . . '\ ‘\_ ' ‘ , ‘
\)_ >.‘ V\ 2‘ . ' . . 2. ‘4 o '2._V ‘\ ~, \. r“ —_ ,'-‘ ". {X's " ‘. I ' r'y’ ‘\ 2.2 ﬁ‘ \ ‘ ..‘ '2‘ ’2'. ’1, "- , .' "I \ f ) ‘5 , ‘ 2 ,.‘ ‘ _ WE, ‘ .2 ‘ . .‘\ . 5‘.\_‘/\\ )K . .n .‘ \‘I “. ‘. \ ‘ y. ’ \ _ ' ‘ , _ .2
'7‘ x " \ . \ .s : '\." ~ . 4' ’.' r, ‘ \P. 2" 'r“ I \ 3‘ K ,.\ _- . (NV! \- N ‘- I -. ., _\ , . .\ . ./ x; \; , ‘1" x ‘1. ﬂ, IV)‘ '_ ‘_ l ‘ x ‘2 , \ , . -. . h V ‘ \ \ _‘\ , . \: \._I v _- . ‘ ,l' . . ‘ , f - .
‘ 3 I \ . K " ‘ ' “ ‘." ‘4 .- 7- " " ’ . x . . '. .\ ("2 l " ' ‘2. ‘x’. ‘ ' ‘A V). 5" ~.‘-\ .\ N 2 ' . '~ ‘ ‘. '.‘. '.' .t ’2 ’ \ ,- \——-—»\ - '; ‘ . I ‘ . ' .‘.
r, , V. _A .2 - ‘. ‘-\ 2“} ' I ‘ I [A l.\ .’. 1., l‘ . a '. ‘ R; \.2‘ {3 2, _ ~. .\ ..\ r '\I ‘. 3/3- \,"- .\ V. 2. -. .\ I V‘ . ‘ r 3.7. ’- ’3' I_ \ , . ‘_‘\ u‘. . ‘ -————_/ k—"' ' \ _ ,_> J” _ . \
A \. '2 _ \‘ 1‘ ' . ’ 2. pk. V' '. a H ‘ ' ‘ J .3 VVAV . -\ , ‘ , .I ’ - - ‘ '." -.' “' \ ' . I . ' ‘ ‘ f~ '.‘ ,’ u ' 2' .’._ ' /~ ." ‘, '1' )“ ,' I ‘ 3‘ ‘1 4 \ ‘ . . ' ' - WW
4 _ _ \V, . \I' ‘ X . K .\ . ‘JV , ‘ ‘ . . \. V ._i f- ' ,\ 1p. - . , \x, ‘.' ‘. \K. ‘.- V. '~ (\ ., 5-. _-\ *- . _I A . \ i .-I . , . -‘ 5; ‘ 2. 5k. 1’ 'AI' .\ . c . ... . ~ \.v t ‘. r
u_ ,\ , . , 3‘ , .y‘ﬂ', 5', \. )\ \ \. ‘ “A ,\ , ,'.‘ .\ _. .. -’\ 5 \. 5: ‘. 2‘ \ "\I)‘ _, \I A ‘.’ \1‘ _ ) - .V VI“ ’. 5.‘ 1 . 5" . ‘ -, ‘ h, \J V, _ :K 'c . 2 2. ‘7 .l - z' ‘ - . _-|. 2.“ '_ _ . v 3". \ ’ ‘ ,
.' ,' ' 2. 2‘ v- ’ . ,I .‘." ‘.‘ ‘. ' 2,: ‘. V I: ’f. .". - _' .' . .' 2 )j . 'rv .. r~V ,“._ y.'\ 1- ‘, ' ' n ‘2 .‘ 3' '- ‘ l ' ‘ l. ‘ ,. K . 2 . -' 2' ‘, - a“ L ' \‘ 4A2 ’ u ' ‘_ . . ' > ' ‘0 I . “ ‘
a , \ \ ' ‘. - ‘\. ,2' \'r.\' \' \‘ x |\’\ ." " "’ \‘. ; >" .2 4 2 ' ‘.' , \': ‘1 :\ l“ ’ . -' - "‘.\»' 2” "‘ ' ‘3, ‘. "‘ >’ " V ‘ ' ,-’\ \\ " ' ‘2: \. " . k5 .‘ \ Igl >1. " {' ;\ _‘ > '." Ml “ ‘ ' ". >‘ \> :\.. :
. 2' . .. -. 1-. , - 1- .I\ A , ‘. 2_ . . .' , -' , g . . ,_ L. . A ., ._ -, , ‘r . . \ 2. . - . . ., _ ﬁ'4v.‘ .- '3 ,',V . .‘ _". _ _ . . 3‘;
. 2. ~ , . , ’ . JV, .’ . 4-_ /. . _ , x I . ,I . , ' 4’». ‘ . 4 2. . n" ’ . ‘ ._ . ‘ _ _ \ \ . V 0‘}, ‘7 ‘ _ , - V ,‘ ‘. .
. . , . 2. -‘ ,2. r._ ’, . \ .I ‘3' 2 ,- .‘a. ‘ . .’. )\ -' 2. g . - )‘. ‘, x -‘ ‘\- I‘ ' . . , ._ ‘. ",‘_ l“ . -. \‘2' 2 ‘ ‘q -. ,‘2, - ‘x 4’\.I ". ‘ 2 ‘ ‘3 ,7 , . .
1 -.\ ~ «~22.~/ 2.- :. -. 2/21.. .22 '. :2: :2 -'. x. ~ .1: ..:\' .2-2- 2:252.» .2.
. " , . \ ' '\: :‘. -'.~ -' ‘~ . ‘ ‘0} 'O , ' ' ‘2' f ’ .N’ )-. ' \,/‘- <' A 'I ‘- '7‘ " 2 \‘.-'2- I " '\ .\,-"2.¢.2 x", ‘, ‘ l I: 3-, \ ‘5 ‘ '2 . ‘ ‘I‘ 1" ‘ ‘ '. ' .' '7 , . \ \2 .‘ " ‘ ‘ 4 ‘ 22'. "Y ‘ .‘-. ‘ ' . I 1‘
, \ t \ \ .2 > — J4_ , .. - - - ~. 1 2/\ _ - . - ; l'. 4- I \‘ ,2 “k. 2 L- j .. . ', ,. . . . , - 2,, - \ - 5 . ‘ . ‘- ., - - -. ~. , M . ., . ._ /\ . I ‘. 2 s f N. y
- . - 2,. . I,. I2 2 . l. \.., 2,2 . ,. /, .. -/ '2 »2 .. - . ~_ ‘. , _\. _ \ . n . .
. . .I I_, ,\ \, ‘,\ ,. x, . 4 l. ,I.,‘ . ‘, -. . ). 2 2‘ a ' V-, ’ .~ \ 2., . h ‘ _ A 3’ .\\‘\‘,I\. . .‘ . ~. ‘. . ,'¢2\.\ ,_ . 2 \ , 4' ‘ ". \ u ‘ .. .
’ ' ‘ ~.\‘ , .‘ ,2. A ." . ._ _‘ ), \ V I \.” ‘-_' ‘.' > f )2" J. i): .‘2 » j". 2 ' 3" . f 5. I~\ ,- l . "~ \ I M. “‘ *’ , .’ ‘ .‘ 'f ‘ \ ,v‘ , ‘ 2 , \ ‘2. ‘ '* K‘ I -_ -‘~ x .. K I \\ ‘32 \ ‘3" "I . ,(l . '. ‘ ‘ - r ,
.> ,._,,_.. . ‘ . ‘ . _,.V ‘ . . ,.V ., _ ‘.' , ' . .. 2.‘\ - .. ‘- . ‘ ‘ , . . \ ._ . _ .¢ ‘ . -. . . . _‘ . ,
.__- 3- -_,’ V.‘ 1‘ .\ ("H'W' .‘ - g}, \A) ‘ I! \ K‘. .7: / .‘ .\ ’2. If ./‘- 5“- ~‘/\; V2" (X _. _\ :.\ ,‘\. , -.‘. , RN“! “x. .\ -\- A Vv\‘\. , I__ .I ¥ ' I V._ x ‘ ‘ t ‘ ‘1‘ ,-1 ) .‘\ \_ ‘ ‘ :I, ~ ' ¢ 1. :‘ '. ‘.
I ‘\l N‘ )\ 'K -2 "“f}-‘ ‘L‘ ’3' “\I ‘-‘\\\‘~‘ " /. ' '\ ’ ./‘ ‘-.,"2~,( ‘.-' 2 “. ‘1 7': 3.3 '2 2’ x. {‘8 X “X A 7‘ 2 \f' \ i" ’ " ‘ ‘ ‘ ' "X ‘ 'jg‘é I \ V ‘(\ ‘ ‘V' ‘ W‘ '\ x} I), >\ ‘A H ‘ “K" V ‘2. O I
\ ' ' ' '. ' ‘ ,~ I - 2‘ 2 _- ' ' '21 ‘ 2‘ ' .“. .2 x I 2 - ‘\-‘ ‘- ' " ' . ‘~ - -' ’ ‘- - ‘ ' ‘2 -‘ pl. .. - ‘ " ‘T-v‘.‘-~ .. .3 n' 's’ ' I ' - V ' ‘ ‘2 “ ' “ 2 ‘ ' '
.. .. t I I x 2 .' 2. I , . . ~ .' \ ' . ,2- . 2 ‘. a ---2- . , 2.. .I ~ 2. . , . a II \ 2, . . . .2 I,
22.. -- x22). 2. \2... ~A- ~. 2/. 2.. . m.” I: 2: - -“-2. W’R’ ., . .- 2 -. .2 ,I ->.2 2 . .,-..._. «2 ”2...“- .3 .2. - 312...“. - 2 2
. \ > ‘.' \_. 5. 2. a f I. ,N. I\ . 2" ,- - , )7 -, ,I. 1‘. ’4.‘ _. :. , ./ :24 \ - .- 3" .‘2‘ , .I ,. “I 2. 2' .‘ 2,, . )\ I‘ A 5.5.2.! \I 2,’ ‘ ' . ,2 -\ 2, 5/ _ , ‘22-“); - . . . 2. f 2.
;~. 3 I . 2. 2 . \, '2,‘ >1 2.: 2f : .-’, . 2.‘ - 2. I 2‘1. 2 2- ,-. X ‘2; .- ,‘ A ,2 2. A 2\. ; .LI ' \ X. ‘2 r. I 1. ~ , 2‘. ,3,- 2.\ ,. . . -' {3‘ T ~.-_. ,I .f. .,.I\‘.I \2 ‘x.’ .: 2' ”‘53 1. ,\ - ‘2 , - 2‘ .2. 1'
‘. .- . , » . I . -» ' . 2 2._ . _. . . . - .. , . ‘ ‘ 2 t ' - . . '. .‘ ‘ ' v I . ' 2 ‘ ’ '
.2 , ,. - ‘5)‘4’ x2): >\;I. ,I. ..- >. ,2- . ._ - :2. -‘3>.I~r.~,~.°2‘“ 2"»... ~.I-.w.~- m. A): .- ‘- 2. 2 «r 2-. I. .. .32 ~__’-. 93. . \2 2:. .. 2 ‘2. .
. . \ - .5; .‘ .. 2. l., f,’ ,‘ ‘ “2‘. ~', .\ '\-,.\‘ . A‘I \ . . 5;; S"! . 1/: I" . . _ '2 ‘. f . \ 2 . 'Q—«r—.\~VA~V, .5, ~V'_ .\-—)Vl-:‘t—l—R3"‘v: \ ' , ‘ O , . “ ‘0' . n‘-
. x "h" ‘ " ".".. " 3- L". ,A I\ '.--“‘."‘-" ‘5 ‘2‘ XX, :K .' ' a \f‘. X I ‘.!\I \“ f . J1 ‘ 2 .‘- ?-\‘:.‘“ W" \.-. ". )‘ﬂ2 :.\ "‘25 \“th'r {L I V“?
-.'A,'J:f"~' ‘, 7). \(',’ 4’. .'l‘\ 7.\/-‘ "‘ ’ 3' .2 -’\‘3 ‘b" ,' ) 2’,‘. " ' \, V T I‘. ." . " IT ’2 . ". ‘22 2.\'\f\-.‘-"‘.‘ 3 f ., 1‘ 2“! "‘2. /‘ QN,’ .‘V A‘N‘Q
' vi: ‘ .r’ ‘-' 1 L' 9' 4-_ ,' , . " 5‘: \I \p' ' ' . . \-i . \",‘.‘I V ‘ .‘,’ 3 0., 1'. h‘ 's\ -\ a 4",- \.‘\.'..‘»,‘. .,. -. r-r n, _‘ '.'_“' .-->
.. u‘ '1. ' f‘ I \ ’ M. B" . ~ ‘1 ‘. ’ ’2‘ . '\ .> I' ‘. ' _ x r ..-_ . _ .' . I ' - , | ‘ _ .l. f ’. V ' .-\ . ‘. . ~. \ h. .' .- {‘2. \ \- I .‘d. I
d ’2- -’ 2 I ’. «‘ \- . ~ - - .- .' A \/ .I 2 t I . 2 2 : -§ ~-I . .--.2. .41.
» P ' . ‘\ ‘2 X , \ ’ 2 ‘ . . I - .’ x \. \ . 2 2 . .‘ - ‘4 , \ ; . , -. 2, 2 . - . \_ 2 2. . 1 ) O‘, Q
‘ ' ./ x -- r ’ " - ) P. .I ". , - X . \.' 2 ' _. . -_ . I a.‘ 22 3.2 - 2, . , O D, ‘ \ . '\ . ‘V ,V , .’ . . '. . ‘
2“ g ‘ I )V /\ ‘,~.‘<\ /.‘_,. 2‘, 2’../ _.v ,A .‘I‘ . _._. ’3‘ .' . fr ‘ ., I. X“. \ 4“ ,_ .. . r ._, ,2 \\ 2, 1 . 3" 2,“ _.\.,-“‘V,.“ ‘ \&,.\, \ ~.‘ >2 2»\ >2, . 2‘_.._.‘.‘ 3"; ‘
'2t' ' ' . .2 I “ .“2 ‘ 2« ‘ . ~ - > ' . ' _"..‘ ’ -'.: _‘ ‘ , ‘_ -‘.. .2‘ 7' . 2 '.. - .’\, V‘ . ‘ 2 ~ '
|V(. . . Vr )3 A .2' ’1' [K ‘)._ . \_ y ; .\ . , -:_.'\,’\ .a \‘ ; _ .x’ﬂ . ,’\_ ‘ \V. ‘ ‘\ x‘ ,‘.V \ 2“. 2.} -‘ \' \,A .3 . . )2. >\ "\\ . )V, .3 ‘.. ‘2 p?» .1}. v . 2
. ' - . 2,‘ . ~ _ ’ I :\ f\/" I.‘\ .r‘ ’ . \t'.’ 2 \.' .Y- 1 _ 2-". I ‘ | 27 ; ‘-‘ , (.V . . . 2 2,. , 2.). g: 3‘ 1.7 . . 4,‘ 1' Al.» ‘.' .x . I
.2 rea 22v..- ,- 2H . . .2: .<. . 42 2 »>2 .. . -..-..2.... .2 2. 2. .. .. .
’1 u . 2 ‘ '.4 ). _: _ ., A 1 .‘ I ~ ,‘ 2.. ‘. .p\ [A ‘ 3- _, .' , “ 2 ‘_ \ . ‘ .' - \l‘ , ) ,\ '1‘ _ -‘ \ X" \ . 2‘. ' -..2 .’ [ "\2y. 1 .7
'2 4 A I .‘ \ . . .. l ; - . ‘ , ~ \. ) \_‘ ’ 3‘" \. y) . .. », .. ‘ l. ‘ . . ‘ ~\ 2,. \ X .2 ,“ .-, . ' _ I. l ‘. , . ’- .I\ ,. ' . "l‘. n‘n
. . ' ~ . .' . . - . . _ - . . - ‘ 2. 1 ‘ ‘ ‘. .’ ,l . ‘.
1.2. > .1} } ,‘ ‘ ,V \ \ s, ‘~.' )\ _; \, . \R . \. ,, \ ." : . .. 2. 5. ‘ 2. X ,_ 2 A ,\,\V, 2. _, \. . , ‘v \‘1‘I‘. . .2‘. Ix .3,
y '2 ‘ ' \ ‘1 Vy 2’ i \ h I -~ I ‘ ‘ ' \ ‘ “ > ’2 \ ‘ ,| I ‘. ' ‘ ‘ “ I \ \ l ‘3 ! /. “ - 2 r '- ' ' . ' - v ‘ “
. . y )x ,n,\ f. I, ‘y\ v »/, .. ‘.' \ _' ‘ ,‘ 3‘ . .\ I. .\ . > , . ‘7‘ 4‘ ‘ '. .- , .‘ ,-'. I ‘ 4.\‘ .‘ .l . \\ )/ \_\ .\ I ‘ h, .- .‘L’ _)’Q
.Q ”7177—; . . j ' 4 ;., ', .”'.‘ H ‘22.. .\:’-_I -\, .3, . V. V r 1". '~ 2‘ I . * ‘\ . ..-' ’ _ v. "‘r‘ .v,. ,
:2 2'>. >. >524 untm Area (Current) «4222. v 2‘. 2.. .1 2~.,I’2./.X. - - y _ ’ - .2, » :2 ., 2N. ., .2 2 ‘ , ; ;, 7,5512 ._ ’2 2
f "l. ) )\ \‘f " ' ‘ W. ‘r‘ :7 . 3,, ) “. .‘ ' ' . '3. l N ,' k‘ u“- ‘ ’ x I 0 V \ ‘. .‘3‘ I r 0 . x! X .\ y Y. '\ Nu, L, ‘_ L‘.‘ -- I l {
,_ _ . I V ~ d ‘ A . - ,‘ , \f ‘ V, / , .' , , . . . \ \ ‘ ‘ , ,\ .l'. \ _ . ; . \ ~ I . 1 .1 t . -
I' 'm ‘.‘—‘,', 3‘. 2k . .2 ‘. "‘ I ‘ . ‘ 'A> |\.' \’ > §.“\ "’ .- ‘ \ ‘ ’ ' 2 ‘2 A \,p -' . :\ )\ :"\ "‘2 vA. , >‘- .‘ ‘ ‘L'g ‘ ' “ I
3‘ 2 , ~22: y. 2.). «."I, . ~ 2. ‘2 4-3-5: < « ~. 2 223 “ 92' ' 2 :
D ' 32 " )“ . _ . . .22 22‘ . ‘ . "'1‘ ‘ - ’2‘ -“ V ' ‘ ’ “. " | ~N2‘.’ 2 ~ 2 k ".2‘ “'\-' .\. ' ‘- 1‘": l \
"‘ __ Ekwan (eXIstInQ 22.; g 2 -2 - 2 . I. . .: : . - ~ 2-2 ~22 -.... 3 - - .m-
L = ‘ a ', ., . I, ." 3" " . ' ‘. . ‘1 _I, ' /. ‘\,_,__v._..-‘.‘:ob‘ " n." .'.
‘ ‘ . - {A213 ‘ . ~ I .11 j .9 V, ' , ., . .‘. . 2“ 1:1: ' .‘ _,\’. .2" ._,22\. ,_ - 2. 1w~,.a. A
2 v- “ . - ', r 2. .. . ' -- _
- - 2 -‘ . .‘ 1’ 2 ‘ 2. ‘2 ' ’ X- ' "2. 2 \ .‘ I ‘ ‘ —
I .4 . ‘. ~ . " .;. . '14. ‘9‘ .2 > I. -. \V2_- j, \l > .‘i\ \‘ . ,—
. O .» ' v n' . ' 2 x x ‘ 2 2 ‘- * ‘ . , . . . 2 v ‘ ' ' ‘
. , . . . r. . .2.» r ..-\ , 3 . .
. , > . , . . ~ . . . . . 2 . .
~ —- Horn River Mainline 2.. .. a . 9 ,2 . , . .4. 2.. k- . 2.....- .2. 2 . .2121.
, . , , , , a _: .- _ . . , .- . , ;
-I' V 2 >4 .. . - .2 ‘
'r. . _ .- 3 .-~ ‘ .2;- .__k _ _ .
P ‘ - ‘ﬁii'v Fww ' "_- - , g - A—’ -L2. ~ '——“" ATE ‘ 2
" ' ‘ “ “‘“‘ ’ ‘ " " DRAFTD 10/19/2009 *-
_-“ _""__.-___."-_-....um~- 22 2‘ “'""‘”'“" “v” ~ .
u... - E“ 1 4-, _.
' '1
" ~ - se TCPL 2
2 2 ' t N t NTD eo- . . -
7.’.
('4: f

V DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
' TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
‘ . .- ; 1:5“ - .. 3.-  :,*.‘;.
.‘r -, ’ V, - _a- —" ' ‘7 .
r5“- . i -—‘ 1" -
I ' raw"? ' =35?“ . .
" _ V ’ ’ i ‘-""'rf - I
, 5?; 1- -‘** :37 ~
s . p-g -— : . ' A
; ,T-q¥* j) .
At ' n
r 5439‘ ' .
r. » _-.~
_ 'é ‘ 7. . ~ '. . . '
4' .7; f; . , .
:_ .f'f:’ "- f’ ' >
'97 f‘ ‘ ”~er 3':- : I Z» ; ‘ i ‘-\ ' . " ‘ “N. 1
_ Plate 1: Bear Paw Print along the TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline.
_ g ‘4 . ' _ _ 3),..4i , 71" 1‘ 13.7? V
. 33$?" :1 ‘ ‘ '. ‘ : W (.3. , .3 331'
. ., . ; _ p! . ‘3 .:.
/ / 3' ~‘ A . ".r _' V ‘15, ‘4: 2‘3; . . '.
¢ ‘ {.1 A. 8 ~ _ g“ " _ 3 .xﬂ:\f‘ ,
1‘ ‘6 '. f! , _ . I a g ' v... a o ' ‘ -.‘
. . - .- - .4453 . ;- ' '
, .--‘\ ,. ..v , {32". f; a i . ..
, ’ vg’.’ \' ‘ _ i3“; :ﬁé . - , i
5‘ * * $9. 5 ' .., :1- . ,
aﬁfh-’ ‘ ‘ . 3.: ‘ W" ( i - '_"" 7 .
‘ - r' ’_ ‘1 A R . . " U T. 3 ”\‘)a - , +- .7
§.A .f .. ’ '" "wté 07.7 —:. L».
_ , ’ , Q - 3 ' “ f. ’i‘ . 0‘ _ _
(bl, . . .i .’ ‘ ‘ £3} \| {i ‘ ~ I
. ’ f . i _ 4 . :1 . ’qﬁ‘ ‘ . " r O
2:137:21; ’ . f , .3 “1 1"]: _ fi- " 5
. .E.’ f . ”l ‘ ? _I‘9~?}‘«§;9 ”‘ ' '7 . .
_> i f ‘1’ ' -. J ‘9 § .‘ t?‘h‘; ~.5( a!) , _ I ‘
r1 1' J3 ' 7‘. . ’~ . 1h i ’ Q 3: \
u“ .1! ;, 3“ ‘ ‘25 3, v _,‘-s -
__ ,» .. ‘ ‘ 7 if .- ‘o v. , s‘- .
, .~ » . ,ﬁgusx , , ,
. l, _‘ i .“«.'Ir'r..r,634 '5‘ '1‘ .' I1
- 3\ i ‘ ' " ‘~13€‘f3-9\"- ' “7'
.7 , '. .. " ~21. “'. ' ,
: ;. , _ - §_:- :7,“- z.lf§‘3‘ . . f 3
' '. ‘L-jw. 7‘ ~ ‘7 1“? :93 {5‘0 , 7' . , ': 1 ‘
.‘ ‘ ,r , 7' ' , ' - ' g}! I ’t ' ‘ c 7" ’ ' — -
-. 9 4;-.. i. V:--.‘r ‘ _ . ,. ( 5
I " ‘ ‘ N’. ta~ Q ’ ‘ ‘
31¢ &.- . "’-n‘ -. .' ‘ g.‘ _ " ‘..\
Plate 2: Bear Marks on tree along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
‘7: 38

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
m_m ‘
& ' ‘ - ' Y ‘ / , ' —~ "" ! , ,,.;"H",. V,
Z I ' ,1 _ , -. ’v/ ,2 _
[3‘ \ Viz ' u
- ’ P .- _ IV ‘ f , ‘ ‘
\ \ . "'1’ .K ‘ ,
‘ "m ‘ \ (j ix
‘ v .‘j \ - , ﬂ \‘ ’ =5 .. ” "
' " ‘ _ \
‘ 4‘ V: 1 ..‘x v .. ' x- ._
‘/’;/ ' ’ 5‘ ' .. / " V 7
, ' ‘J ‘ J l l ‘ 7 —‘
/ ‘ - " \ :7
“I x .a _. 3 5 x .
. ~42... ‘; “ «\‘ ;
. r " _ \ , ‘ ; I
- ‘ '\ ‘ . 'F.-.‘ ‘ ‘ ,_
. 11' \ i'ﬁ ,,., i; ‘
-_ ‘3; f” f d >13, "52‘": “3:22,. V. -.:-
\ —:‘ . /
‘ ...7 i .' - I 7’: ~ ' «,.‘. . -
\‘\:£ I "Ak- 1:“ ‘ ",— . ﬁ“: ‘\\\ ’/ t» .
- ‘ t._‘ 9:“, . ._ »’ I ~_ “‘4‘. Y ",' ~ ‘
:::- 5. /’ , g
\ ‘i‘ ”5;. <_ , ' 3 3 . /V 7 A
'~ 5 ‘ / 2:
’ ‘ ‘ . 7,- .. ‘ ‘ J ://4 //f I —
i " " ‘x‘ . _ . 5.- ,2 [
Plate 3: Moose tracks along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
.7, ‘ A 1’! ’ xii “I; ' .8.“ - 1'21}; n1? “7% “.5 5 ",3 f)» . ",5fo h; . _ ’ _ i
. 9 . 2 - ?ZWT'». “~73“ 7 5 ~ .2; {“9 3"?!” 1m -\ -' "1‘“ >5 '
., _:_ ,. '. .5“ I: : I.W— , .‘ ‘9’ . ‘ﬁ .3.- ‘ . . 1 ( )3 . fl, ’ 3
* 12$? -f‘x,u ' , 3 ~ Mr“? . gugw , x f - - 7.9?- ‘Q
. r‘ - .4 ( ‘5‘" ,~ . .u u; "‘1’“ '1" :‘Q‘; ‘4‘; R. .‘ ‘1; gh“. t" ‘ , / —
?’1 W v 'I g;;H\ ! .’ “3:; i,“ >> .. i" ' .’. ' I '_\&;.5\") i r ._ ’ X A '5 t. ‘
Q | ' " V‘ ‘r l ‘v ‘1 , < ,g’ .\ ‘ ~ ‘ '.- \l‘ 1Y¥/‘-‘ ‘ .. . ' - :{v A: P
“ ' ?- _ﬂ' i . . M A? ‘ ' J 5L \‘
' . ~ Jr». "D - érpfel} v .. ﬁx 1» g: ' - .7 ‘ y: c: J. /
' ’9‘! ( ‘-."1 f ., ’§ ‘9' 1‘5??? “VJ "'1""-~If‘ 7. ﬁt 1 .4- L, ?,f ,. 1’ .9: (1;, , «'-' ‘ /'
“’1', .* 5121' '5‘:ng #’ I 9; -1 “ff", Q 'Z\ 5 - ?:d I VJ ’ ~. '_ ‘// ‘ :‘J’ ’ .1 . ’
3 a ., EL}. f‘stv‘kf r 9' ‘ Jr 1' I 1 -' '2‘ . ' 136‘“ CT: .125 5 U ('1' '4', ‘ \3'2’.‘ ‘. r. L O
f ’2: 2*» 2L m; ’ I < , 3‘ ‘. x“ 5,9, m 275’ §th g" c; 3171:? ;
J; N «‘41:! r”? ,~. WK“: “‘ ~ ’-..~ '3 J" «‘5' j ' “‘34 4"“ 4 ‘
w: W373..- .< . é - l' ,i T vsfb 189‘ ~" ._ 3:1} x . ,~ )54'» ‘
- “:1: r 7.!- ~ . ,»:.-g..-._;.p “ -’ 4   2‘ '~*
.Tx-‘x ’1’" '53.. " ".i ‘ A -- I: .3 ;;.c ’2’, \ :3 T _ -+. K; :2”; -~
: i a ":1-“ 4‘: ' .7 : ,n,( 342‘s; Z - 1” .a JEP—éx%‘;ﬁr’ ; 2 “' ‘
(’1': ‘ 4/ ,. 2": ~ 1],; ”qt "iwﬁ, ‘33: ‘ ' ' WZL-x. w~—-."“L/:: : Em? ‘ . Ur
.' ‘ ?- ‘t. ”f? ‘JWnL‘ \ ’7‘ ’ . . 7‘ / ‘ f1." ' " ' ' r ‘5, ~ A. '~ ' “I” 3' 1
1A ‘2 ll ‘ Riff... V,,J,\751.’;, . V?.??i: ‘ \"" :1 a:vgg‘a '- ‘1' ~' > ‘l‘ﬂ' “2 VA . O .. oz" ‘_
I’ 5 : ‘."" ' f “.5... 1-: )1 ‘ 2~~&*,.‘%"'~"" " 7 la / 3‘“ I J \1' 4 ‘ -
‘ {C 9” ' 2,3 .; 'iglv‘f‘ 5"" “#1:. ﬂ "2" 5‘ 'l‘.’ ‘3 IA'V '1’"?!
ff“ r 7} ’ {rv:v: )5! / ' ‘ 'A' ‘wjr’l‘f |y5’,,‘.. 1.5 ’ 2
~. -. ‘ ‘ " ' ‘2 r.» 1..» w-'-*" "
, 9";ka )E‘.“ ffgf- fé': A. ‘ , 11\ *3 ”:;‘~:,." . s . .11“ , ‘
(:1, ‘ .l "f . ‘ ‘ x f‘) 5) r_ 145‘ :1. ~ ., ‘ .:_ n" Q “. . l
3 ‘ ‘. " , , .' -.’. ‘7' f 1 . A . j. {.4 ‘ X‘ ..— -' ,4 2. ' x-
t%:l; \' ‘9. 5:2“ W \i. i. ‘- f K. V. > V t , i ‘ll ' :I/Q ': .‘2' ‘I.‘;.
L : (‘»,}*‘ T?\ E(r“ ‘ . . ‘5 1V ~ ” k. V- 'ff"; - 5:"- , -- r A } .‘ s ‘2’: .3 L’ -
ii J’tv'.."".é§':l ‘%\ ' )Yi“ ‘ I ,. ‘ ‘ . ‘5. ﬂ 1;“ ”:1 *1 _4‘ "(A 4 I
um: . - _ ‘*< “.v» ~ ' 1
J v: ‘.’("“\“‘"-V { Win. ‘1, 3‘4 ‘7'." J I. '2" ‘- ‘7'," V > r , :'\ \Eég.‘ ‘V \‘ ﬁ :
" 3‘1”“ .. ‘ . V ' ._ ‘ '_-;"« \ » ~. " Y ”2 -~ " ' “
7"? ﬁx ﬁ' . {‘3 JH‘ . \ .c ‘J Ir» .', '9, ’ ‘ X“? - j," 1%“, ”,5'
:4ng J . aw a: - w »  
,1. "F351.” 1—1" dale ,' '“' ‘ " 5' ‘ "M 7“" “/9 » ’5‘ 27‘ ”€784” ‘
t ‘ ‘:-¢ >‘~ r‘ ;‘ J_"ﬁ ' n . ' 4‘. \ (“54.7, ‘ ‘, .\
”‘ {3 4 ":3?!“ 52 * "7 ;-. - /’,’)j w x 2;»: 48'? ‘
. N .. " ‘i.’ A {'7 . : 1:13..) E\%ﬁ§‘_-.V I. ‘ .‘9
Plate 4: Moose Tracks along the proposed Horn River Mainline Pipeline route.
39 i *

DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
‘ TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
gll‘ ‘ . ., r 'f “ -.~ ' ‘ .~' f 4‘ j. r '3' .v?
, .1 A" I , ' '. i - 7' ‘
-‘ v- , 'ff' .3 ' ' ~
‘71 4. ' i .‘ v “v a f i ‘ N
#5; f1 g " T' ' 2’-
:9: - ' ‘ . f" J ’
L - ’14:; ' ‘4 . g . o '_
4‘3: P. / r
‘ '| ‘ I: - '
. ,1 , 4‘ .
' : «1 .
‘4 ./ ~-
(.5. u ‘ .
,. "é.il ’ V‘ t o
f“; E ,! ‘ - _
_ t . I ‘ '
r_ S! ‘ V ' ‘ ~
"I V - . ‘ V
‘ ?4' 9‘ .. -* ', : -- ' 3--
y , -. ' ‘I -’ . ~, ‘ y . 1 ' L; ..
3.; . ~ ‘ j y is ‘ :30 . A. ‘ 'I'M A. , :4;
' ‘J r;- t - 7 ‘ L :’ ‘ j ‘3 ”Hf -'
- Plate 5: Animal markings along the proposed Horn River Mainline
Pipeline route.
:-- 4o

DENE THA’ HRST NATION '
Abon'ginai Knowiedge and Land Use Study _ '_
TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeiine :1;
4.4 Trapping Areae
DTFN study participants spoke of currently, or historicaliy, trapping furbearers found
throughout DTFN traditional territory. This includes the general area of northeastern
BC and specifically on the Project footprint (Figure 4-2). Furbearers discussed include ‘
beaver, rabbits, lynx, marten, fisher, otter, mink, squirrels, weasels, wolverine, wolves,
muskrat and fox.
Commercial trapping was described as the primary livelihood for the majority of DTFN
families. Philip Martel explained that before the creation of reserves, people trapped
everywhere. Specifically, he noted that "before, everybody wou/d go out in the bush all '
wintei; get /0t5 0f furs and se// them, ” ' "
As mentioned elsewhere in this Report, interview participants were reluctant to discuss '
commerciai trapping activities conducted outside DTFN member-held regulated trap
lines. Louis Foumier said '70 BC 12"? hard Ifyou seta trap and you get caught, you get .'
in trouble,” Despite this reluctance, trapping activity, both historical and current, was . ..
documented during this Study.
Current and historic areas in northeastern BC where DTFN study participants report
trapping are:
o #756T001 #755T014, #756T015, #756T016, #7SST017, #756T014,
#756T017, #755T015 (C. Talley, J.B. Talley, W, Yatchotay, A. Ahnassay, '
S. Tsonchoke, E. Kolay, R, Metchooyeah) '
o Conﬂuence of Shekilie River and Hay River (P. Ahnassay, J.B.Ta!|ey, ~~
Abraham Talley, S. Lefou, T. Didzena, V. Talley, Andrew Talley, Curtis .
Talley, R. Sutha)
0 Around Kotcho Lake (R. Metehooyeah, 5. Samantha, 3.8. Talley, Abraham '
' Talley, A. Seniantha, C. Tsonchoke, John B. Wasp Colin, H. Denechoan, T. ~
Talley) -. .
0 South of Kotcho Lake and east of Fort Nelson (Lucy Fomier) .
o Kwokullie Lake north to July Lake and east to Dickens Lake (Alberta) (5. ' "
Lefou and A. Lefou) .-
o Etsho Plateau (S. Seniantha)
0 Along Kotcho River (R. Sutha)
Trapping areas identified speciﬁc to the Project include:
. 0 Along Rainbow Lake Winter Road to Fort Nelson (Louis Foumier) '
o Trapline #756T001 (c. Talley, LLB. Talley, A. Talley)
41

% Appendix A: interview Summaries
1.. Archie Ahnassay
5: H 2. 30m: Mmassay Sr.
1 3. Peter Ahnassay
. A 4. Adalghus Beauiieu
‘ 5. Peter Beaulieu
5. Themas Didzena
‘ ‘ 7. Lucy Foumier
8. Lauis Foumier
9. Eric Kolay
' 10. Aibert Lefolu
11. Stephen Lefou
12. Betsy Martei
I 13. David Martel
14. Gabriel Marie!
' 15. Phillip Martel
16. Robert Meteheoyeah
1?. Syivester Samantha
18. Abraham Taliey
~ 19. Curtis Taliey .
2 20. Jean Baptiste Talley
' 21. Robert Tscnchoke
' 22. Stephen Tsanchoke
. 23. Wiiiiam Yatchotay
. 2 24. Field Survey: Chaﬂie Chﬁssakay/ Rebert Matchooyeah/Emest Chonkeiay
25. Field Survey: Ernest Chonkaiay
.. 26. Field Survey: Ricky Pasties:
.. 27. Field Survey: Rocky Yatchotay
. 28. Field Survey: Charlie Chissakay
r 29. Field Survey: Jean-BaptisteiAbraham Taliey
' 38. Field Survey: Steven Tsonchake/Rebert Tsonchoke
31. Field Survey: Victor Taiiey/Andrew Taliey
32. Field Survey: Howard Tsonchake/Charlie Chissakay
33. Field Survey: Roger Sutha/ Racky Yatchotay
' 34. Field Survey: Aibert Seniantha/Chaﬂie Tsanchoke
35. Fieid Survey: .3th B. Wasp Calm! David Wasp Cam:
36. Field Survey: Steven Lefou/Themas Didzena
', 32. Field Survey: James Danaisij-tis Tailey
' 38. Fieid Survey: Harvey Denechaaa/Thamas Talley

Interview Summam
Interviewee: Peter Ahnassay "
Date: July 8, 2009
Location: Chateh, Band Office
Interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beauiieu “
”The peOple were told that the land was given to them by the creator to respect. Spirituoffty is
feit in all the land.” .

vPeterAhnassay

Background ‘ I.
Peter Ahnassay was born in 1936 around Amber Creek, in a place calied Tree Creek. He was
married in 1957 and has no chiidren.
Hunting and "ﬂagging . .~
Peter started trapping on Aiber’ca trapiine #84 in 1957. He has trapped all over this trapline as
weli as in BC, around the forks of the Shekilie and Hay River. There is a cabin on the trapline on 53 .
the western side of Willow Creek. There is a road to this cabin because there is an old 0&1 we“ .~
located there. in the winter Peter hunts beaver, muskrat, squirrel and lynx. Peter’s parents had
previousiy hunted along Hay River. 5
Sites I
Peopie are buried alt over the Dene Tha's traditiona! territory. Peter knew of 2 sites in Habay, .v~ ~.
and one in Zama. He was toid that traditionally, their peopie had their burials in the trees. The
last known one was in Steen River, and the wood for the cofﬁn is still up in the tree. But years "
after the burial, the government came in and took the remains down,
ﬂiﬁiﬂg ‘
Peter fishes in the Hay River for jackfish, pickerei and sucker. ;
Eheegeé .
As a child, Peter remembers an abundance of animais. He had good fuck with his trapline up
until about 4 years ago when the number of animals decreased dramatically. Now there are no
animafs ieﬁ.
The biggest change for Peter was the introduction of fire-arm permits. In the past, the fathers
would take their sons out trapping and hunting. The sons were taught how to use firearms and '

how to set traps; now they need a permit. With the addition of this permit comes the safety
1-; restrictions and training. Long ago, people did not need to be taught about safety instead they
" were taught to be carefui and told to watch. Traditional hunting techniques are being changed
A H because of the influence of heh—native peoples,
Peter feels the reason it is difficult for the younger generation to trap is because if the father
.t has the right to the trapline as a ’junior’, the other eiigibie famiiy members may not be allowed
‘i to also trap on that line without permission from the ’headman’.
There used to be tots of animals on Peter’s trapline, now he explains there is none. Though
~_ there are no major developments, there is stiil 0%! and lots of other activity such as cut fines and
3 ' oil wells. His trapiine is mostiy muskeg which prevents a iot of activity yet Peter says that a [0t
; ~~ .. of trees have been cut down, and this has had a negative effect on the amount and range of
animals. The animais use the trees to hide, and when the trees are cut the animals leave.
' The poilution in the takes and rivers has 3350 affected the amount and quality of the fish and the
. 1 water. Peter has also noted the changes of the weather; he says the sun does not seem to have
' the heat it once had.
I Future Generations
' Peter believes the reguiatior‘ls that are now in piece discourage the youth from going out. The
' .~ f fathers used to take out the sons and teach them. Now they need to have speciaf tickets and
permits to go hunting, and a lot of younger peopie just do not want to do it. If they are iazy,
: they wilt not get the safety permits. Peter beiieves his son cannot tegaﬂy hunt or trap anything
1' without a license.
Areas to protect
Peter would like to see the flatiand area, north of Zama and south of Bootis bill. This area is
I mostiy muskeg and Peter wouid like to see it preserved. Peter woufd atso like the area around
the Shekiiie River protected.

4 . l, 1 1 4 _ 4 I :7 Area of Interest
, , 1 V ‘ - J.-
. . .I . . .- .. . I -.1 __
' . . 1 1:127“,
1 0944207 ' ~24
’3' J ”I 1 -7::fj",""" . ,
n {33” .' h ‘ I - % "I2. _
_-_ V‘ _ g ‘ I ‘1 ‘
'/\\_.-" ‘4 ' .‘ ‘
LkulhIe‘Lukc‘I- 1-57-: '11 q. k .
” ‘::- .é‘j: .- ' “7:4 ~ ‘
r ., —-3 .‘r‘ . .~‘r" -
"1 ,.‘-»"“>‘\.« ";;_,..-‘A L ' J”:q‘1./~‘i , ‘
E“ - ' '5‘“ 3/ . .
"'3 ,,— ~.. ‘ _ *a ‘
i“‘~/‘. bx: . , \II‘ .
ff":— \\ “-- .c «m. ‘ _
1.2;: =4. (3v. W I
. .‘km ‘3‘ I . .’ I {I \‘I I’
0941502 ‘ “4 . \s
.- f 1 «[ 41., 0941301 .,
-t. ‘~-.-._*—. 1 g »'\ OI '
v'_' " Jc " '~—4,.-L.I .23
“'~—/r “R; U... I,‘ .l 4-, ' .
“I I .I‘ V
AAA b I‘ ' ,4; ' ‘ ._
- \I , 4 4'
c? .313: -
-- ~~ " 2!
t x“.‘_I c : (£3 V
M‘ ,r I ‘ I. -‘7
~ ' I " I 0 ‘.
' ‘ '. ' l 1 i'2 A 4%
i. A It i } "t r.
‘3‘ I' . I I) {‘1 I ‘ ff. “IJ I ... ,
' ‘. " |..‘. "XVI? ' ‘ -. ‘ w
r J ‘1 -’ ./ :‘U‘ . .Ufz“ ‘ . 0431(34‘ ;
., ' ‘ .1 . ‘. 4.1;: MN. 1-1;»— .r "~_. -
3" 1 I I : i ‘3‘ ”1-..? l'I‘: I
“ 4' 1. ' : ‘ .- Y‘ '. L ?{& v R;
‘1' ,‘ “‘\,I,_/‘ N. '1 v ' _ f " —— .
, ~ ~ ' “ 4 15“; 0‘ I16 \
o,’ ./‘~ 1 I .V "1) \ ‘V 1 -. ' t - \ '
'1‘ J. .5 «‘ , ; ' (x \ {:1 T ¢\v35 7‘4- 94 r. 3']; 1
4V...' ~ . '." . I .‘ -\H' .'-‘ Qﬂ .2 ~_ 1. ‘_ 'Il ' u. . \
. \\ - . \\. \‘Th\.. ’21, V M‘TJ again; i. i c 'N‘“.- ' . 3 -’\\-“)“¢\- \
A . v ﬂ» ‘5‘ . .~.- 2. r 4:4 .w
:4 7% ﬂ 4 "Mi ., 1‘ i Pow ” V -* ‘°~;-"'LI.“"‘-”1’ ‘-s‘.::‘a '
- - 1- ‘ 4* . - s." “i7 "4"“ 4 '1' .. " - Jr: . .4? 4 '.4-T‘-::
'. _ T F "- ' J! _' ._ _' y _“ ."'- -.,‘ ., 4.
> hr - - , -. .-.. -c(- e ‘f' ' ~13" ' nk’r‘n-xv ..
’F‘. ("f V“ 1 f i . " h / " -- .‘I g A“ 5‘.“ . v ”-1. «r?-:‘?I * 'w' ‘ FR \
V“ ‘ .4‘ ~ f r- .4... 4.’ v .. - , ‘ 3“ ‘ .. ", *‘rr '31- . 21 .— -- K. .
- C” " .I’Jst‘ ,4 .- -‘rx- -. ‘ '. ,~_: $4 -- - - -. ‘ 1
2- ' '. 1'75'. . ”537;? 1 'i "-' .’ 1. Va 1" ”1... ' "'3 “:35 c; "£331.; - -. -22]: Sina—o ' ‘- 4 ' \
- ,‘ '. ’ .4‘ L'.. f1 0_ " , ‘3 ,1' ' l a,“- .-.-“-«._. “‘~ ,3 f- " ~'..I. " - . -- ' "
: ~ :4, » M; 1% , , , . «+1.59%» ,2: .1 ~.: - . .
. A . _‘ - -, . ‘ -‘ .‘ .4 . ; L. _‘ . -'.. ' ,,‘ ~ ‘ .‘ ' U . ﬂ; 1"“ - I ‘ - ‘_ ..' _ , ' ‘1
Z.“ x *' b1¥é;§a .Aﬁix—«Qr—g‘ " r’—~/ . ‘J ‘ lhﬁuﬁ 7' - I.’ ’ .35. _ *5 ‘2. I
-‘ . ' - ‘ - .1 I 5" ‘ +- ._ ~ -' ‘ . . ‘ ' “ _._ '
1‘; QW ’. _‘. 1' N Io —~J - . . -— _.'. __ — 21"... - .' T. -I ‘ I-II 3
3" \g‘ I ‘ “94"“! ,—r..' -... .; .1 :1“. ' I N} ‘- ' ' - L all j
1—, 3 I ‘ . ’ ﬂ! 1” ,. .101 I II. I]. ’ _,ﬂ 1 .. ', _. ,‘I ___r: .Jé—"=—=' _. ‘t ‘I 4
_ Kif] . l H 3 , ‘ ./ - ,‘f ,—" '- ;,-.a ' . f ‘. 1‘ 'J 1'3. - “73" '33-“: :"47:7i.“:7i- \ 7“ L—
'5’! 5‘»:- J '4 f ’. / z" '7 . , ~ ' ~. ;-‘./’ . .1 I " ‘ ‘3 -. ' V ; 7 y. '~.5-'. T’ ' ‘ A1 ‘
3 III $.w: 0 \.~ I o 'R-vr‘; .x/f / l“. o’/ 5 . -*_.l:':~7-;II"" I I .' .4 _' . I II I 4 _ ‘II-I ‘:-":".I1I: 084L12 I
1' » ' .- 419/ r ' - -' 7 .— —-—'-‘—-T-‘w‘ t
\ I ." ARI~ ‘ “.l'lfggf" I I7" - " ‘ ‘ ._ - J lo. 7' — 1 ‘
.— , ‘3 1 .. ..—‘—-‘.’- f? \' I I '_' I-_. IA, _ ‘ 7.4 I-‘I 5‘ L JI [
Legend J ., .,:-.4,.,~f-;' v5” . .. II . . __r _. .
_. . . (2- #:331‘ c I I.” A/ “"z-‘J' ' '. ".' n ' " ’.'. "-I- I _."—‘“ . - 4'3
\ =—— Ekwan(exustmg) . ,. - - " -\ ~1’;-~' ’12-“ q, ' .J ”1:. r. -. :5, Tr _-r.0_ . -._
. ,- -/"\v W\V ".f I L‘ l‘ {/3 I.) v -I {r I313 I.r l. L .5 . ‘4. —;-_ J ‘t . .
— Horn River Mainline L r. 7‘ .» ‘ rvA;——___ .5“; ' "1-) ._ :1
E‘. ,a‘, ‘ "" .1 -<-;>'_"é‘;:I,- ’ ’3‘ -\ ‘ l ‘I' - - ‘. ‘ . , ‘ . J. '4 ‘
[:J Area for Land Use Planning .},{}-—-:\*:_ _ _ ,_ w - 47"“ -. ' ' ~. . 1 -. ' £31k: -._;-7_ 5,11. - ; .._‘:.‘ g .
3% .- a . " -_ . : ,~ \ ‘ﬁ \ fl- 1;. J'_ll_3,. :9; I3 .‘2 f?! It"
I ' -* 5- r" r\‘ 3‘5 , ’ , 4 ' .-."' —'«it—'vi$ .11 & Ni: 1
-. , I \Area oflntense Development ‘é"“”::;l>~hr" .i I [/1 I. K 3-".- II. , ‘f 4' I SJ: :uIrII-I I I
- <currem> ' - . 4:41 .A 1 ~ ., .4 J i213: ~51; ‘ 111. .__ .
V 1 " ~‘: 1 S. .I “-17 ' ‘ N ‘0 -" . " L' - : ’ I l'
4 - Hunting Area (Current) ‘ '06 '4‘ , .‘ .-;-- / O 7 97; -c .l j ' .— f I&ﬁgﬁfﬁl g - .. ._ £_ --
- z . ‘ .. “ ’ ‘ ' - I1 - ‘1 "cv;¢g.142 '. -~ T: . , -:-.
Trapping Area(Historic) m“ 3‘ ~.j . . . . g} \__\ 349‘ ff LX...‘ ‘u‘ “ﬁg?“ : ' I-_08 ‘—
. Iv '- ‘ -\' " l:v ' . L w .' D I I D s -' '— . ' I‘ . i”, , - 9" V7
m Trapping Area(Current) ‘ ‘2 ”—. ' ,v y , K . {ﬁt f”: I (1" 1'2; .- '1 . 24f??? '3‘”, 4
., .4 . \_ I. ‘ . o ‘ ‘, . \ o . - 4 — W’ ' . ?-
:lfr—--I PrOVinCiaI Bounda ’| ‘ ’ ’ ‘ ; :Lf’AN ‘ é“ ““1 ‘\ z. " ...$:1 - .“"!‘ h..'.f‘ ; 5' 1O 15 .
i L“ W ~ ~ ~‘ *- 4" 1’ ‘1 31" ‘ 1‘” ‘w' “ ‘ ‘ E
: . _ i S: . .1, “.-': x‘ ' ' "' ’ C _ ‘-.
.m ' . I 1 ‘7!” is {‘m. L” ‘7 " -, . KM
MaplDZOO3
ALL MAPS ARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION \MTHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHiBITED. THE INFORMATION
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAlN ED FORTHE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES WiTH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION USES AND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOVW ON Tr-HS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEARE‘. MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. .

interview Summary
interviewee: Adolphus Beauiieu
Date: May 14, 2009
Location: Chateh Administrative Office
f Interviewers: Cathy Baidin, Kathrin Janssen
Background
é Adolphus was born June 29, 1929 near Le Crete, Alberta. His father was Patrick Beauiieu, who
was from Taiicree First Nation around Buffalo Prairie. He passed away in 1986. Adolphus’
3 [ mother was Mary Denais from Fort Vermillion.
2 Adolphus has 10 children, 6 boys and 4 girls.
. Hunting and Tragg‘mg
Adolphus started going out to harvest with his father when he was 7 years oid. He recalls
§~ going hunting and trapping in 8C for rabbits and beaver with his father many times.
 ": There are good lakes and rivers in the BC trapline area. Adoiphus would also hunt for marten,
: lynx and grizzlies on their BC trapiine.
in the past Adolphus would stay out in the bush for a month and a half at a time.
.~ Adolphus is still actively harvesting to this day, but now he uses trapiine #203 in Aiberta. He
. does not use his father’s trapiine in BC anymore because of a discrepancy regarding the
7 ownership of this trapiine. The Aiberta trapsiine is around Rainbow Lake and is the size of 6
' townships. Buffalo River is at the end of his trapiine. Adolphus says there are many moose in
. . ~:. this area.
Adolphus says he has hunted many moose over the years as weli as wolf, marten, lynx and
. grizzly bears.
5' He aiso used to hunt caribOU, but there is 1101‘ very many around anymore.
Adolphus iikes buffalo meat better than moose meat,
i in the spring Adolphus hunts beaver.

Fishing \
Adolphus fishes in Rainbow Lake, usually catching jackfish and rainbow trout. l
Medicine and Berries l
Adolphus went out with his grandfather to pick medicines; they were considered ”doctors”. ‘
The plants they harvested were used to treat people. .
Adolphus has been all over BC and up to Fort Vermillion to pick medicines. He would stay out a ' 3
couple of months at a time. In the muskeg there are small spruce trees that have small purple ;.
berries, like grapes (juniper) which he would boil and then drink the liquid for colds. He .
explains that this is a very strong medicine. ' '
Sites '
Adolphus has two cabins on his Alberta trapline. One is approximately 25 miles from Rainbow l
Lake and the other one is by a creek. There was a third cabin that burnt down which he would
like to replace with a new one. [E
There is a gravesite at Rainbow Lake, right by the pump in the lake. AdolphiJs knows of 3 other ..
graves that he takes ca re of. Every year he replaces the wooden crosses of the gravesites.
Travel Routes
Adolphus cannot drive to his cabin on the trapline in the summer. He only has vehicle access to : '
his trapline in the winter through the winter access roads. - , f.
in the past, Adolphus used to take ten pack horses and travel to a cabin around Kotcho Lake.
Adolphus would follow Zama Lake and then cross the river across the BC border. From there, . ,.
he would follow the Kotcho River and then cut north to Kotcho Lake. A non-aboriginal trapper ,
would join Adolphus for the winter. in the spring, Adolphus would do the trip back with the '.
horses, which would take 3 days. ' 3i
Observed Qhanges .

1985 was the year that the government brought the buffalo to the Chateh reserve. Adolphus
i}: was hired to take care of the buffalo and did so for 4 years. He would walk around the pen and
2;: cut bales for their food. The buffalo area was about 5 miles by 5 miles. Adolphus never had
problems with the buffalo; the buffalo knew him and felt comfortable with him. They would
‘3 even come when he called them. He recalls that one of the buffalo had a radio collar around
‘3 his neck.

.' Adolphus explains that back in those days, you could not kill the buffalo, but now you can. Now
i 2 the buffalo roam all over the area. A couple of the elders like the meat, and will go out and kill
.. a calf once in a while; the calf meat is very tender. Adolphus likes buffalo meat as well.

3 Concerns

Adolphus does not like that there are a lot of pumps and portable bridges in his trapline area.
; These bridges are brought in, in the winter and removed in the spring depending on the water
. 5 level.

.. . “w. 55-“ 3’; f ' WEE“ : r: L (7.15;. .3 5. '55 1‘. 5:519:3{3} £5" #4” ”w -. 55'- 5: _ {257.5% “W‘— " ‘ ”m" = ;"
A v r ‘ ‘nqb‘h J) . . "‘ .- > l“; - 1 ‘l “ ‘B ' : ' J’ ‘ if I‘l"i, 7“." ‘ v, I L311). "' IJ q" i, l. I *~' '
v . I , . , l I >&- I, g - . O A . ‘I‘l _) z I I. . 5‘. . 5 , J =Id
. 5 ~o .- ..~" -;.~-- .23{: “\- , y 5; J‘ 5‘5?" ..; ,5“ 5f, .255) 1) .1 ,ﬁ; .5 ,1 L 551’. Area of Interest .
4, “ ‘ ,: _,‘ =4" --\ ‘ \ ‘ , ‘51.. .J- 5 .‘5 13‘ “K “13%" r v w , a . ,2‘5'; ‘
1 .. . . , J: wt...“ {1.4). \ \ I , L l. 1”. 3 . J 7 .
e.» - 22 5; 2.22.225 2.- .55 m «5 5) ~15 M 5' 5 .z 5 ~—
’ " "7 "2? l f ' ' i" “ 5‘ ' x ' ' ' . . .3“.-
I. .3 ‘ " ¢‘hst , '1' ~ .- , “V . X‘- ' $1 ~ r(- . . A 'H ‘ . ,1! -§,‘.;' 2 _ '. j ,n j: -
d’ v.‘ v ‘. if ‘_ \ . "2‘1”le \ ' “—\ 0‘ 5" /§ 3' l“ 4 4' ‘ w ‘
,,a5 *7. ram] ~5- 5:. ,gu ’35} 5729972“ .3 ‘ 21153.1“ 5 : 55‘1“ , 1,. £41195 ’ . “:ﬂ n 5
. "f; I 5.“ ,, 9- » v... 5 5 f,- "2—4;. - ; .3 . . W 2 l, 11 \‘N ;- w 2- J ggsljﬁa n “772-... :ﬂﬁ‘a i
51 .5 Li’. 2" W“! ' ' 7' 4 if" 5‘ . '- x‘i ' "£3 .! ' :5 : 2. ~ ",\"-r"«‘ k» 55,. ' «v‘ E "'
5 ‘2 '1' 3’ v ' L...“ ‘ ‘ ’. ' § \ P n.‘ , . 3"” _ f 45.. . b1“ .‘ \Y 1"? - n
"5'" "f "“ . ,. ‘ ? 5 5' ‘- I '5 v "I- 5' ' n;- J" "g‘t’mLJ fpfm” K x " ’““' ‘5 7‘ f
@3132“ ‘ 4‘ 1 J‘ v- ,4 '1 “vs - I 5 ‘3‘ 5‘ .5 — - , -2 ‘2 . ‘ j .5 4,32— ..t . 5
- f‘_ N ’v . " .I , _ -‘£ '. F“? ‘51 "‘33. .." iI I t 2' . ' _I.'_ _ ‘\_\'. 3k - {:1 ’I “ff. ~-,
I .rI . . ,. LL I . _ a“ J? 1,! Hf ‘ {f ’5- 3 "~‘f, I .3 ’,.—.{l&::.\. ‘71 5., 5" . ‘25,;1- - F 1
I'- .f’ -, .4“ - A .' h 7': > I. .5/ " 5‘ 5 -‘ ‘5'- , m:\'>2’2‘\ 7 “‘5 5 '- ‘
7:”,3. ,- f 9%;95594 L" 9 ,u I” .' ' ﬁg . ﬂ... .' ‘ ‘7'1‘5'5'35'57Wﬂ'l': _ _ J :- 22 .. r : .
r—I ‘ '5- ogfn— ‘ ‘* “13L" 4 ' ' ' ‘ 1w. 1' ‘““"‘ .- " .. 'i ' \. ‘- " '
‘ T‘- "’1". ‘23:" . K E: V T - rﬂkﬁa- aiii": 3“ . ‘ “‘4‘jﬂ‘. £3.71?" “f :v x 1‘ I t; "J ‘1’ ?.-La. L, \t b:
1 I ‘_ . , ﬁfi. P'- ?rA‘ N ‘ ' ' ‘fr‘o- ='P=-*ﬁalJU ._ ﬁx I: .6? .' .‘ .15» 4, I.»
5 25%,.-- f.g‘ 52-22. 5- .- -. .2 W ~55 :2;- -— 5x .
L 5'4“”; ‘5 . _' ‘ vx . ’ 5‘ L -. c‘ ' “ _,‘ ». {I’— 9“ 4-.5-‘5 t, =
WV 9/ I- ré'l-GT':-.§",’ In. g). >‘ . r~-- II . ' “I wy¥ & . g’ 1,1: I 3}! 3‘ ";3j\ ' _r . I I I §?/I -:Z:Erl:% “7‘: _V 4;.» ;
5‘5 - 2‘ r ' ~"‘ —.:_\_.- 2- 5,5" ~ ,_2 . -’. 5 -— - -- :.'. ‘5 ,_- ' -- ‘ "T '7—‘?—=" .. “:5: - ' ’
,5 .53.. ' “* —-. 5J3 .f” ""' ‘ 3, :2:*-’~;—.,.. '» _ . 1 3 V?» i" ' . _ )1; - ' ‘ 2 .' r. r ”7.25::
i‘ \ ‘5 . IS _ ‘* } ‘ ) 1‘ .‘U \ V _ Q o, ,’ . ‘ "i ' f?
5‘ ’- ’5, ‘ﬁgiﬁf‘ I SD; “—‘M' “"3: ‘r' 5 “ ‘i’ulx W “V 2" - ’ ‘5. 1 ‘ , L
‘ ‘._~C—¥:-’:S ‘- N“ ’ ' '% ‘ . .~ ‘ 4., . I ‘3 ’2‘“ 5.- .. .. - - t
rs. 5-5"~r‘;». ‘ “u- ‘- .- _ .2 — ‘ ‘ 5 yr" I . t. :2_ ’ 4:“ ' ‘ ' “ ' y
4. . 2251255525.“. .s ~ . ~13... _ 5-2, ~, $1.1},- i' . ‘5? - 2:... _ 5 ,. L ,
L' “:2. 5:: 5 w . , w -. 5.- ~ ‘2 o v.5 “1" ' 322?‘ ‘ 2 . 5 r , 5: .
, \ » 1.1.3‘_ , ‘ .— Jvﬁ 1 II '. A I . . 1 I I» .. ‘ . ~. .—~. 3*“ _ I ‘
l W’ ‘ —— 'l W‘ \‘ ‘ t. » 71-.“ ‘L ‘1” . I A J ‘ I -‘ .H l . - I' ' '0. ‘ .1” -‘ ' “u ‘ ‘ ~~ . ‘5’ - J .‘
r123 3?}, @ F33” :' E "" ‘4‘ K“ “ ' - w ‘ . AE‘QII 'I‘i : i i" 6‘ ‘ I . _ l ’ﬂ- ‘ 5kg. 1 ‘“ ‘ ‘ AL
. 2 I;>—.‘ ‘ -\ _. __ - "-' '. _ v _ .1 — - ‘ _. - a 5' ‘- _..'._ I? 5 +5 a — *4 ' “a - _r_,‘“"' t
":k 7;. - ‘ J a le . 13621235!) Ign'IIL’K‘u .L , r—‘-"*~ 1%: 5 .' .22.."1‘. ‘ A 7-... ”5-, - ‘ ‘ 5.. ,‘V'f’.;.__ . L
‘ __ ‘5»a-'2-'_-:-1 r, F “ -._ 5 ‘33, 3‘ ﬂ. ‘ ‘ ‘9' -' 'f 5,.‘Jgdjﬂ- ‘5: 5.‘ .12“ .-_., I r
f. .‘\\_:/\’.I,~rpv:;".:> 2/“ - 7 - jg; ‘~ - 5 , Ex is . .If 5. - 5 g" . _ -L: _ ti - ' . L ‘
1 . “~‘- , Er: _ “ ' ‘ _ _' 1 ' 9- “k, ‘ x ‘I-
5.5%? “ 5.“ ' ' "‘ ’5‘ . ,7? / 5‘2”» 5“” L f: ‘~ . I : 5-22521“; - ‘- 5 v z
,_ VI, . ‘ ‘5 '- “ .a '. I " >3... ' . ~5I
Fri?! .1 1"": 17:3}.58-5f‘- , J a ‘ 53 MI! ‘ E- if L5H ," -_ ~ " i
3:. Eﬁ;ﬁ? ' iq‘c. I ,‘ l- : 7“ .7 ‘2‘ - , ‘. ha L " I -I ‘ 5 1:“ - 3 ‘3'} _ ~ ~ I: i— I
‘6.— ,._‘.; I’J i, W is? 'l‘ .r- “’5“ ("Hi - . En;~1§:"Wvlh-l'iﬁi-1125—A“: 7... -= ‘ '1; ‘ U. “‘9; _ . “A '2; E ‘
.- . . . . 5 .. . . 5. 5 5 9.. . ' 2 -:5 -“ u ' - 5— ‘
1.». “5 Rare, f‘. «2" 5 “f" 4’! . "5‘53? 5”" 7:3 I 5 5' ' .- ' F‘ I
‘5 ,5 __ . _."-_» ’ ,5. « '. -2‘-’ 2 «2145" $15 ‘1 5 2 n. q , ‘. -- . .5 — _. , _; i.“
5 5 5w“ , .5522: 5. {5‘ «:5 W J 5..» 55. :5
I‘ .- _'."': ‘. . LI [I .1 r . -r 'K DI .' « V. II' I - . C . I 2
't a : '_. I ‘ .57 1“ '1“: :32? "7. .f }“ -;‘xr, '? i ‘I' ‘7 I II _ '1 . r ' , II - é . L
n ' "V ‘/ r ' \I‘ "-Vr ’7- 'rhﬁy. 5" 2. ' ' , - . r r ' E ' ‘
‘1‘» ‘ I; I I . '5' '1' - . 7’.‘ —" ‘ ' .r C, I “ r ' ‘b‘ . ' ‘ ‘ v u .— ‘ .I ‘ 1| ‘ ‘
-~ 5 r5 5“» -: 5e 5 5 5- . . 5 . 2 z. .
L.‘ -In LI , _ I. J ,. ,4 I.. grin 1‘??? .3 ‘ If ‘ . , L ‘1 ' ’ . E
1i 1 7‘.“ ‘5; . I‘I 5‘ II 1 {VI :7 II_. 5' F.1- ‘4- III. Q 1.: . I $.- I ‘_\ II '_ I a ?I I .. . . I - I I I"
17%,; L ,L_ 9) A-‘Tﬁ ; 'I-" . ‘ . .rr\‘ 42"?" - - . * AP 9 ' '1‘ a i"- :II-I‘“ I. I :1 - ’ ' : . - V. I ‘ l .- ‘ I“ [r
.. \ I 7 ‘. ‘.“‘l;’t' i‘r- » ~33 TIE ,7, :' I/ '3? - . . I: 5. . . , '. I [
I“ N . .‘I b. “ A .\ '2 l 3 . q .. . 5' . .' P“ 5
-7 - ‘r. n ‘( ‘5 rt 0 L
’ 7... h—.‘ ‘_ ?— \ ‘N - . ‘TI E \I._“: _.‘ I“ ‘ ' {\ ‘ ' . g ‘ : |
a "3 ." \fa ‘5.~2 . . ,.? '7 M “‘2' ,_ ' ‘ -5 ‘ 'i
«4.;‘_-- .__ )1 4‘ . 4‘ - 3“- . ‘y K I ‘ 7’" £‘- 1 3"“ 5 . d ‘5 _ o I l_ \ _« P
‘i?"' L: VI . ‘ I - I I’. -;. V ?'r .2 ,‘5 I... v . .5 \ - _ , I .- I _. I4. I .
.~--._ _,' - 5' 2'5““ ‘ f ', . u ‘ ' “'“ ‘ ~ :‘ . - .
2- 35;, _-.-“ -_- - W 2 l . . . a v 1..
.. ~-=2— ,x- 5 ~ . . . , 2 ’ _ . _ w;- . » _ _. 3 _.- - .1,
£21 . I ‘3 ‘ . _ ; ‘ . . I .‘ ; II 5
‘bu ' 5 l * L t. VJ: ‘ ‘ ' a ‘4 ‘0 V - x" 7—.
4 5 - 5 ‘35 . 4‘ - 5 ‘ .5; ' . 1
‘ «I I “ I) . . 1 _ ‘— "“ ‘O . 1 w.“ - ~~ ' t
A. 3—2 . I - \E 7%x. “ I . _ _ . -- . 7 .TT' ‘. ’I‘., "IA‘ I
a V r 1 ‘7“ "“;"‘:»ir»\\ ' ' ' ‘ rl- 7/ " ‘7“ ('3‘ ‘ §‘ 1
l ,- 3; ‘. 'V .i . ‘ l' I, . -_; ‘ <:"v_ :\ ﬁ§;>~.'%¥ﬁﬁ‘d '9- '4" T. ”‘ ’I.. _ , h :5. 1V - . _ '.:¢Lg’;'h ~ V I
‘ “ f: - - nl‘ .“ "‘< ... ._u - ervp’h”. 3"... 1% ‘aix I . - - , -' ‘5“ .’ g.
75-5, I ‘ . _ 3., .’ ' . .5! “"1 ' :1‘ “F "25¢" _ ,'--' .. _ __ 7‘ 5“" ‘7‘1.53"“:trz‘1'1'721-rm- ' W .. T .31”! _. If I2. 1‘ ; ‘
a . - ‘ I ‘ 5 l ‘5‘; . '4 .-‘“““ , .- __ _ ‘ “' *~,:»'~‘j¢;~::-“j\;:;“ . f ‘1‘ ‘ i
"' ‘ -— -. ' _5 . .I,“- — _ ‘ ' 3.5.;- ?‘?\Z‘.;~’ ‘. . . 1 , .
_ 5 W ' ’ ”:7." .7 .5 I k " £4." 1 “i A ‘~**"‘“—“‘ ' ‘ ‘
‘ ' ‘ l' —- ‘ . "I 2' J“ g . NF W—‘- "_—— V ‘\:.\" ,‘ u" ,27Ii4 ‘
. I _- “,ﬁ ‘1 i r r.‘ - ‘1' I 1' ‘r i _ I _' — > {I I . I“ <2 ‘ : x—J—fIi'j; J.
MI | _ I :4 'q S 7k . ‘ Ci“. 5" I 737" ‘ l‘ ‘. '. Ii 1 {’1‘ I . _ _I I 4:” 'I 1. ‘ , ,"q ,"_ IL; .I lift:
‘ . 5‘ . .2 *v' . 1' - - V - - ‘v" | 'i . —, . - r'"
- ‘5 1‘ 1 L52...% "5 7‘ ‘ " ' 3 J . -' ‘ .5555 " L ‘ 5L 3.5 ”(3 n5 5
.s -. ' ,-.- 2' 2- .2 I 1 " " . ' 5 -, 5'. ‘2, 1
m .~-q.‘__ 1' "I x ‘f n.“ ""3 "1' 7 2 .— 'ﬁ'. 1‘.-- 4:, I .- ‘ t .r, 23‘s, 15‘ L ;
- 9 " ff 1 _ _.__ “ 5 ‘_ . i . 4; . l |'-. 5.
- \ 5 - -".. z) .s '1‘ E “'98 . v.“' 2 “‘ . .,‘ ‘ . ', l , 1
r- ' " ,7 x ‘ "52 *’ 32%" 1'5"! ask .- *—‘*:- f ._ “- m" 'r 1‘ ' 1r ‘ 55+" 3?:
I ‘— o- V ‘ a ‘ ~ ‘4‘ -“2 .‘9‘ I , - 5 ‘ < , 5f . ‘ r. \ V ‘
**~—~——2. - ‘ ‘5 . ‘-* ‘J .2 ”2722‘ * - 2' . ‘ 5 5“" 5 ' PE x ~~
_ i —— ‘ 2...:-“".~‘--‘ 85,-) a 2 l“ I . ‘ . j.’ 7": .2 l. ”4 ,1) L" I 4) ’4 I
j: :I w,“ 1' r9 9,5?“ ‘ . I. -_ . x g; . .‘ ' .5 f 1 I7] . ‘. I
.. Y nﬁ!‘ -ux ﬁfx- '7" hug»? '3 ‘1‘ 3...:7'5“ -. - -“ 5ft":.\ ‘ ‘W "k h " rVr': .“E, ' ‘ ‘2:- ‘3 ‘
5‘ 7‘ LG ‘1’ H. 5 ")‘-5~‘:F~.’f'.s~.‘a£ {42f ‘ “ERE—hj . 3;.5 ' . “‘. ’ I "“5 .‘ 'sz "‘ ‘L ‘L '
L; 225.. 1‘5}: . .ga -. . . ' . ; ‘ . - '4" “‘ 5‘ L ' ‘
. Legend - f -‘ 5 5;; .. ,5- . 35.. 5 5’ ~. g, ;
q ‘ I, F * J '1 ‘ ‘ II . ‘ "t 5r “R .P I I
k ' ‘ ' l I .. ‘ ' i: v
.15 — EkWa . t. 9'. .2. . 5 " l‘ 1: I .‘ ‘1 "y: ‘ "1/ ‘1' .4 .‘j
P: = n (eXIs Ing) h‘ A” 3 A ‘ ~K.‘ ‘ V' ‘ ’ - ‘ 3 :7?! : ,3 J .‘ f1 ‘1’ “ 5‘J‘ 2 '4
. _ ‘fn; ' ‘A'. ‘I " x . 7' 35"”. I :- . . 5 ‘ S". ‘ x g‘ "25 1' A4 V‘I :
L — Horn Rwer Mainline . '. ',- . a ,4 a — ”n,- x 5‘, 2...: ‘ “#53 - ‘53: a ‘35 5,53; 5 - r; 1,5.» .7
l S '.J ‘ r ‘I , , WV:— _- :1 i . ,I? . , JI,..-I\I‘35,—-\,I f ‘5.-. 4.— “ p 7!,” . - . .
‘ --- Travel Route (Current) ‘_ * H ' , g ., -‘ , r 51f 1 - v_ .1. r: .- 2: __ v (3.22; 3H]: . .
‘ » 2W“; ‘ I. A 5 I ' ‘ F Y“??? -_“; ._‘ L, V -\ .T‘V '2“ :1 5‘. i r\ y — * . 7 ‘:;{‘V If?" .‘ I ‘ ‘5 13? ‘ 'f “‘ I V .
t. L II._..._ Provincial Boundary . v ' 5.2;“.— -“/ ‘ 3.: ‘ “u . Ff 1 . ,2.» '. n. , ‘9 ' *2 ‘ , , QQLm‘ﬂ 1L9 '
n -- ~ ~"2 2- “-1 .33 {ff - A 3““! ‘. 5?, E u ‘ E " " .———
‘- . . .2*- 2. .3 ‘9 ,‘5 , a 5-.-f L 2. .95 ~.. - gym. . . .
.35“. * LT‘.‘ ‘L-nﬁ’k’f- _.;. -5 U .1. . r. «9- 12.21%!» -_ r: ‘3 .. .2 .P. - “2m '5 ;-
MapID: 004 : .
‘ Traditional Use Areas identified by Adolphus Beaulieu ‘
I I n I o c n 1.--;
In relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline Ly
: L
ALL MAPSARE THE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF 084E THA' FIRST NATLON. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBI'I'ED.THE{NFORMATION
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PXPEUNES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPEUNEAND IS NOTA COM PREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY. ‘
DELINEATION OR SUWARY OF DENETHA‘ FIRST NATION USESAND INTERESTS INTHEAREAS SHOWN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACTTHE DENETHA‘ FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. I2:
122-;
r; g

interviewee: Peter Beauiieu

¥ Date: May 14, 2009

Location: Chateh Administration Buiiding

i interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Kathrin Janssen

.. W

Peter iives in Chateh with his wife Bonnie Metehooyeah and their children.

3 Hunting and Tragging

; Peter uses his father's trapline in Alberta #203.

; Peter hunts moose, beaver, lynx, marten, wolf and grizziy. Moose is the most important animai

for him. There are also smaller animals such as rabbits that he hunts for their fur and uses as

' ' food when out hunting in the bush.

Peter says that whatever is hunted and kiiled is shared among famiiy members or members of

. .. the community: ”What we kill, we share,”

Beaver furs are mainly used to make moccasins and clothing as the furs are not worth much
anymore to seil.

"'l Peter is looking forward to teaching his son to hunt and trap. Right now, his son uses a .22 riﬂe
to hunt rabbits or prairie chicken in the bush around his house. That is how he is learning to
i hunt _

" Peter plans on teaching him any bush skills that he does not have yet.

i Fishing

. Peter fishes with his father at Rainbow Lake. Both men do not ﬁsh in the spring as they prefer

to hunt beaver during that season.

Medicine and Berries

Peter and his wife collect berries whenever they go out hunting. They pick blueberries,

raspberries or whatever they can find.

Peter’s wife Bonnie used to go out harvesting berries with her grandparents Baptiste and Judith 5 '

Wasp Coiin. Bonnie and her grandparents would go out towards Rainbow Lake to harvest
berries.
Travel Reuters
Peter’s grandfather used to hunt with dog teams and owned 6 teams. Peter used to go with
him and travel from the old cabin out to the tipi site on the trapiine; which would take a who¥e '
day. 5. ..
Areas to Protect
Peter wouid like to see the area around Rainbow Lake preserved. It is a beautiful piece with
many animals. " "

7 1
. ' N7T 7“ ; p]. 711,7- 9 :7; ‘ I; w, 1-077 -7. . - - V" a. E; 77% 7 ‘1; .‘ f 7;. «"7 -7 331,17; 3;. “7&7 t =7 *7 141:, - ..
A .5‘ J4. 77.le " '1 ri' -~ W” “-31.57. "’ ’ “f If "I P
I . .- " F: ' .-' - 11 ~ -. 5‘47 z’ti’ff- "“i ‘1 -. .3 . ,7. 71\ $2134 ',. 7’ f 7' f’ f :- -;3! Area oflnterest
: -7 ... 3‘7 - ~__7 7 3;. . ‘ : 7 , 7 - .7 4 7' . '
' '7‘ , 3.. 7.2- r’i‘c "' ' II 7 2-: 7 52“ ~ :1; ‘ -'“_ 7' 1 -\‘\ ' ‘I'K "+4.8!- ., kl" \ I.’ IX“, ~—
17 7* ac “ .. ~, 7 1,111.; ~*‘xe1-79I ﬁ ‘7 '1' 71 77711:.
7‘: I § : J.“ 1.? J .' ’_ I‘M 1: ‘ 71%- II'III\ '7 7“ II 'I'III‘IIIiI 7 _ : J {#3 '
I ,‘ ,",' dqf': I :5?" . 7. V ' _,‘ II III- I I It ‘ REA...‘ “ ‘ .7... _': 7" \ X r \ :‘ " IIIIIIISIN 7' iii?! ﬂ
7 ‘ II‘I‘VIII- I ‘_ ' V to 1 ”I '1. .‘ "’7 -_ y .‘ Uémﬁ , - 7 i . $ '1 \7 ‘- _ "Iz‘F-i; 7. ‘ > I‘:\\ § ‘ékh 3;. ;A17'_7('[1I 1
’ ' ; ‘_ ,‘ ;" ' 5 0’ ‘ 0“ ~ N r”‘ 74 . I‘VI’IO : ' i a -‘-I v.“ ‘IIC‘EQAIAIIIIIIII & 7‘ ‘ ‘Qg‘ ‘ ~ I'r I. (, ‘1’
" ‘ . , M7 / ‘ ~73 :f’I ‘ “w- >1 , ~ ‘ ,. a‘— \. : :7V'nhrv {\\F.I7 . 0' 'I g .—I .
> I '. >/ ‘f/ : - I \."‘C‘:." 3“ ‘. l f 71 ’ 3,- ‘ I .9 T; "- :‘f ; ' ,’ v ‘ 5 ‘u'w ‘ :3?" , ’ I1
‘72:: .14., 9“ : ,1; ’ _ ,—-. . . {£91 " ”‘21 da‘ '1’? ' fins '1 5’3 I ‘IYI II" II
"J‘I‘I—r; -’ II" “- 1 * l 3"?”I- ”I X ’ I'II‘Eﬁ Z L4: 7—0 4r; 1 .L: "i 44%.. ’ k1
I "I - . I ﬂ‘ ' -r _. ' -. - , __ n . . ‘ 72:. {I 7 r.
7 ,L'.I.j ,7 1: A M"! " \ ‘3 ’ "442:. f; .\ - {I 1 I3 ,1 {’II; L,» . I‘ —- -~ ‘ ‘4. W; ’ ‘3‘ E
III gﬁ‘I‘: ..I 7 'I‘ II I ‘ “I ’I off—ﬁni'l‘ -! 1Q". - ' X {I- II- ‘ J’s . \‘ Ir»}\~;:!I.,I‘,: _ I ‘_I u‘ I ' - $8), 3.. ‘ I; . . {I
‘ {WW "7417:7311“: 3 - ' :‘177- -414; E's“, ‘ "'I’ ~ 5"“ c" ‘IIII-‘f'fTa‘: -- I“ x
._ ‘ W, . "Ad I T N v 25.1-7‘ . _ - ' -7 v-‘_ . a 1 ,n‘.“r 7 J "
.t -. 47' \ "'—-. “z ' ~ ~ ‘ t . A | ' '7'- I L!" 7 ’ I'I‘ ‘ . ~ ‘~
7-1 .r 777:7. , _ 7:57?“ 7 Ma. g- ,J, 3‘ ‘2‘? Av: 5 4" f 2:74 7 --~~,~
7 m 1 W" ,1. 1 1.11- 1 r .71 ”a . J a - 7. —— =1 .r ”1.7;“;
I; -- I i? '1;I 7 gr, (1"?‘3t- gr rI :‘\~‘#‘ IX I II, H' .: q’ _- . 3.}\ f ‘ 1_ . I g' ‘~‘.;,¢."1; §__4_v,4_
.,._.. .1. .1 :2 1-1—7.1 1 7 7 gm“- .7 71 - . ._ =7 ,1).
.4 a ' . \i " 1 I \ n- -:‘.“' __\ .34 ‘ . __ ‘k, . I r ._v \is : , , ’ 4? ‘37,; 0--9“
r ‘ ‘ _-_ , ‘ 'I '3 1:" 75‘ .‘4-«1‘53‘NU7 ., "7 ‘ 7 7" ' '\' , ’ 1; T ' ""‘o '7 ‘T '
7 17 7:24“ , ' wit. ,: 71:77:? *1 . 1,11 - ,1- ‘ i 7 r - 7. - - 1. .
“I. J. -973??ng 1‘ '1‘ I [a I —II Ii‘~..III‘ .. " I_ mgn:’J-IZF- I 1 I I 1&\ I 7 I; I‘I‘:I - ﬁjI‘IgI-Ef . IIIII f
- ‘ ; K?..‘} 7%. mg.‘ . :==,r [I .IR‘. 1"‘III 5.5: OK i . 0‘ .‘ J _ _ i ’ n .\ 1 5‘ - 2 - V r_-' ‘ 5 A
I—I x‘ _ ‘ :I’e—_\ .. AI, ‘ d 5‘ I‘ II r,’ ' _ ;I:’P\'_AE_§£IIJI IIIr' ‘ :‘II D 1 I ' .. I } H H.417}? ‘ II' ' ‘IK I” |_ I\ I I II,— ‘I ' '3’_" "I I I I “a I
.7 F“: '1 .‘L . _'. \ ,q — 1' %~\.'ﬂ“ \- n'l‘ ‘ g l I — f'ofl'.‘rI’." ‘I "_‘-‘ “ " ’-'“-‘ ‘
I hit". ‘ - — ~ -~_ 2 E‘ ‘ I t ’ k‘ 1 _ v bl’_ﬁ f | I A LI?!" 3' VI I,‘I_.\ "1:" a'- 7 J E“ I" III?“ II I
7 " ﬁx: n" '.-.- I, . r‘a. ' (533,5 I7 “~ﬂv‘ ,QII ' 5': g "5.93- ,‘ 5-7”. 3" _ ‘ " , fr! .'
‘(M'A -_" 1 . \ . v' -. _ ‘ I II“ . .:- ,7 ’lit‘ ' . «" :r _ .’
I 1 I II K‘: . x I ' i at: I I~\ A .}.I(':'.7 7’ ]- 1.4.4“ ' $313332?! % ‘ I w ' _‘ ‘j ?\I nI I o: I_._,.: ~- 7 t I ' 31:11::
7 1 7 g. - ' gy‘ 177;," . a: . J . 7‘ 1 .— :~ ' ' E ’ F117.“ ' ' ‘.' *1”
‘1. )5 :EAk-gif-gkf}: '2‘ #7.... ‘ —- 3 . -_ . _ . {gr 3:”; 1?! ﬁg“ “(7 (rill T-II‘TIIuL ‘- .
57%;”: “57‘ 722* ' '7 .77 ‘ ID" . ~- . , 1 ,4“ 3,“: "”7 :17.a 37" ' a! 1 " 7 ‘71., .7 7 -
*1- w. 377—1417 II. 7 '1 a . ' y . 7 ~ . . 7,
F5! {\—...~~:1..1_:‘T-‘;«" .. 2 7 - ' a 3 , ' , ' J ‘ " «.4 \1. ". ‘ " :
1 I Wgy rr'e .7 . , i? . 1, 7 7.:_ I- y: 4 _ , ‘V _, b ', ,' I“_ .3. ' .‘1- :'_ _ 1, 1‘7
1 .‘ .- ~73 ' j 7r 7 : (’I‘ .- , 1;.9'17‘7-71'3 --7 . , 7 7 ‘.— 7- 7' .7 7 '7‘
7 1 rJ-E-ﬁzzr ,7.) , '. . , ., {1‘1 1 / -.7 7" . «.‘Y' 7 7 _ -‘T‘iﬁ. ’7 --7 -, ~ .. 7‘
;_ ’ ‘ 1 ‘ ‘ I‘ d l I" f , ‘ 1 . ‘ ‘If F 1, 7 l“ . ‘ 7) ‘ 7. . '_ :3 1 .
:7‘ \Ikﬂﬂx‘ ’5: "f ’7 '1 .) 7'7, ' iwﬁﬂd “I II’ " 7 I - c x 'I o- - I I"
H - ' 777771.727 ' 1.17:" r x s T} 7 7; <1 7 7 "71——
7 7:: /“ . 7 -' ‘71 .' r} , ‘, :I
‘ “7 J: 21*7'1 ~17 ' “779 X 7“ *1“ .37?» . ~ 'I . r '1‘ ,1 7 , .7 _
l I i1, . IIu ‘_... ._’ P I.I '_;,¢ﬁ IILK £1 I‘IIV"I’I ‘7’: g D ‘4 ; ' ‘ (I _ . ,I ' '_
7 71 -1 *1 1-. T ' '1 *r mm mJ 77 7r _ 7 7 ,7 ' 7 7 . . 7. .y ;
I R ‘ \ A I ~not I 7‘? f'b; I "3?# \‘I I. I II I \I o ‘ I II'.
L917 “L 7. 1.». 97;?be ‘7‘ 1 -' ?.pigﬁg‘gfwc 7 7 u 7 7 7 y: 1 . . '
III; 3 \ﬁI "I II IE‘.‘ I I r7 I Fiﬁ 7: “II". I .IaIiI‘ 'IIII ‘ '\‘ I o I 1 '7' " l
7 I37.“ III“? \ISIIFII-I‘ 'I.'I'- IIIIIII -k III rd" IrI/‘I J II I ‘3' I '/ III ~I"-"II‘ I I I I I( I I I I I I I I I I I 7 I I
I t 7 I ’4‘“, I g“ -‘-‘f - ‘gj J'I’I I‘“ :4: 5 ' f'v‘ ‘ 5’ . I I I I - I ’ . I I ‘ I
. ., . 1 V1. '7 H ‘1 II ‘I. I"? 3.. "LA \ f I I I_ .ﬂ ' . \ *
1 7 Ia .1 I 'I : ‘_"I . -‘\ - ~ 2 '1 , III . ' . c I
II I '.I -‘1‘ II‘KF‘" 5I>hI\:' , ! LI" M 4 7 ' . ‘. ‘ .. 7
~ ”E " “:‘A. ‘, - a’ “’ I ' ' 1 - .7 ‘ ._ ' '. g'
. .1 3 ; :- 1.7!.” o '4 1. 5' 7'
‘ _4 . r -r ‘14 .3 _ \ Ii“: ’ III “—7"; #I'I , T I I - ' ° J I '1"
1 L‘I”; P ‘ ' ,I r ' I I r ‘ I1 I ' ”I 'I. * I I I ‘I'
"1:1, .3; 1 '\._ ‘ ,4 15;: . J ‘7 1 35 ﬂ , _ ' _ H ' . J; _j .3, V
. _. ‘ __‘:_ v: , _’.' J l i ‘7' } ‘ _ N " ‘ ‘IJ Q - ‘sf, ‘.
39>-.- ‘II 1:; _ , _ V J ' ' . I " 1 _;
7 ﬁx... ... , 7 -L ‘ _ — 7 I _-.
7s * *5" 7-" — 7 ' > - , - ~ ~’ : . -. , .. »~ . a
'(‘— ' ‘7‘!)‘1 ‘V q_ '4', I~—-< ’ J ‘ ‘ r ‘ 3‘ i x“
7 -*-:-’ .. , .1 _ 1— -J , .- 4'; 1‘7,» , :-
1 J , " > . I I .I I 5' ;.
; 7‘ ‘ ,_ ‘ ‘1' 7| Ir. ’ :, - - _ ‘_ 1 ‘ ~. 7 7-2:: 4 .1 .I_ . 7 :‘n‘ 3'
a r- , . ,1,»——:.:H \ ‘ , - - . _ 7 “ . ’. , 3. '
I I k ‘1 . II V. _ t 'I \CI‘IZ— \I :'\‘I\Il1_‘:-~~IT:-\b I ‘ 7 I I _'II‘ : 7 I ’ ‘ ‘r I: II ?‘I.
II I" 3’ I 3" . ,‘ 7 ‘ ._ , . I .,_ ~I I RST?\\‘ ‘ .I’I v - \f '1' .1 £9: :‘I g-I
- a x ‘ a ‘ ﬂ, ‘ 1 ‘F-:’.I“_\. q“, .~ .. .7, KN”: 7353',- 5"I7t:»,;:_I‘:_I:-I::W_‘ , ﬂ ‘ ‘x J II'I_ * I .; ‘3‘} I f
I i' ' . ,'7 7 . 7177. I ‘-‘ "7'14" "—f’ V 7"“ - _-_.;_.:H" x‘TL‘x—k I II ‘I - -' I
4'7»: E 49”” _" - '. ST'V ' _-_-— ‘T - ,7”: ”I "'-"-¥‘-_:’:§_—:..\%_>i‘_=.a~f¥ F3” . , '
3 ‘7 "a; I 7'7- ' 1 7 " ' IiII 7 '9 ~ IIb’I‘IIiintx‘ ‘ 7 _
7 I 4' I'I —‘ - .I .I' II I , ’- I I ‘_ . " ' , If 1 , - 3 _ ‘ {i ' I-W Y_;¥;II::'
i ‘ ,v’rg ’ ‘7‘ ‘ ' PHI - r. I‘. 1 . L" , . I u 1.. "En\ J 3 . ’¥ I7 __ =‘--
II I 3" I ?- ‘i‘ =- I] q -, II ‘I'I II ' . I 'III .1": II} I 7 j- ‘17 T:I I
' 7*,3’r II -I1:.:IIII I‘ i5 *‘5 I I v I ”I - ; €I I 3 I :I II‘ IJI II' -‘I, II
J 1'7? ‘1 "5'73" I I I II: :7I' ‘ " I III ._. , _ -' I I ' - 7 ‘IZI. 5 " i ' l 4.15.7" 1‘ 7
' . h‘Ix :- ‘_ " a I- la ' ?cﬁjiI ~ _ I I'- I /I ' _ 1,. . - «t | ~ 7 < fff‘ .\ . x ?
“aﬁIrL' -'f\r J’II— ”.9 9“, 'J—{ﬁ ‘ 7"J ~n“; V ‘0',” I. _, ; ‘ 1 I > ‘ 7‘; ‘ ‘1 J“; L ' A 1“!» . I. :~_ r“
. - ".3 I .I ‘r I 'i'\ I _H$ (u. _ ,N-—_‘_.___ _ I“" \ , ."T ' , V " I I .Afg ‘ I 1 -77" \ \1 . 7 I .f"\
l 7.1.1 7» 7: 71 «J 1 1- 17 — - - J». . 7 --‘
-¢ ‘7 TTT’TT-m ‘~—‘.~<—.- 3'- ' ' * ‘. * ' ‘ a _ :7 a ‘ =' 7’ l") ' *7
j : F ‘ ‘ " '— f t .71 4‘ $5: . "’ ~ 171' ,1 ‘ 'I’ j
‘I i ' JIIIT: ‘ ' I‘: \— ‘J -I 34'.“ &I\ I‘I-II I a " ‘ .T‘ 1. II\ T‘ { 4'7; L . " I7
7 __ I ‘,'\ . :13 ‘I : I ,hf-t"\L ~. ~. ' " .."- _ 1‘ ‘ ‘ . II 1 '_ -4 "I "‘ g. _
I I 7‘: ‘ 7 b 1' «LID §IP’AI‘stIIF“? :VILIFI ‘ RIP '. v-aI-L‘r ‘L. -—'w‘- a‘ ‘ \x ‘ III ‘I IIIII III I I
r.. . _. ... s .111 ‘;_.'a7 ‘5.7: 3. J- _ u , 1. _ u. , “a f
7 - "72-, A 1 7‘7 -' “ 7 v!- 1’7 7 ' V‘ 1. .7'
f 1 - 4". ‘ 4 ‘7‘, A. k; 11:”: . "II . 7. (I ‘. ,’ ‘7 , ll .Jr’
7 ’ ' 1 I '1
-: 1‘ Legend ‘ ‘ 7,1 . ‘ g _ 1v ‘ : 3“. n \ (I f “1
'I J; 7 J I |- -IA 'I I. a] II III. ‘ HI (I (II
‘I 7‘» . . . . 7‘ ' ‘ 'I II :2 '4 ‘ I ' I‘Io » ’1 '1» 5 1 I
x — Ekwan (exustlng) a z- ' ~ 7 ~ 1 7 f," ,1 7, ;. .. 4,; 1 1 j ;_ ,2
II ‘I' I' L 1 In .I .. ‘ I n. .\ I ’ W .L 7 I‘~’l!{‘ ' - 11-? ‘7 i 1‘? L4.
.1.-._ 'r — Horn River Mainline 2. " _~_ ‘~ ‘ -- - {a .w _. v; “=11 -743 1\ - I ;_ 1 _'::’yk: 7
' ’3 :2: v_.‘ 7 A I‘. ﬂ _9{ 1 I t" , 9 , If: —;_ 7 >1-“ 37’1“” ;‘ ’ - ‘
7 v 7 ' ' 4 ‘ 1". ‘ ‘. -.' ' \_ 7- T - {- .1 5,7, ' " ,7 ‘ ‘
1 1 :7: T'aVB'RWCWeM) ' 7 7 u 7-1-1- 7 1.1,. 7. :7 4.7117: 7'
1.1 : . , P . _ I Bo d ‘ . j . J ’ .11; ' ‘ § "CK... ,r" \ ' 7? .u' ‘ ‘._ ‘ if}. at; ‘ ‘ I'II'JI.‘I 'T’ .‘I ?%Jii IIIIIIL >ﬁ‘ .I'
\7 L.:_:-Im~” TOVlnCla UI'I ary ' , 35;“ P ‘ 4 1‘ - 2:" e .156. r”. a , *1 f ' 3 'M .1 . .
g. "'T‘ I-7 1.5:;- 7 7 w ‘J- ‘a ft) 1.: 1 q 4 1 ) Ag? .1» —_v f“ —
II: h-I'I' :I 'I; LIL‘I'ﬂlﬂrEII? - I ’ .4... .1 ‘ I I 1. _ TJ' 1 ,_ _ YT: - 7 'I' 9' , :Sﬁ—asff_ A 1 {7' 3 :I;' 1‘1» _7 9L7 -4EEIEIH‘I _:I
_' ' Map ID: 005
U I I . . I
Traditional Use Areas Identified by Peter Beaulleu
' I t' t th T ansCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
ALLMAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DEVETHA‘ FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION WJ'IHOUT WRle PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED.THE )NFORMATION
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP MS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPEUNES \MTH RESPECTTO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPEUNE AND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
53-? D&INEATDON OR SUMMARY OF DENETHN FIRST NATION USES AND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOWN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.
‘ ~:.

interviewee: Archie Ahnassay "
Date: May 14, 2009 1‘
Location; Chateh Administration Office ' :_
interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Kathrin Janssen -
Translator: Baptiste Metchooyeah
Background : ~
Archie was born October 18th 1940. He was married in August of 1962 and had 8 children, 3 t
have passed away. He has 2 sons and 3 daughters that are all married and live in Edmonton. He "
used to work as a carpenter but dislocated his left arm; this is the reason he doesn’t hunt as
ofteht . .. "
Hunting and Tragging ., . i .
Archie’s diet consists mainly of meat from the land including fish, ducks; moose, grouse and i
rabbits. " ' . . 2
He has been trapping ever since he got out of school at the age of 16. Currently he traps on i -'
trapiine #756T017 (BC), which he shares with 4 junior trappers: Kenneth Didzena, Ronald ~
Tecomba, Wayne and Barry Ahnassay (his 2 sons). Archie frequently goes trapping for lynx,
marten and all the small for bearing animals beionging to the otter family. He also traps beaver, ’
' bear and wolves and hunts moose on his trapline. = ' ' ' ' . ~
Archie learned how to trap from his (maternal) grandfather. He remembers his grandfather
telling him that they used to go out in a “band of families.” Families from surrounding traplines ’ g
would go out and hunt together. ~‘ ‘ " t - - - -
in the past, Archie used to hunt around Amber River, north of the Hay-Zema area. He does not ;
hunt there anymore because he no longer has a vehicle to get there. When he did have one, he I
travelled all over the land. ; ~ ~. .. . ~ > 1 . :
Archie expiains that out of respect for other traplihe holders 3 trapper only stays within the '
limits of his own line. ' . . ., -

_ Interview Summam E
interviewee: Thomas Didzena
Date: juiy 8, 2009 ;
Location: Chateh Administration Office, Alberta “ 3
interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beaulieu
Translator: Agnes Gallant I
Hunting and Tragging

‘ Thomas’ trapiine is in B.C and is shared with John Baptiste Talley (#756T001). His father was a
registered headman on the trap Sine until 1950.
Prior to being given that small area, his father would trap anywhere in British Columbia. His dad
used to teii him about the days that he couid trap where ever he wanted, but after receiving T .
”signing authority,”trap line boundaries and the provincial boundaries changed alt that.

At one time, his father lived in Meander River. Thomas would go trapping with him and his ..~.
uncle around the Watt Mountain area —~ the area between High Level and Meander River.

Thomas has trapped animais commerciaily for the fur and also hunted moose to eat. When
asked what other animals he has hunted, he stated the only three (3) animais that he has never ....

kiHed are caribou, Wolverine and grizzly bear. There are some caribou in the area, but he does '.
not hunt them because the meat ”tastes like matches”.
There is a winter road that runs from Chateh to Fort Neison and he says that a lot of Dene Tha’
people currently use that road for hunting. 3”
He states that there is a lot of moose in the Alberta southwest corner of the traditionai i ;
territory.
The winter of 1984 was the last time that Thomas commercially trapped. However, he stil! '.
”takes a ride out to the trapline in someone’s truck” just to be on the iand. They stiii hunt "
whenever they go out there. g._. ': _
Sites and Travel Routes .
Thomas knows of travel routes used by the Dene Tha’ all over the iand, in both Alberta and
British Coiumbia. For example, they wouid go from Hay-Zama Lakes to Fontas to visit the Dene .

peopie that iive there, There is a village that peopie from Fort Nelson used. His famﬂy and other
3; families used to meet there.

Thomas has 2 cabins on his trapline, about 5 miles from the B.C. border. There used to be three,
5 but one burnt down a few years ago.

.. at Thomas aiso mentioned a number of gravesites §n that same area. He also mentioned two grave
sites at Habay, one at Amber River and one at Zama Lake.

1,. Thomas wouid follow the littie creeks from Habay to Zama Lake as a travei route.

...j Observed Changes

f People who have vehicles may go more than short distances to trap. Thomas does not have a
g vehicie. Thomas, David Sutha and John Baptiste Taliey were the head trappers on his trapline.
3 He says that now that they are oider, it seems that the younger generation is not interested in
~ 7 trapping as much anymore. He is unwiiiing to speak on behaif of anyone, as to why there is less
5 trapping in BC. For him, it is his age that keeps him from trapping.

' '7 He says that there is increased oi! activity on his traphne. But despite the activity, he says that
.. you can still see caribou or moose around.

He makes special note on the number of roads that have been built.

;, , Though Thomas does not have any kids of his own, he was abie to teach and pass down hunting

" and trapping knowledge to the boy he brought up. The boy doesn’t have a licence to go onto
5 the trap line, so he hunts ducks at Habay. ”He is a good duck hunter.” Thomas encourages him
., to continue hunting, ”The creator gave us animafs so that we could continue hunting.”
3: Thomas expresses his concerns for the environment. ”Even if i didn’t want them to cut down
I any trees, what can lsay? If they cut down trees, where WE)! the animals go?”
Medicine and Berries
f Thomas does not regularly collect medicines or berries. He was able to remember one instance
5 ,3 where he was out on the trapiine and he had a reaiiy bad toothache. He had picked some rat
' _ root and left a piece on his tooth which reiieved some pain and reduced the sweliing. The onty

1' place he knows that there is rat root close to his home is near his fathers’ grave.

“r 7' 51-. ”T" I ffr '. “6-3; 11‘ ‘ n3“! 1)? :41? m Y‘I‘Iés I.I 3 ’ ftI 13,-?!“ 7‘57} 375?": "“" ’ *"*' ﬁ‘?" ' -:7g‘ﬁ~--'r:-zgma ‘ : ‘
us : f": 1 a' g . 1»: g.» i v.21 .51.» 4%” 1‘19“! I N 2 ﬁx: *
‘ 1 *- a .g ' “ u. g ; um , ,. » ; .1 .} .~~ 1;»; = V .- l.‘ .' . :2 Area of Interest 1
4 ' 7 I I .- ."'l x t I 1 t l
,3- ! V ﬁn" J. . “t .53.; ' J .9 g; ,1 ﬂ ;. LI“ ' ‘ 'ﬁt- r' x .-.. . .‘II II 1 .
k I G I' «“I .J' ‘\ - h“. “ I t . ‘ 'I\ r: ~I IA (I I l I I; I p n I._ 3 I ;' 9 ‘
r .I "' I :27, {—7 ' 4 #:4: 213;" 70121.} , I\ ‘b E «15:; ‘ J] 1‘ .rI III ’ Pi :‘r‘g .- I
‘ _..~ 73;... —_ ' II 1 .—:II I I . ~ _' D ‘I I 'I F ‘ ~

I I 1 wt; I:T‘<a/ ‘ I, ‘,‘.‘ ,- 'Q ﬁ 01* Ia; \ _ v/ggz' v :II'f _ i , k *, 1‘" . g1 ?IN'E‘L I ' qu’)? E | ‘
" ' ,i‘v’ ‘ ’ . 1 ' "3‘ 1" . a .’ \I“ 13;?"- ﬁ’ L223; ' I ,.-_. . , _uI; . ‘ ‘92“ I {

I'l ‘ "‘ ,, , ’ "II t_‘ﬂ a r?“ ’9 3 ’rrgla _,I ‘ rt ’ ' ‘ 3‘;317; - I‘ﬁ‘yIﬁ‘:I§| ,J’I‘gv‘ﬁ- i ',

‘ I I f! '1 -3. . " k ' | . IA 1L , ‘ A " ”l p l\ - ‘i "v LL 1—,, ‘ I a —.\“:\f ‘_ __ ﬁr (I: :5._ .' A = J
II - I ."' . -./ II" '1 'y‘ In I ‘ I s ' {I . ‘ '_ .. 1“ I - -‘ ' {$8 ’\ I: ’\*,1,, , «.-
~- A 41 e‘w‘ 1’ v v 3111s; ‘ .1. ~ ' w ‘ g '4 é ﬁg: ﬁ-‘- “ -~ '

'T 14—" - '- 1 l1 ' “‘ i’- ' _ 3‘. " ’3 .I I V . _ V,¥/‘..‘:-.\‘ _ . -. 2 £51,! '1 i
.- ﬁg 1M ﬁg;; ; ~ ~ ~ u :
_, _r I ‘~ .' k ‘ II I I' . V‘I . A . I _ ‘I ‘_ . r __ I 1. . . - oI.. III. a ,_ I- 3. I
' ”'FR.’ —/’I;J‘_-II‘."II¥I.§§‘;§ II 17:»? ‘I‘g g j 6“ _-‘:’;c /I ":15. 'lxiiffz't V"; ~AH 70%;.-. __ - ' x 31

-‘>_II"'“7‘A"'I III ‘\.\°' ;7 II. 0‘: ”'Ig—‘j—‘LL‘HI I -- ' J ,_~I.I i‘rLu :'_IJ I d. \ ' A' if“ {I I s- 'rI‘IIS‘T' - I ~
‘ ' ?\ﬁ“ ’3'" "‘3 r~ 32‘ E 1-" --'“"~L"“" ‘* ‘ \ ”" x 'I’ 5' "I" ‘7' I'I- 1 '
I . _:' 3:5: 4 ' 3“: -{I . :74 ‘-J‘~._-‘ J : I . I. .5? I 4i: "'2’ (r > _ II_ ,J' ,,4 ‘1th V , ' . I
. -' ~' /? 5 ‘\ ‘ [a ' Q 3*? w 76'. , :‘U” r‘
1 1 - e25 "ﬁﬁﬁ ‘ . 1 ﬁx a» - ‘ -gr-ﬁ ﬁﬁ .r w 53/. ~ g g .g g a 1
i 1 ‘ ‘1: . - 1 9x1. “ v ﬁ 35. ﬁaj «3' _1 ﬁn 1‘" g 11; qr - ggﬁ’IJ. '7 E ‘
.ﬁ " 7.3“?» .v’- T’"—— 1 w ~ “‘ ‘. ‘ 2 I 57*“ ‘- ?\g ‘ «3; ‘ ' ‘. I ‘7“ ‘~' '2'" .4 - . 1. ‘.
‘ N » 't-d<’~‘+§~ I " F‘- I‘ _ _pﬁ _ A g. 1‘ .‘Ir‘ ' ‘ I 6 IE ._ 4' ‘1. ' I ”J” 7“. ‘ A ‘ '— ' :kﬂﬁ.‘
.— " .~ , '1 “1“...4, " “ v' " " -‘--' L_AJ 5F . 1 7‘_=,V ‘ -‘ ~ ‘, _ ‘ '1? .:"'="".. “
1‘ ’9 cﬁ‘ﬁ? '3 - -__._;'“3r “—- xix ’ 9' F“? "5:51,: f 1. 1 F“ 3 k
9 Ez'.u_.‘qi_‘\ tfgtk‘“ ,.r-" :ﬁ :95 7‘ 1. _ ." ‘ _., a x: .. —-,— -.. ‘ ‘ *:g 3,» ' Ir ‘; ‘

w ~ 1‘: .«r, .73; -‘7‘ E:\ﬁuu' h ' ‘~‘- 3 35‘1“ ~’ _- . ~73 . :uEI ’F ‘ _‘ 3 'rk ' ' -. 1 ‘1 I’"

‘ '. ‘V-ﬁ , ‘ '- ‘v" ; 1 'I I'I ‘ -x I u. '1 _‘ 3 , ‘4 - ;‘ ‘1‘ «."<':~ ~ -- 'h' " .‘. I I
r. .. ‘xaasﬁﬁﬁmﬁ , MN“: :4“ _ _ 3.. \ J 1,13%” ' “‘3 :3... .' , ~ - ~: {- *_ " ._:~ 1: .
‘xrt - - ' ‘x...- 1. ‘ - 1«- L»: . 1 1 - n“ | w ~ ‘ 1,1—“'--— . - .

' Vc— 2.5 g , :‘ . '- ?.‘f ~I‘-~. 1.2.}2'321 O.» 3 ﬁg?" ‘j _-_ ;. ‘ mfexer, 3 . , 3’ -1..- _- ___“ _ ' “V . . 3. A
' "x‘ .c Q ‘1... p; «vim "hr; " u- '5 1 ;'«< V , 4 V w 1 ' .~,. «e. : = ,1 ~' ~ J - ~
sis. 121:5: - .V " k. .1 .5; JV ‘ " ‘ ‘~ . mi- ' - 1v ' -- -' fem“. 11," -‘~'-\ 3: ‘~,~.~ r v’
2.} I‘ “,3 V- —"‘“ RWI ('4— ‘-1;_‘_ II‘K‘ [t F— ' :I‘I Im’JS r " I/f ‘\‘ “Iv I.I '37 —, -:" ’2' , f
I 1“, - . . ‘_ . I I 1‘ . .V "g _ W- .I I I ‘.4 ‘I' u V-I'WJ-v _ I —I I- 1 - ‘ ~ *‘L’I _ .‘T‘ N.I‘
—'—"‘ —... J”? ~ 1“ F 3\ -I I 3' :}\I: k ‘I I - 'I - @ IIAISE-ﬁﬁ :‘J I 93-4"- '3’ I 'I‘: I IQI'EV 7
7.34.3 2\.gp *. 1 . 91%“ ~ . - - . 5% Fax” "-5 ,4?! {$21-5 1 ‘~ *7 1: g '» -4: ’. \
II“-hI ‘ F . ii '1‘ 3:. l I: LII: III -'J.III‘-LI' “ ‘ iI~‘h~ _' I r’ 5W: .1 . 0 -‘J K‘ 2:- )- ‘Jl “ __ I rV _z‘ " ‘F;‘* I
I gr" . » — 4:; - ' 5 I _ ‘ o ‘ 'I ' I ‘P ‘.-~..';- - I I _I +‘ I;‘ h : I
.~ *.."(:I=r Ff: “~12” {I gIl” x) ,_;'1 - _ _ ,q I I!‘ IV | #. .r-r-‘Eg.... V , 0:; ”Y. r 1
4 2,.- ,1-‘ ; a . .g :9 . . ‘ .~1._ ,3»; ~ .. - . 'f .. " <_";—1‘.1.; _ . . ‘ ‘ '
‘ﬁIEfm-PI II I‘ [I - " II“ rgJF - 1‘“ ‘ " —- I13" 5w“ .9 .3 1' - 11:9. '1 ’— g ,- 1 1 f
'3 -. g»: g; , ‘ ' ~ '. x . 7 4‘» . - ‘ --:‘=-- s 1
l 4: ‘11; - 1;? 537-311,? 1-:- t‘ _ . l. I .‘iY "ﬁn ' II ‘9: .‘ III I I I-III"? - 5‘ ' I I I N ‘III II A I
‘ ~' ——..-. ~w‘ l 1 IV ' 'f‘ . ." .‘. . ' ' “ :— ' ‘7‘. _ X :- I
‘ -7 -"- ‘3' ¢/ II" M I; r) ,' I IS; 7,:21ﬁ It‘ll ti“; 1‘; '4 ‘ -‘1 A ‘I ‘1!" ,- . .II‘I " |I
M” I a“,‘ z- ‘ f) . :‘Gt '7 ‘1 Ix‘s r II . ’1 '.| ($1.: I‘ ' I ‘ ‘ L ‘LSE‘. I‘ I I I >7 I I 5': .-T :’h ‘I\ II‘ :ﬁi I I
u. If ‘VNIIZO-flwtl { a r‘ .13 l p. ‘1; 'I F \I Ir. "-7) :t‘ ‘1 " I ‘ ' ‘ I _>‘ a 9
‘ I.) "1 \T:) ,= ‘ , II- 3‘ JV", a? ‘_’y:‘I~,‘ I): 5"." 5‘3: )I'E‘ _\ '3 I ' IE. 0.. I _ . . . In \I.
. . -&.;—-‘-‘ "“ " Jw‘ .-_.I' . _ ' ‘ | .g I u .\ . a ; .
I“ I— I I 4 V,.- ,“ I ‘75,: i ‘ ﬂ .4") #2 I. J) I I;I '/ J 1‘ j I " ‘9 _. :I ‘I
III..‘ ﬁ .-~ ’ I sI‘I~. ‘Y‘I >€F¥I L: '1I-l =3 3: 35 If 2‘) 'I- 7‘ ‘ '- ,- 'I'. 1. r - ‘ ‘I ‘3- . r 'I I
‘\ .- ' W _aﬂﬁ_; 4'1; (195”) .~ c 1 . _I. , < _ I . - I'. I:

. 11—, I » ' 1"!) ﬁg 4&1“; r» .1? * .. ' ‘ r , - I w

r‘ ' 1. 1 F. g ‘ 2'": d»; . 1 z 1 "x.' g ' ‘2 -: 3‘ " r :
-. -. . “q ’. . I ._ ”501‘ 3" I ‘ 7..“ {'5 .5" 1‘4" 1 :1 ». \. 4 I ‘1 ,5‘ I
‘ " ' :3 ~ ' n' I I' ‘ Ii" -TI @3559: I‘! 'I\ I l‘ 1‘ I I I I I”. I

-‘ ?IF‘I‘I ,I l 3- II II ‘ I ' 3'.— 1,: ‘ >7", , III. - -.: I.I J x‘ II" I J ‘ I - II I I I

I .Q. I _ 1.. -VII I‘ ' ~x- “I ‘ I I— "\ OI—II II ‘ ' I‘ " I I ‘ I ‘ I ‘VI 4 F—’
' I I1; " k? I. r -' Iﬁ-gx’I‘III‘za ":‘I0 {2). "II II, I $3.." I !I I " I .I‘ I . ' ‘ ' ' . 5 ‘ ' I
’ I I. 3| ' __ I \ - ’ ‘ (3‘ I i .‘ III I‘\ v I ' I‘ I

"Q .7 (~ ‘ ‘w‘\ J ' ‘ I ," I I I,‘ x \_ I ‘ ‘ ' . V 1 t “l I .

=1 3.}. -.- V ‘ r .‘ a .' _ - ‘ _. V 1 'L ;
_‘ “‘ﬁ‘ I I ‘:‘ ‘3‘ - r. K? II ‘ I I I __ I . I; v. {I

I I .I l I' n‘». II? a > ' I I I . .' .‘IV ,I'

q _ _ . . VI “-"" I > '— ‘T. a I ‘. I - II ; ‘ ' r ' I [It
(.2; ' ' . ' -~' -~ * .‘ :5 ; , I..‘-"" x , - , ‘ a {_v I j . V
1-,, .‘ , . _g", , I1. ~ . d ‘ 1-} . 7 .g- J $ , 1
. - ,1 ‘. ‘ ,- , ; V ' 1 1w». w- - i
-;ﬁ‘ . . ‘ '5 . I r . I ‘3‘ “ J < * . _a v, ’ t I

I I‘T\;.._ ’ ‘ r' II ns '3- ~ ’ L I ‘ ‘. Li ' ' _- ' I ,- ‘g, i *—

,_I‘ I’— .‘ I 5' , _____ , _In - I I, ’ , . _ -‘ v - ‘I )I.‘ ~ , .; ‘ -_9I “I I,‘—-: )I‘l

”3- _‘ 1 . I - ' s I .— ‘7 _ :A-I ‘ - . - r‘ 7‘ I: . I ‘I _ r. I. 1'.”

, - .II ' I. ' ' I i ' I I ' IV?‘. I I . "I I- _ I‘ Ir. ' - I
..——.I-.’ II Ln. x.‘;_/ ’\ :lii’::::§:::\ “I ,7 ' " ﬂ : ‘ , ' *ﬁﬁo __II~: - . -- -. .J IL L
' —. - ‘ . _ ’ .- _f: . . ”45,5 '2;f:1}ji.;\: 13-11;” "‘I , ‘ "75“ J“ ‘ :‘I :g' _fI'I —‘- 3

:1- , .3. 3 7 _¢,_:" -1 -brvg‘P- _‘cT-I .Iek‘II-' IIIﬁi-‘ﬁ-t':;gnﬂ - “I I“ I " VI i . :‘ B . _. _ .

1- ._ , ' - u'.‘ . ' , .1 gr“. ’ ' .57 . _ -, :1 ‘I-1’\-\:~I.-_’/"ﬁ-:.“:;—V:~“M ,I ' I T ;' ‘ .I ‘

‘3' ‘ k v " I I “ ; 'CT 1 I1. ‘- ‘ V _ - g 1 - ’ I - I “II IT‘FI‘Tﬁfht 213:1 V I, ‘I

‘4 I ‘ ‘ _ ‘f I '17 ' ‘ A I .-_ '_:. ‘ N ‘5. Ir ; I~;’_;_.‘C : J u _ I - 4" I

‘ > ' ‘ V.’ . ~ ‘-‘ ', t ‘ , “ —‘&;..'-- ,

A Legend - ‘ 1k ' - V1 . ; _V T ‘ - .

I] rq. "- ’ II V I — - II I‘I‘ 1I -1” AI : g

. . . A ' ~- I ,,
n E Ekwan(exustmg) x 1-. 1 v~ .. ‘5 O ’ 5,331 l

L4 r -. 11 " _ I ’1: 1

. . . ; v - g _ - . - in! 1 . 1 f
— Hom River Mainline .a .5. .g”: ‘“ ,-- - 1‘ 1“ . m
I 5‘ i Zack ' ». ,. I __ V I ' i‘\ I}. 1) ‘

--- Travel Route(Current) 32;! 'z-\ .- —.g,,V___I_“ : -._ ._ ‘ I I — . [4/ , , ﬁ‘.‘ «“57;

s: _I‘, .;. ‘~ _ , a_g.
. . 1'! I , ‘1 "‘n .I,
__— Travel Route (Historic) ‘ 39g?“ . - - ,‘I; ~ . g J " f _

I .é‘}. I 9 'I‘. I 'r V .~ ~ .- . 7.4 I?» 1 i ‘ . 9 ‘ ‘ II 7‘. It I I

. --- Water Travel Route “6 “424,3;F-‘g f ‘1, . . ' n. ‘* ‘, g: 2‘31 ‘

* r:?,- f' c m ‘ "-4.11" ‘ “ ,-- ., .~ 1 ‘

w . . . a . O. ‘ ,V . , v ,' ,

P a Cabin Area (Hxstonc) " .34“, . 55;: .1 (‘1 - , V.“ ~ ‘1 *3; ,-_ .1 ’ -

II “3 1' 97:. : .e'I 1 I 1 II ‘. -‘ Ix" 1551‘

I: Cabin Area (Current) V ‘ ‘ . x . I. ‘ f . ;f ‘

5’. — - I ‘ - I." .‘2 j i ‘. . I .“

' ' ' ' L ‘1': IV - I iv , .. I i.‘ . , _ V .

L, m Camping Area (Historic) . .1; , II ‘ Ij’ I, ~. .I r I? _«V, ,1

. 'I I‘ '4 _Q - "I ‘rI , 7 , ,1" " - '_L:I I~I‘r‘ AI, I I. ’
- Hunting Area (Current) ‘1 V ~ ; .-V. -, -q 3": V ~} us \3 _1‘ 9'" 3“ _g—tfs"
} II I’ ‘ I’ I ‘A’II ‘r, 4E I2¢ I 6,: 'ngz...» - _‘l row? 1. '5‘:
' ‘ ' '1 I I ' I , '4‘- ; 'I 2‘,” I I ""1 .. T' ‘1 . tr???
- Trapping Area (HIStOﬂC) ‘1‘ I 1 "q ’ - ‘, ‘ - :' I»: } . : - w ‘ 1" _‘g- -'~-:;*:'-"r)_‘I “v —
’I_W_ / , a ,‘ “1933.- W ' l c. . V ’V’ o F‘ngﬁ ‘ , . ~ I . { " ?:?‘vf l ’IjJII h‘ _V,‘ V ;__
.-'—~ . . . ' »- ‘ « : .. 1.... ‘ - _2 ‘2 :.

. Provmcnal Boundary ‘ i ' 3 a" -‘ Av, ‘ ’11 " i“. 429.: ‘i. , 37' 3 ”C: v I, ' ‘51 ‘1';_'JL

-— "‘ "‘ , ‘ 1 , I.‘ g-d‘ _: r‘ \ 1.. I A 4.x" 1- ‘ 7 » ., - _ I,

“I . I: F- ‘3. ..~ ‘2‘ ‘1, d a r, 4 _‘ ”?_I" —‘ ,1- _—

_ _ - . V . ‘ ‘ » ‘ V ' t -'> M ' ‘2 ‘ 73""

.- t _ L- ‘ aggri'ﬁ. -. 1:; 1 ‘ m A A _ 5". _ _ _A _ﬁ~,1 - _:g_—:_~;11«:__ uLL I 11-. MM; .4 :23:

MapID: oos
' ' - - - - - ;—‘.;’:i.‘_
In relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline

ALL MAPS ARE THE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBlTED. THE INFORMATION I

CONTAINED IN THIS MAP MS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATDN WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES \MTH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.

DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION USESAND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOWN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENETHA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. .1 ~.I

.Intervﬁew Summam
:“ interviewee: Lucy Fournier I
E- Date: My 7, 2009
f Location: Chateh Administration Office "
‘ ‘ interviewer: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beautieu
: ~ Translator: Thomas Ahkimnachie
f ~ '~ Background
' Lucy Foumier was born April 10th, 1936 in Zama Lake and grew up in that area. Lucy’s husband
; ' is Louis Fournier, who is originaily from Boyer River, Lucy and Louis have 4 children with the
oldest being 40 years 01d.
‘ Hunting and “nagging
. Before the designated traplines were started, Lucy’s father used to trap in BC in the area south
‘ .. of Kotcho Lake and east of Fort Nelson. Traps would be set aiong the ridge andtaiong the
shoreiine of Kotcho Lake and aiong the rivers.
' . Lucy’s father wouid walk from Hay-Zama area most of the way when travelling to and from the
. 8C trapline. Lucy’s father had to move back to Habay when his heaith prevented him from
' .' travefling regulariy to his trapline in BC. When he moved back to Zama Lake, he applied for, and
received trapiine #88, in Aiberta.
3. They would trap for iynx, fox, marten, mink and beaver. Lucy’s family has always trapped, even
5 way before her. Al! the traditions have stayed the same way. Lucy currently traps for squirrel
. and mink.
:7 ' in the old days, they wouid get groceries from the store in Habay by bringing in pelts and
. . trading it for food. There used to be two stores, but they are no ionger there. The price for an
anima! pelt went down from $96 to $10. Today it is not worth going out to trap anything
’ " because the price is too 10w. This is the reason she thinks not as many Dene Tha’ people trap
. . anymore.
in the fali, Lucy’s famiiy would go to her dad’s hunting area and prepare dry meat. Lucy has
. worked a tot in the bush and teamed her skills from her mother. When Lucy was very young,
" her mother taught her how to treat moose hide, how to dry meat and fish. Lucy’s son Ervin,
" "' hunts moose, ducks and fishes for the family.

Lucy said that just yesterday {July 6, 2009), the family took a boat along the Chinchaga River to
do some hunting. It took all day and they were on the boat for 7 hours. Lucy explained that
they use the boat a lot to go hunting along the rivers. They went west from Chateh and north ’ 3f
on the Chinchaga, then south to the fork that goes back to the north side of the reserve.
Lucy explained that moose is very important A long time ago there used to be a lot of moose 3
and now there is not as many. When you kill a moose, you share it among the community. 3
Fishing
Lucy explains, every winter Dene Tha’ would take the Elders to Bistcho Lake to fish and camp. '
They would stay for about 4 days. Lucy says there is good fishing at Bistcho Lake and you could g "
catch jackﬁsh, pickerel and Whitefish. There is also good fishing and duck hunting in Habay.
Lucy was shown how to live on the land by her mother. lt is important to Lucy that her children '
are able to go hunting, fishing and also to know how to live on the land. She explained that all
her children were trained to live on the land and get food, but her grandchildren only fish, ..
mainly forjackfish in Bistcho Lake. '
Medicine and Sara Gathering '. '.
Lucy gathers rat root in the vicinity of Habay and also gathers juniper and mint around Chateh. .
Lucy explains that if these are atl mixed together, it is good for fever, stomach ache, body aches '
and very good for the liver. Dene Tha’ still use traditional medicine and every year there is a lot i
of medicinal plants. Lucy does not take medicines from a nurse, only from the land. Lucy says ..
that medicines grow better in wet areas, like muskeg and hot on dry ground. Rat root is {
difficult to get from underneath the ground. There are roots all over especially around lake or '
wet areas. J.
Lucy travels all over the traditional territory to go berry picking. She goes to the trap line #88 5"- :'
for hunting. ”We go all around.” Lucy also travels regularly to Boyer River. Lucy generally

picks saskatoons 5h Chateh and around Boyer River. Lucy also picks raspberries, strawberries,

blueberries and cranberries. Some years there are not many berries, and other years there are

lots of berries, for example, Lucy has observed that last year there weren’t very many berries,
but this year there are more. i
When Lucy’s father still trapped in BC, the family would go there in the fall to hunt. That was
also the time to pick berries. When you hunt, you also make dry meat and harvest berries.

” We get all our food from the land.” 7

.. . . .. Travel Routes
3 During the trapping season Lucy’s father used to move the famiiy to BC, which would take 5
a a days‘ The famiiy had various campsites along the route to the trapline in BC. On the Alberta
trapline, there are permanent cabins, but in BC they used tents and horses. The famity would
‘ ‘ hunt and then travel, so Lucy couid not specify how long the travelling took. Lucy expiained
a a that they would camp somewhere for approximateiy 6 days, then move on to another site.
; Lucy used to travel around Habay Lake using horses.
" Lucy remembered one trip her family travelled to Fort Neison with a horse team when she was
17‘ She followed the Hay River on the high ground and then over land with the horse team.
~ Lucy’s older sister iives in Fort Nelson. Lucy reguiarly visits her in Fort Netson by driving to
Rainbow Lake then across the border using the winter road. Lucy explained that you could
~ follow along the pipeiines in BC and then use the winter road as access. You can oniy use this
route in the winter. Otherwise you have to drive ah‘the way around through Fort St. John.
Lucy last visited her sister on February 14“”, 2009.
Shes
1 Lucy. expiained that her famiiy used to live in Zama take but moved away from that area
because there was too much water; it ﬂooded every year. They first moved to Habay, and then
3 - moved to Chateh in 1952. Lucy pointed out that they had a cabin at Zama Lake.
Lucy mentioned that her auntie lived on the iand in the BC bush untii her husband died, and
. " then she moved to Fort Neison. Lucy explained that her auntie used to live along the river
'. . outside of Fort Neison. There are houses and cabins ail along the Fort Nelson River towards
Alberta.
' Lucy said that there are gravesites in Zama Lake all along the high ground. A” of Lucy’s famiiy is
buried in Zama Lake in the big graveyard there.
Lucy knows of a place in Habay that was the site of a tea dance. There was also a tea dance ring
. in Zama Lake on the reserve.
. Observed Changes
'V ' Lucy stated that the water at Habay Lake was no good to drink because of the oii weiis. The
water is contaminated from the oii and there have been horses and ducks that have perished
. on the lake because of the spiiied oil.

Areas to Protect
Lucy would like to see the area around Zama and Hay Lakes protected.

L. / J I ,‘f/d'] -l] "I ) 'n i I Q \\\ r '1" ‘. 2 ' "1 ( ’1' 'I ' ‘D I h -“ .2 ~.\-.’l \\ . 1 _ ,v 04"} (g 'p x , .. 1:“. a ,_ - , .
( ‘4 "' . 1 r l ‘ . I v .' , 2‘ ‘I , W ‘3! j ‘ I
‘\_¥ < ‘4) I) { /{“‘ ‘,‘ ‘I/ #5 J") ’/] f ( KR \‘ K ’1 “J ‘IK 8' (I ll .\ v.‘ :3", {I k k!“ e ,1 ' ’ I A Lg“.
1 4.: ,3 .’ 34 '4: 4- 'v/m \ 22' at gm (yum MHZ .’-'f 3'. Areaoflnterest
‘ \ l. '- ',.- b.‘ \ e‘,," b-\Y\ 5 ‘. 5‘ ‘ 4 ‘4’, 55.; /,- A’l /
. - , rr' "J 741‘; \4z-Q- “—4- . *‘ 4.1 H - \ R l. \- 'J i '( '2 fr ‘ x"
- . a' 4 . \ 42',‘\4 T,»— ' ' ‘ “1‘". " ‘3 '\ 'f' I ‘ {I 1‘ , ”hf" [f 4 ‘-
3 .7 "- "V2 ' ‘ '.‘ V  :¥‘ ~— ‘-.. }; \ :‘Ir‘ 1"' .' ‘
- , ‘. ‘ f} i. ': .5334 N1 [(5 4""ﬁ/ f? ‘1'?" \\\‘ L" ‘3 :11‘3. t“ \- z} 1’: "1?er k; ' r. G .-
f "; . : 0' 2— " " 41"” "‘ F‘ RUE" 7/ 1. v ’3 '3 IF"? 4/. . I
- t . ’ N . ' ‘ ’ a I‘ ' i t ‘ ‘. II ‘ ‘\"\‘\‘. '5 .4 ‘ ,Irrﬂ . 4 ,
. . {f 33, ,, .3 _, 4 .r 5, l; 5 I f. 5 g‘WcK- (1911307; .\_ x. ,1 5) 2,; l
_. , ‘2 ,4» ,...-' ﬂ”: :) qu': i 55‘ / j!) X P f \r‘ . J \5'.‘ . . @614; X\\l\‘$:%"u_\‘\ 9/ :1 7“; I
.‘ a ,9 ,.\ .- ' “J J m“ é qulL I v, l, 4'" i «1 j r \ 9 -/" ._ 5‘ \q _ -" ﬂ }
3 v . . , -\ .' -; 3’ . 1 {I ~' “\ \ _- . ' ‘
x i r ‘7 'A\"\ \‘ ( (A ~ 9'; Jr” ll 1’! ’ (/5 _0/l| ." .\ ‘ xx \ ﬁg ' E
‘ . _ ~J- $ K m V \ . {I/ r' K ‘ l {1 ,jq'Ls— ‘\ M . ‘0 > l‘L .
L-.‘ P$ ~ - ﬂ\ ‘ : .j/ l ' 'l I“. J \‘ \ ' I,» ’ y’- f H ‘. ’\\" ’ r A ‘l - 5 t ‘
‘w P’,4 Q 2 3,, 3.4.; ° f ‘4 f//,‘ ' ‘ 2 ‘ ‘f 273*”? 3 \ I
,.‘ ' ' >- V I \ I ‘ > - J
7 Jinkk/Va/ ,/ \\ 1 “WK?! . ‘ a ,’ “/w V .. ...a r 4%.; i
. 1.3'T' ' .- 4H 7 v I ‘ v 4- '1‘ "d - W —'T 4:11"! ' *m -—=—_
, " , .‘ 3 MN . 1 9:31 °—"“ - g . 4 o'¢.o(o’o'o'¢'¢\~'¢fo Vow v 4,. 4 w”‘&/ ' " 2 2:3. '2“ (2 y
‘ ’ Z ‘ ’ 6—4—2“)! -' “ «4 ‘o'o’o’o’e‘k‘0’0’0’9'0’6’0’0"o’o’o’o’” “o’o‘v 4° ‘ 4:: ' ' 7' ' 5"" ‘ "7
‘ 47"“ - ! ’v’x‘QOéOA ¢‘é09000060004’w‘5'00‘6'9‘9s " 2- 2 . ‘5 .-- . _ 53*.»
' ' ‘ \‘N KOOAQch600*..OOOOOOO'OOO’0'OOOO6 .4. ”V4? .. 3244-2 . 4.--.
' \ \ ."‘ ' ‘ ‘V . ‘ ' ‘ A ‘ ‘ ‘ \ - ' V a ‘m r "i. ' I - ~ ‘ '
; v - 2* Wo'éoc «3294-2249...099-9¢o¢¢ooo§¢¢9¢90.0%,,644; 3‘ V ._ ‘ W4 r‘ ' '1: ‘ s
, , .444 w«9.¢:«,«- ~ 4934299909...90990909930990“4.4,. ,4; ~-,.,-.3.._-+ -
-2 = #‘x‘QDgZP. 4 2 ’Q'o‘o 84:; ..-44'5’4‘co‘o‘Q’o’o’.’.’.‘o".‘?o9o’o’o’o’o’o.o’¢'<30596449~ 4‘ .-.t"~'.-:5 ' 3—2931??? —. . 1
3 3” 34‘. 4. 3' .. 0449.1 » 1. ' \(ﬂ -..'.,-:.'. ‘4 .‘ . «sv-V‘W-P- -.“ . - 3 .4
. .3/ 0.40;,0'0‘40‘9v‘,.,.,._’i0.00.9,9OOOOOOOOOﬁ rher4x ch _ - -- , ~. 0 .- .
‘ R NRVJ~ 2'3- '23:?9’o°o’§'v'a‘*'do“'«$’3‘3’0’0’6’6’0’4’b’o’o’o’o’o‘o’o’o’o".’a'¢’¢‘¢‘°¢“6‘4;-4 "#6": 11!? ‘ -' .4. t" 1- ' 3 -.
~;~<‘—445,\M $443.43..00.0eeoooswooooo44009900039204) 44.4. 9' ; ®«v30_€“"22;9¢f 2 " '3' 7-" i
\ -' 4.9; 'vvv90vOOOQ0OOﬁ§OOOO¢OOOOOOO9v00600‘9ﬁs‘04'éﬁv .<5'.'-=:s~r 3 ;: 3 j
t” ,0.» uooooooomo«69¢90,099044.909.000.00943999.0.94. ~, 3 2 -r- _-,.,.g~. .3
+ ‘ 4’. o 4‘0 o «v o’o’o’o 0.0%”:¢‘0’o‘0’o’o’o’o‘o’o"’o’o’o’o’o’oﬁw’o’o’o’o’o’o‘o‘o’¢°"a»"‘>“'..' :3 5». .: 3:: F4: ;-_.-: . '~‘-
= \ eoov22ooooooo¢2o§4m«o.Maoo»:99.014.499.90ooooyloo’imxte*c««4, - “1 'Q .3»:
- ’9). 290090.94 3.0 o <2 2: z-4--:- sooooowooomyoooooo 000 4499.. e 0:. r.-,:,.4,~4...-3~* 2 A?
z 3 -: 4,9433 c969902,.pavipoooowﬁooooooooo»OOOOOOQ'OQQooo.«.-o.¢va- - -. _ .-
4’ W~ r’o’c’o'o’o"? ’3:’o'o’o’o’o‘é°*’s3’e’4h’e’o’0’0’o’o‘h’«’o’oVQ’o‘o'o’o‘E’o’e’o’o’b‘?y’o’é’b‘5'34"“490’?" ' - 3 4 '1' '1?
4944.,— 4!;9949 rooooooo‘ooooov».~¢.¢'c‘9'69'999999099006990n99'9-9'4' g ‘3 4' - ,4
096060000¢}QOOOOOQOOOOI '090000099009900«000999344324. ~ . . ,_.
, 4,0,9.o.¢.o.¢¢ 3,¢.¢.¢O¢.o.o¢o.o.o 03.0,... 9 3 c2 o o 6 o o o o o o o e o o. o 44 23> a «2.4 § 4 9 Q9 22 «4, ._ - -. , , 4 _.
44,44.- ;.;~ c v oooooooooooooove.4¢.¢-406.6462:- .2 .~ .- 4.
. 9.9.00.4, ..e~¢.o-¢.¢,¢,¢,4 6994 'C'OOOOOOOOOOOQOO~§,§~4‘36v,9«- - . .
3 ooovooooaoéoova4.4¢q«m 409699099609064g»¢¢,¢4444. .3 ~ . , w
ooooooooqo,o¢o¢¢¢o--4,¢.oo~v~ 996-0.9330000064542.4.«0 —4_2:.;4-aw«4,- , , - s - J
1 , gp.¢.¢..¢.¢.0.o,¢‘ 344.3,.» ”64’ ¢3‘Jé’ﬁa" «4 o o 59 s‘ 9 v v v e e e» 9 o.¢.¢-¢,,_~4.~' Q ~ .44. 44,229 « ~ . __. . . ,4 Q r . 4
' ‘ o 4* 'o'o‘o‘e o «’A 3. 5’44"; '9'» 2: <4 9"»"(530’0‘ v ’0’9'0’9’0’0’9’0’4’9’9'9'b"¢-"'e4‘ 4 2' *- 2“ ‘ ' P- . :5 i
2090090~0V¢ 9""...96-040090z3w 000690009¢¢rb¢<¥2t¢1¢" . 1. - - 4.. ;
Oopj’ﬁﬁvoo ¢o¢>,.«¢,.~¢¢¢-14.¢»0 0.0.0.0094.0092044424.; 4.. , ,, . ~ 3 2r -
xv“9099000,...0-909094b09{ ~oooooo-ooo2»,o2te><~gr. . 4,422» ,. - .-r-Q
¢¢o.¢.o.o.e.o.o.o,¢- '39" o 2.4 o, O o, o 0 go o, o o p o o o o 9 o 0 o o .4, 0 «0,4,9 4» _ 4 . 4 ., - Q, ., '1 ; , 4,...
A n .4 03,933190. «woo 2&090900994 4,9,4. 4 - _ . 3. ., _.;
2 r '¢’o’o’o’¢’o‘4~‘4’o°<h ‘o’o‘o‘.90’3‘3>°¢’¢’¢"o’¢’¢%‘ o‘v’o’o‘o‘éb’ﬁveﬁ": ’2 .1 ' ’“ " - 44‘ " -- ‘ ~ i ' s -' ~ ‘ ~ 1'
«eoooomﬁ'com ogooeétowewooo‘st «(44¢ «1466’. e '. 2- -'.~.; ."'.. .2 ='.""?..7:5
. 3Osy¢o¢ooooqoc 4w EOOOQOQOGAO-OOOOO to» 6'2976 12:42:32 ,3 22 )2 - ~ 3- . x;
m . 900604.90900:...990¢oo¢4¢¢9929;,_3 ._2. p.“ ~Qg..‘ . -4
{43,3343 523,44, «.9 4;».9‘ .§«O,O,O,¢.¢A§,lr 6 0’9 0 o o 0 049,9 0 «n 43;: - Q . . ._ 3 v . .2 Q -,-
4 o «4' 14“.; «4, 4% 9'9”: . « o 43124 449494.‘.%%%%..14.-49.¢4 344-49.? ‘ - '- "- ' 7-- ' . ~ Q '
\ ’ ‘-._ . I ‘ 5 3". . ~V.‘.' ‘. , .“\ - ‘. . . . . ,., 4
.44 $4570,» o 9 o 43 o, 9,, .9 90,44,442» u» «(.4 o 0‘“. 9‘4» 4. r 0;. . ‘2" 4-,; .._2 . . . , 4 -. . » . 3 . . -»
' . Q’.’. .31. ,-¢&*©t4’..¢¢‘$¢&6 "....J. ‘V.§é‘¢-v....9. ‘§ -’.‘x ¢C' “;Q' )o‘v‘g$§'¢’ ‘_ ?;L“ a? v'l': K‘ L , . ..~‘- , ‘- 3' . - l 'r . . - '3 ' . £
- " 6dr” .1 \1 .‘l' .\..\ , 4, 3 . ’ .' '. _.\ 5 5. . ‘ ,
4999996964,; .0». \JO-#¢¢¢OOOOO~¢.&OW 4444' , . . ,- . ,3: .. .. _ 3 .
reo-vocwoowy‘vo-Oaroo @oé«09240090944021»544-3443,22M-.. . .. , .» . - Q
~‘o’o’¢~'¢’¢°¢’o’$x~ Q&‘o’o’o’ 9..“'o’o‘:4’¢%’¢’¢’¢o‘d'39 "4'4? "24"05'24 4 2' a -_ ,. . 3 4 - 3 . 2 - ' . .
M I *' 66 «999.0%. M: 909% 2'9 9 07¢ a s.» 244226- a 7' "-27:45 9%174'4 .4 '.I-:'i " r _-_ Q" ' ' ' 2' 5 ~ - " ‘ '
V: K \ 4. § 4 9 z A V‘ . - . - , - - . ‘
$.9.~.0.9.9¢.§9§.§.~.446¢,2 2 "”34»“¢‘$’¢’¢'6"¢9 "e" ' ' ' -‘--"@§'»¢J‘%"“-~‘2 ' ’ ‘ ' 2 ' ‘ 2‘ ” 2 ‘ 2 ' ' 2 “
Hae¢ooe¢¢¢¢¢o€<ro 63?: M 60990:? 413-4344 '. ..~‘;‘.:'7f~M..:-;:--:;. . . ‘ 3 ,' ' :'
réeég. ~;¢Ao&t.¢-¢O¢O«,OQ¢%¢¢¢¢~,~,¢,¢, ’o‘o’o’o"¢z‘é’2"o‘5’é’éi 3,5,9, 4 3 ., , ,, ~ 3 _ ., 3 , ~. 2 _ 7 . ,3
T 4.,9.-‘44'.. 4‘“ eusww <4 4: 44 2.42.3.2 v.» 00 00> («'699e'é1241-csv4-“éy' 2: ' ' ' « j . ‘2 ‘ . - 2' z
3 5,4,4..wv a 4.44.*Q'.9<v:6,ﬁ 4.. .--.+4.,« -.- 2' «(444.000.424.2494,42» . - . . , .- -
3 ' ' '-°'-$;€£§;o,‘~'¢f 4,3,0 ‘, 3,09:- 05'1‘3 ,5’ 5 {39.2'.l'.§9¢‘¢...Q.¢.¢.¢ “425.3”?- 2: ' _ 3 . ’, ,- ﬂ "'4" . __ - . Q . . - i 4 r’ -
si.‘=."‘é°;ﬁ"'4"g' :42; 4.4;";‘2'22: - 7: ;¢.o..'<.4.%%%*' '. ' . . . . .. , :r-s '5 - ’ . 1' 3 -
9...‘. .'¢'3‘_&_'9,:"""\.". / :— 4. -, 5 ' :4 5.3,: g ‘ 3:, '_ >7: Y. ~ ‘ .5 Liv, M“/CI;'1~V --' . . .
» 43 0 «<4 9 «4. 4 _ .. 4,4 . . .. , ~ 3 , . , .3 _ . _ , . Q .,._ -.
«4,412,449.04 4 <2- -.—,-«. o, . 1., 4 .~ .. .. . ~ , . , .. ~ - « . » .
no-4 «44.4,. sew» . « .. 2 4 .4 Q . - . . 2.
v ' o 484 G .6, o 0, ¢(l_.n“ “ '.‘$4.' «“7», ,, ‘5', r ' ‘I . '4,‘,.' o‘) , ‘ 4' . ~ ./ . “l. t,' l." .C' ." ; I . "' , . ' II
voe-é-iww ,9¢«42,~,~.~. ., 2 .. Q . .. .- 2.. _ . . . - . 2. 44. . Q -,- -_ 4_
0 Q Q ,9, ‘4. (.1 ’ . ¢-'¢”,¢i-‘".'* 4. . ,1. J .7 , ..'-.._,‘, 3".” 4 3 .4 5 . . 2., . , 4 _ . .5 ,. .33 2 _, 4. Q- .3 ,, 4 -, , . .4 .,
32 e 29,522.44- 424- ¢ 4:54-2:33, ,. -2. 4.» .a.24;,,:.~,,3.;,.<:-.Q~1 . _ . , . 2 - .2 3 2 -
. ’Q‘Q. ’@\¢:'{§\41’0“&A~HJF .ylf;v.-‘. 5;. . 3. .3, .Ir.' Vl'. ;-.4‘\. ‘ '{b ”— ’45 .(x‘Jg. “ {'é ?v '31 "E: " g, , ‘ v ’. .'~ ,2 _ . , ._. l‘ ”f ‘ - _' 1‘/ '1‘.“"T (‘2. A 2: _ ‘ ‘ "n-v ,. ; .\:"' “'1 < , ‘t '
v .24 43.4V'4.'.4,‘-@‘¢13.~'¢- 2.21342 : A3» ?€qu .- ' - 4. ' (“a . . _ 4 ..~. '. 3 ' 2. .24- 4; . “rib.”
v 433‘ 1.x: 4 .. ,.. 5. _. 4‘, ‘~_.J g, 4, 4,4, - , .. ., . ,4, 3 ,. . .A 1. -’.~ ,. .,, i...“.
9 ‘9’ ‘4'63'6‘2Lr‘36‘ {DI ‘ 7:3 '7': .' -- 4 [,3 I‘R-P-ﬁx _55,“®'{._‘.5 .tanrraﬁ‘ét‘ffhr (-14,, > 3." ‘ . . . _ ‘ ‘9 .‘I. 7...; 4 ' ,. 4 “ , x: . . 4’ "4 ’ -_—.~ » ~, "f. 53.. Q“; _‘~ 2 _v.- ”.4.- . ,3“- 4 . .‘I. ,.
'r?<+f¢'$~°o"’ie V” *4«"2 4i «4"24 4 44; 4:— . 2"~%~"5‘»~ --. . T": 15” 4< -.
.T'Js‘"'4:-‘:":.‘ ”:4'22' {'4-:.“é’¢“"¢'¢°o‘o€vo’¢”'<<"3V(?o'ﬁeﬂ“:I’é’aﬁyyy.4.-4. — ..-.. 2 ' ,3 4, , 3 Q
g. 4,,24,;4,..6494;,:;;:.,<4;$,;§ «‘94.» 0 e e o 63:; «’02); o 4» 4 «4» «54 <49,9,44,22,43124/,1; «- . 2. ~..~ ,1 ,3 42‘ ' ‘ 3.3;,«4‘ 6,2,4» . .4 : ",1- 2' :3».
‘4‘“ 4‘44 o 2'2’23»'<¥‘¢"e 9%”???4 “2"4; 43% ~’¢’¢¢¢€31§4"¢%>@%¢4'i "2,~.".~'.“$..°¢f.. ,. . ,5. .fz -':<'Q-;.-.' . '4, .. 1’ 4" 34 2:".- 3 -‘
‘4' ~ ‘.-/,.. ‘V¢f\‘ . 4 P ‘ A ~ .'&' '-.‘ 'l‘" 1' y 4 ‘.’,\ 4. 5, '4..‘.\‘. 4.) "_ lk‘ .. :1". ,; ‘ ‘4 .‘ 4‘ I, 4 . .
A‘b G 0" ‘2‘,9"""‘ 431' ¢ {3' ¢ Q ’ O . Q * o . " ‘3‘ 6‘ ~ 0 Q Q’? v t; ‘f Q ‘:.‘_§"_-‘-':r,‘.’-’$,, " ‘- ," r". ‘. ' "\‘h ‘ ". 2 I ‘ " "/r' 1"" ‘7, '1 "-L’ .. l 1... I i l“ 1‘ r/ ‘ '
«9,944,429.23 .;.:,,4.--,44 9 o 6 «s e 9 o o 44 «4 a 4» 4 o 9 «a «4,4 4r «2:» 44 44 .4 .- 2, ., 4 4 -- .4 ., ,4 1.,» 4., -, ., . - .,
4 Q -.~.»4-,,Qa «a 4» 90¢ o 4 o o o A o 4» 9 «c 4 64 4» «a «3.» 4.» 324 0 444.1474, ,. - «.4. 3,4,4. . ,-. 2. I; .- _ .
- {ES} 1 i"’53.?‘0'03i’o’ib‘k‘o‘o'o‘k‘¢’¢’+"o‘o’¢7’o¢¢é¢*ﬁ3’9‘9‘ﬁéﬂ‘ﬁ"*4T 4'43““ r ' 2‘ a .‘2 ’4” 4.4“ 2- ' 2 .4 '4" 4 3 4"" 2' ‘2 -' '
: --9:o.o-o_o-dv~-o-o-o.o.¢.té» «0-4-44.9 ’49 o 4 «.5 444.- 4: 44 o «#4432 4 ,4' :41: V 4',;:..'.;:/a 3,24. , - 44"- - . 3
1 ’9’09694; *«ﬁ‘ﬁaﬁe’é’o‘ﬁﬁ "~"-:~". .-- *4." 4:52“? ,"*.-~"."'.af~’ 4f. '1 2 #42:.“ =1» .t- , ;- . ~
,4. ,5 , -Q .3 ; ,4. ,_,~., 4.3,. «,7... ..,. x5. ,3 6 ~, 4,“,
I §OQ§§oﬁsj&¢v, ¢«’§\¢:F?$$¢ .. . _ “’4',”- __., ,.' '. _,,: “j‘d’ei‘ {r} ,2 , _. "Q'dq‘év +1.1, I“ » ..'.‘ 3“ [96' a‘f' :gley 37’2’5,
. Legend b’§.¢*¢.¢¢6:®ﬂ§ 652,; - 34233-3 5.0;»;,;,;-.f:§"__,c;fT-’5,50 ,29¢.f3;4;"53;945’.§{- "4‘2;$54.55;.‘3..”.<4~;¢~; 5:44;.- 2 '
I s» 6» 44 24:64 «2;??4. _, .~,,:;.;‘2.-'>"-r>'i2'--.-:e?":»' 4' 24“ “4,4,3 4’2 .4843143,‘ 447,..4~:i'/2;'°.c~,1 '4 ,
——— Ekw 'st' ~%"4¢;4"4.34.%23.4.—;.~.<',.:--.4«. .39; 4.3 '24". 2- ,2. ' 3.3-: 424‘ 4045'. . 22.4~"..-.'-x.~%ﬂ--v,-:.' 4‘2" 4'24»: .2 4’ .
I an (EX! m9) geéégﬁpﬁggnj‘.:':;3-.4‘21:151:14;'43,? 3 ¢ 4’1: (_.9:.);'.";3‘~QT"452-9463 (43 $c;rf;ﬁg~“'ilﬁ 49?)".4'5‘ 5.17 .3
. . . - «42.2.4. :2.-. .." .' :' . 2.: .54." '4' . :42; 4 ' 4.2., 2' 4'
— Horn River Mainline tzozﬁhgeégiig 5.;43,.,:.,;:§;2,:3 "2:: . $5443 43:33:: ’ 431", 9:63;: “9:43:32: : «31y 6’45“? ‘ ’1 , 4.:
a 62.42:"? 3'??? i i'-I2-"’¢fr‘4~.~ 3“ ’14?" 4‘3" 6 5'32: r .44 v' 234' wax“? ,J ;
”-1”! "Q‘n\f $1": $35 {’1“ 4’4“: 47- (4,:1‘: :2:- $ 4V4 (- _ v v» ‘9 ‘ ‘ ‘._ '1 ¢ ¢ ’ _‘ Q. 6,... ;- r 7 V‘; 1’], .L i
Travel Route (Current) 'E'¢;‘¢"<>“~s>%” {5"‘4':”:-.5 dléfﬁ'ﬁ‘ﬁﬁﬁ mix"; {’3' 9’” 5,344.9 “5349‘ '5 4%". 3'5? 3’ , -1
. , , v «.44 4' 4 «.—. 4,25 <v - ,4f4.2'4~-'- 2' < $24,» 9 .4” e» «’2'? «o 4%.. 4' I. 3;
- Cabin Area <Hustonc> 4'4'-=4°4'4'~'»;'44 '4'", 41.2.2439. '42-..24' 4".24'.*4'4,<.~°.'x4'2+5 ' <
I “$5’4‘f5‘63’e‘3’4 945134153? 92:33 '3' 3‘” 'I"¢6¢194v‘5 "4”}! p’rf¢.¢§’7"2t'-o’¢€”/ ' 711
‘:I Hunting & Settlement Area (Historic) Lgﬁgyféﬂﬁﬁgcf373.13}..956 _-34-<; 25 3:34:391’43 “0. «P3 -‘ 314.004.; (4;; .0399! P”. ' 4’ -
. ' T1045“ 44 4*3“ ' ‘ .3272 .. ,5" ? ‘3? '2'. ‘F .04. ' -’ .3 “'.4"?'I.<" ’2 a
m Hunting & Trapping Area (Historic) 7“ —, _,4..,,W4.“" ‘j 79" 6:378:32‘éio'f‘ﬁzéfﬁf 6 ",%.‘:'i?(@¢" ‘ i
|-‘ -: .4;- : ' 4‘3, ‘,‘ Ad: Q3329.) Q.” .0 ‘43-’44“ 44. , ' J 3 (a 3d" ,2, . 5 -
. 4 . | ‘I ~— - ? ‘_ ‘ ;_ , . 4 I ‘ . .V ‘ . 4 , .
Hunting Area (HIStOfIC) :5 ‘ - a - » 3." ﬁx ‘ff‘, ’3 ?"ff’ 3-2,: W 4 ﬂ 1 1 ..
Trapping Area (Historic) Q — 4g, - 4 .2 ‘3 - ' if "’3 ,. - 4441-" I Q: ,. -
’ W331 ' ' W 7 "\ 3 ’ ﬂ 4’ '9‘" ’ 16" ’r" ’- ' . ?- "
L--. prowmmoundary . rev 4. 3. 7/ '- .4. '4’/‘_ —""_"_.
‘ K. “ 4 ‘ j ‘ 5 I' _
~- , 4 4 ~ 4“! I' / ﬂihH
.m 41‘. gm rw 4 - 4 ~. -. .o...»- I 3
Map ID: 007
ALLMAPS ARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION RS STRICTLY PROHIBITEDIHE INFORMATION
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPEUNEAND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
, DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENE THA’ FIRST NATION USES AND INTEREST S IN THEAREAS SHOWN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USE AREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' HRST NATION DIRECTLY.

W
lnterviewee: Louis Foumier
' Date: July 07, 2009 A.
Location: Chateh, Administration Office
Interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beauiieu
"You shouid have been here in the nineteen-seventiest wouid say it was one of the best places :
to live in the whole Alberta" '
—— Louis Foumier
Background
Louis Foumier was born September 2, 1932. He moved to the Chateh area in 1959 from Fort
Vermiition. He initiaiiy came to Chateh to buiid houses after the'Zama Lake floods, through the
Department of indian Affairs, As a young man Louis worked on e farm and later worked in the
0%} patch in Turner Valley. He has four children and lots of grandchildren.
Hunting and Tragging . f
Up until four years ago Louis and his brother~in—law woutd hunt for moose in an area south of
Kotcho Lake, aiong a winter road. However, Louis no ionger goes there because of arthritis in
his legs. .'
Though he may not go as far as he used to, Louis stiii hunts quite- a bit just on the other side of Z
the Alberta/British Coiumbia border and west from the Sulphur Lake area [Alberta]. He has aiso f '.
tried to pass on his hunting knowledge to his ehifdren. For exampie, his oldest son and his
children hunt hear the confluence of the Chinchaga River and the Hay River.
Louis would only occasionaiiy trap in British Columbia. He says "in B.C. it's hard. Ifyou set a : g '
trap and you get caught, you get in trouble." He knows quite a few people who got in trouble ' ,
for trapping in British Columbia and even with that in mind he stili knows people who trapped .
in British Columbia. His brother Harvey traps just across the border and his brothers-in-law ' "
trapped in British Coiumbia.
Fishing ..
Louis does most of his fishing at Habay and catches mostly ja‘ckfish with the odd pickerei.
Though he likes fish, he only eats it occasionaliy. He gives what he catches away to his family. -

Medicine and Berries

Louis said raspberries around the Chateh area used to be good but after the Zama Lake ﬂoods

they were not. He says now you can notice them coming back. He also says the cranberries on
the winter road to Fort Neison in British Coiumbia are exceltent.

57 Shes

Louis says there are many cabins throughout the Alberta portion of the Dene Tha’ traditional
territory, as well as in British Columbia. He says the cabins in British Columbia are called .
~ ‘trapper’s cabins’ and says they are generaliy off the road and you need to go into the bush for
.. .. those ones. His brother Harry owns one of the trappers cabins in British Columbia just off the
' " winter road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Neison.

.~ . Louis said he knows of 3 Tea Dance site at Habay. Also he knows where burials are in Aiberta,
but he is reluctant to point out their locations.

y~ Travel Routes ~

: " Louis said that the Dene Tha’ people use many travel routes all over Atherta, Brittsh Cotumbia
and the Northwest Territories. As for himseif, he traveis and hunts every winter on the winter
§_ road thatjoins Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson.

; _ , Observed Changes

Louis said he has not noticed any changes with the water that he can speak of. He said he does
‘ ~ not feel the same when it comes to hunting. When he hunts in British Columbia, he says "the
moose is not like it used to be". As an example, he said in April he went into British Columbia
and did not see any moose and that was the first time in his life that ever happened. He said in
' Alberta he now has to travei to Sulphur Lake to hunt moose.

.' Louis said since the creation of the Hay-Zama Lake Wildlife Provincial Park he has seen a tot of

the birds come back. He says that putting the land hack to the way it was wilt take time, as "it

2 ' won’t happen overnight, you know, eventualiy you will get better and better and better.” He
goes on to say ”Mind you, it wifl never come back to the stage it used to be ".

Future Generations
. While he hopes the traditiona! ways continue on, Louis believes the future generation is not like
the older generation. Though his oldest son’s children hunt, and he beiieves this is important,
they do not keep up with the other aspects of traditional ways. He says "The younger people,

Ei Fishing
Archie fishes forjackfish in the South Shekilie River (BC) and in the area where the Ketcho River
‘ meets the Hay River (BC).
Sites
Archie tells us that his (maternal) grandfather’s cabin is still on his trapllne.
Travel Routes
Archie uses the winter access road along the 29th baseline to travel to Fort Nelson. This road
goes through Jean Baptiste Talley’s trapline and then southwest to Fort Nelson‘
He also uses the Harvest Energy road to get to the Alberta/BC border. This road crosses Fire
. Creek and then continues to follow the border.
He also uses a trail that follows along the north side of the Hay River and leads to his trapllne.
' Observed Changes
The biggest change for Archie is that now he uses seismic lines instead of trails to get around on
2 his trapllne. Most of the old trails on his trapline are now overgrown.
Archie explains that they used dog teams on these old trails in the past. Now they use vehicles
' instead.
The old winter access road is opened in the Meter and they use a vehicle to drive to the
trapline.
' . Future Generations
Archie would like to see his children on the land. He is saddened that their jobs keep them from
. .' going out hunting and trapping.
.. Cancems ‘

they’re not interested in the old life style." Louis beiieves the Elders shouid get together for a i _
meeting and put down on paper what they think should be done to protect the future '3" '
generations. _
Areas to Protect ’
Louis wouid like to see the areas around Duck Lake and Zama Lake protected.
Concerns
The main concern that Louis has is in regards to loosing Dene traditional knowledge. He thinks 3' ' '3
the old ways are fading and he is saddened by this. The reason he beiieves this is happening is
the young people do not want to learn the old ways and they are not interested in learning. He t.
is worried the traditional ways win be lost forever and says "It'll never be back the way it used "
to be, never. But at least come half way, make it betterfor everybody. ” ~

i , ' :9" -7 'm A 4 a x. 4 urqr 3 1 ' : r 4. 3'4 J "" ~ _'V ~‘ ', j ,7 ‘4' J“ A 1..____ _ ; _“_ ;A:1ifx“.£i'~"» 3""1". .
‘1 WI ’5" W??? 4W1 44% I - “9'3 “ *3 i]! * ' '- i‘rv‘ 1
.‘ _ , ' ' ‘ ~. ' ’ t I -" ‘ ' i ‘ ‘A I
4 w . ' M 4 ‘ 4 - _. 4 . 4 I . z. _ -
‘ A .a" ”’1. A‘ 9 , ' "‘ 4' ’16 r‘ ' I ' . I ' ‘ '
5| . » 4' Q I 4 :4 gﬁr-{i-Wg’; 239—11232‘ 1'. .- ' . .-‘ r", ‘\ SI . 1“" g j , ‘ .. _‘ Ar ‘1‘ Area Of Interest ‘
' ‘ f‘ ' > '— _ ’,‘\-:J‘A ' ;A,»_ '\;‘~; , J t; 4“ " 1 '} 1“} L‘BK _ P 1'. -' AI: L f _ ""11 (' ,‘ Djiv , I
L V . ﬂ ‘3; ‘ZQAA’V‘S‘A‘ " » ' 252—2: ’"Ai | t ‘1‘ A \VA ,‘~ '. 4" i ‘5 4, 4r A I”: J”; r: ‘ I
, ‘ , r~ r. (,1 4 - - .‘zv '. ' ic-ggﬂ‘: ' ‘ . [ ~ . L r . ' - ' ‘\ “7"“, ”2'-
' l i. ” 1’ ' '14 ‘1: ‘krj‘l p"A-A .‘5 V .9 -‘ 4PA‘V‘W 753’: . ’ I " “a ‘A k. -I J ' ‘1 F
t ‘4'." 4 ‘0 ‘r' ’ ’ , 3" . .‘d E .j‘ r I' r (0,? l! Q's?! ‘4 ‘ 1 j 17"., I P.’ .h' ' ' V {‘6‘. t3" ‘
' l ‘ A . 4 ’ y’ .‘ ?J- '_ ’ T '1; ‘45".u" , . . -‘ | ”‘7" ..‘ 4'.‘_;' .y ﬁ.§ ‘b ‘ r-x f 7.4
' \ . .4 . -4 3/; J M ' "‘14 ‘ 3*" . « ~ *4- ‘W"“ ' 4’ ~A‘ " ‘3‘ " " '
4‘ ‘L J] 1 ' l. - ‘1. I w 11 P a) 1| .1 «7 ’ ‘3'} _'.',,fv~:$’_" ' '\\A\, ’1‘. "121‘ _;'A t
4’ ‘ ’7 J-' ‘ _ A y‘- 2"" ' . I l “-3 A. , q” 9’ '~ A- : b.‘ A " H\ 4 A 45“: A ’
«2/ ~ 424' ~ 4. 4 .. , 4.4. Rm. . WA. ._-.
. _.l-: _ 4 , . c - 4 ’1, ~ '75) \ < - , r... x - u, .. r" .- ,_
.I . 7.4 ‘1 . ‘ ' ' ‘ ‘ ‘ ’- ' k. ' ' 1- v- ‘ ”ﬂkh‘ ‘ 'Aﬁ 4" ~ ‘ L
’ ,( ﬁ‘ I -_ -i , 5 r I. 1&4’ (1' ‘ i I 2 ;,—) a r' . A. - _ h. - . \ ‘3‘"1.’ '3, -
‘ z «(A- "'1 '3‘ J - ?-. ' =4; _- [I -"".' 45.“ J ~ ' 3' a
w w « 4 m . » a4 J .-r rug \ - -. -, . 44
L, ' _, I _' V. d 7 , ‘A 'ﬁ—ﬁ ‘a '1'! .‘ . A3 A'. ‘- } n 4 r A H‘ AA ‘ % I ?AA A . v “A Ll:
22-?- y E“ 4%4 r - :42: J ‘x 4 *1 J“ "n'lxufzﬁz ; .4 ' i? ' 1 - 4
u’f . I _. é - ‘3‘“ m - A 3 . " :h a ‘ v § - \
i stag’i“ k‘%—-‘ “-2. ‘ ;—,’ ;‘A‘1A'::_]AI'A‘AAA:AA 2 '3 ""1: ,, 4;;‘ W‘ W_ '4 .7 'A .,-"" 'v ' ; 2' . ; A '5
r " - ' 9 , A‘s; ’ -" '4‘ vf:-‘~¢~ 132:3." “m- ' 31" - 23-4“ ., «'7’ f“! r/ :3“ , 9
4 rye . 5,41 , , a - ~- 4.: 4 ~ *4" m “.44— ~4- ~
; kg; F f‘ff’ ‘ I 9 bA-(~ﬁ§_: ‘3' 1 - - s ‘ (M; 83?: I J _ :lz’y‘ _ > -. , _'_ _— ,- , "4
ll ‘ '7 ' W‘s“; ‘3‘)”- 2-22; ‘7' l c; ’ ” . "T5 A 3W «513’ E ' é: ‘ ““ r f" 4;--*'.'f '
I " l~g,?:;>~‘g‘5’-:- ?:EI‘T ;~__.-:.-‘§ .- “-14.4." A v "x g?” A )gﬂ "‘ ’ 4, '31“, 7‘: - 4,? _ "’4 “a ’4}, ;__;234
. r'F » - _. ”“" ’ ~ , —<: _ k. i. . A ,.:' A'_ ' A . A' . " ‘A ‘ 1; ' r-
1' "A A‘W‘E A ' ‘3‘ AAA ,, A4531 «g; ' r . '6 ii .~__ Wk 4 4 . ‘A‘ , 4 -.— --j' 1“: 3‘ ‘A
{AV V—‘zm A311" (- A ;: CT‘AA'A,‘ (1..” 4 A A mi‘és’. 1% 3 _, ‘~': w , ’ "“-‘-~' ?
I “ z _ .3933‘39 K“ 425:“? ‘- “ ’92:. " ‘ ” ""AT? ,. ” 5.3.“ c: :4 * 4 -4 " ‘ _
J 4."), $3 Aﬁfﬁ’jﬁﬁh’ﬁq i" m,- 2%.“; £3“ "‘3‘“ 1‘ L38 ._ 47:1: ’ max? 7. I ~ .55!» '71-; - A A 5'
' .. . ‘7 h “‘ “ “-4 ".. ' ’ A? .. ¢",;_-~,‘ .' A _ 1', ' , F“ , ~‘f c- ‘_ ~,_ ‘- ‘.
' " ’ ' t1" 4" ‘A‘ 4‘ ' 5” ‘J. - A A ‘ ' , 1"" > ‘4 ‘ ' l‘ h - _ ’ ' .
g ka‘wﬂa’fs“; 4 4-4-4 .59 ,f—zavrrwﬁ ~~ (. ‘r’ 411,244,? 5 ti; 3-44 4. \‘ * —. T
‘ =7 E ‘4 4.J"""“ﬁ'g:u_ E ’7 15:; '. w , ,,l - mm \ ‘3 q 4 J— v; ' '
-‘ 4* 9’ ‘f‘hiﬁ’ " ‘1 " ‘ - '3! AV \_‘ ‘ 3 — - 9 ﬁx," ‘- _. ~ ' ‘_ ' .- -'
! i ‘1 ,‘ ' , - 3‘ v .7 4 1‘; L‘ 1‘: -I'I‘I :3 .l»3.'l’. L)/ I ' M _“ 3 lb . é») .___' ‘ < c. It. ; 7". _ 7— 7 4‘ _‘ ‘ ~ :9 —. .
f 1 1 E1 - - { *‘-‘_4 - . 3 - L ‘ . _. _| v ,f-m ‘3 ' P . - .I >_ 1.59.7 __
‘ ‘ 5 ‘ﬁ A ;—A‘AA;—"/AA \ ’ ‘ AA4 A l: .- A A' 'z. :1 VB ‘ ‘ ti 3—5-1A‘? A ; Al . A
‘ , r-" . Egan.” . ". ‘ y. - ? A‘Aféﬁb."> ' . ‘ “I A% "k ' ,' |_|,:, 1’ ‘ i §— 3
“gay: AA‘é’A}. ,1 ‘ 3a ‘3‘? ;" ' ‘ 4 ﬁt?! ‘ ‘ /1‘ 4:} KATA} 31-? g I 1, . r I \ .;:‘_’\; _ . 4 O»
‘ me‘ J 77 _ 7: ~13 - f1 ’ 4 "I ~ " v I .- ‘/1" :‘(Ir '1 I- , 4 n ' I I> . ‘ “__‘ ,‘\ ’ ‘4» - .
i '3' , " "“:_,"‘-,A'-‘: .‘ 11-4" ., n ' .’ . A- I: !' A ‘A A ‘ A “- . A '
‘f.‘*f>mm:; m? - ll" 1 ”v f" , )\ ~.A‘§.’2{.;§Si‘.,’ ‘- _,L. ‘54)," $‘: 4: 4 l4 :
‘ ‘3“: v“ 4,4"— ’4' a " ' ‘ “ - ‘4‘ '44 3 . 7' r “V I ., ' 4 . ,,_ 4 l “:4 " ‘ _ «.4. ‘
'3" 44 ‘ A 1 "-54 I/ 4, \ 9 ‘ V ' ' ‘ " ' i A .1
l.‘ ‘ A At A ‘ ' , I l. ' “V J- ‘ ’ ' I ‘ ‘ d ’ ' . I N.
I Q 14”.- 1 ~33” 7: ' ‘L‘r" / *ﬁ 254' ‘33 a ‘4 "4 . 4 3» - ' - - 4 ‘ 4
‘4‘. \‘ 4": _' \V '4; A'A F ‘ _ r( X. 33 3 '4‘, ‘ ’l I _ ' ' ' 4 ‘4 L
‘ s .I . \- u‘ "'1"- . I 'u '9 ’ A I ‘ ‘ . ( I -
40‘. _ ‘- 3—, ,. ‘., '4 ‘2‘! ".5 Uzi r," n F r: 1 y . f_ _‘ _' 4 4 ,
' V i ‘ K. N» ‘ A 7 1'... I .7.‘ ,I ‘5(’ 1?, q'{ >‘; r "J J ' t \L/ , I 4 f I. . , . y ’4 _, . j
. ' 3 ; ;,~ ’3’. 1 d '0 .5 / I _ '3 . I 1 ,
“,4 A l . n 4A ‘A' ‘ ~ A" «3: ' . V ' . A ‘
J - . ' : r» :1":- 4:4 1 ‘\ - .4 ~- 7. J
. ‘ ‘ A v? / E‘ '.A ~.; .1 I ‘ ‘ . . V v
‘ 4 v “ n ’ ‘ , ~.' c. ‘ =4 ' ‘ ?- .- -" ~ 4 " ' ”5“ ' ‘ ‘ ‘ ' A k ‘
‘ H “ ’ “\\ SA. “(A 4- . '- ‘ 4.”: '. A '1'" AA '7" 9'” ‘ " ~ ' , ‘
L. ',' ‘ 1-3" h .. “Ngni ‘4 ‘ 3‘2“ ‘ J (-QL i:- y. z n’ ; A ’ A. (<4 > ‘ ‘4- . '1‘ ‘
L- ! LA‘.‘ :A ‘3 A A A ‘4- 4} ( '. 4. “J ' ‘ ' ‘ ' ‘ : 3
‘ ‘\3 w? A ‘ ‘ ‘ 1- "'.‘.:'_ \~ ‘ , A‘. _ n . [
‘A t} 4' -4 * J‘H" ‘. ' J .3.‘ if -" ‘1 ,. 1 7, . , {:A' ;
:25" ‘ “ r L ' " ” .-. -~ " '*‘ .9 7 ‘ ‘ - A 27 I. ‘
f .4 .4 ‘ ‘wr . -v .- . I , '9 4 _ . -- .A .,. -.
_ - 1 ‘- J - 4. . [a __’ ~. . , I _" ' ' .01 .
, ,“ _._ > A - 1 ' ., . 1 " ,v . - -‘A' ._ ‘ 4 '
-- . 7,5. , ; _.4 ,_ .4 4. 4, / f 4 _ ..
‘3‘ 7 _..~ - 4_‘ ’ - , R" k‘ " x. . A 4
. .3» 7 x " :_A 7.‘ A _. . _‘ . I .. A 1% 3
A) '- v. A :‘ '- '- $3 V _ . '
3-4 - .. w «r - w.2 .-_..:4.. - .4 4
,i’ ’9 \ ‘ . ’A- ‘ ‘ .7 -’ ,A - .‘ 7’ b -
1 I‘ ’ \. /——_v 1 ‘ V , ’ _ .'l‘ ' ':~ 4 I AAA; 0' ﬁ.‘ . ' v-., i‘% A F ~‘5
' .9 ' ,4 ' 33—4-53“ . ' - . 4 ‘. .4 4 w .- ,. _ (_ : _
v ’ ‘ ‘47,:‘3‘ 4‘ | - ~£ _‘ ‘- 9 1 ' ‘ 9..“ I
l _=7_, 4 ‘5‘ A 3: x :— .. ‘. J, _ , 3,- $5
I, A AA ‘A A A ’A- .Q‘\ -' 'A . .- ‘4: ';T>.;:‘\—:-: 7A ;- A‘ ' a.-A ._ _ .5 A I A z: ‘ A AA‘LA '
‘ ".— ' Hug? A ' "'A A ' E’A’ " 3“? - "A 'L AA :— :‘AAAAAA’ZA\~ 77%;“ .“A ‘ Q :¥:£‘7 . i _ .
J‘ " w. 4 - ﬂ ‘ ‘:" "g?" r" ' P "“3; ' AA"::-{‘A;i:;}'-k4\ nu“ " f' .
V . Q r ‘ § _— ‘ — ‘ "%...’ A'\‘AA\, I
~ . 1 .3 4 ' '- --rr“"~‘=>‘: *
‘ , ‘ ‘ ,_.- '_- ’3‘ -, ~ ~~~_W4:;.K L_A .
3 t . 6 - A 4/ .- , 1‘ AA.’ 3 :A‘ ‘ “—......‘_.~._ AA‘A‘I“:_:: :4 -1 .
4 7 - ,ﬂ ‘ .‘4 4 9‘0.“ _, - 4 ~ 4 4 +4.. .. , , ISH— ,
. I A, . A" ’. 7'1' . ‘ I 17 u ' a: ‘ V‘ . l‘ A V
' V vi a ' g A 3 2'“ ,_" 0.5‘ 4 " 3"” ’ ' 4 ; "“
' A' A .2- ?AivdZEa I -‘ "A * -' .QAN‘ 3'" A - "Ana. 4 I ‘ x '4‘ - _~ [:4
,...' Kt”. d 3‘" 'v 5‘4"“) " J I* . 7“ “‘.\~ \ ' 7",. : . A 4" ; o", 'v ‘4'
4 AA ‘2'?- ‘ V ‘ ' ) FA .9 1"— 4' ii?" ‘.‘J.:€. A9,? V :f‘V '5‘; T&v‘:* ‘" ’ 3 ’ _ r :1; x ‘1‘ ‘l ‘ FA‘A': A 3 I3! I‘- ‘
f: _ . .'_, 75- I A 1 7f _ ’ 1- g. A w .‘4 .' A,A*At.?.‘ QtOA‘t.“.i"'.v';y‘-A‘\AAA&‘Q " V v 'A 4. ' ' _'.: A ‘ II a
» .4 4 ~. '“ , ‘ r: 4* +799 manna c 6'“- ova-.-" . «~- -\ ~,-.
‘ :‘~‘ 'A '- ‘ AA, ' ‘~ ' § ‘— V - ,. 4 4~ 4 '3 ’ ,uI , 1v, 4- é ‘0.."*~‘V‘AJA9.S.TO}Q?‘§0~ ' ‘ V ‘- W.
"l Legend g, ;\ '4 7-7 A” .1“! _ «a ' .C ‘7 A A .37 94:3“ ‘} ' ‘41
i ‘ 1 _. ' ' ,L‘, 1‘ ’A‘ . I w I ‘ ‘4‘.“th ~ ~ .‘J
— . o . __ (-0.: v A _s;- A n __ . .- q 4‘ 4 ‘ ' "A' \ .
E 1 == Ekwan (exustlng) , .9.“ ~_ g . , 4 4. 4. x . .r 2‘ ‘4 . 7 3 ’3' wk»;
. ‘ ' 5 4:7 c \- 4" A A ‘ A .. '4'» .‘ \ "‘ “; 71 :1": ‘ j “ ‘$~$:/
4 L. — Horn River Mainline ?gw“: . - _4 ’5‘ y ‘_ . 441. 4:1; 1' 1‘ 1 4" 1I ~134‘:
' --- Travel Route (Current) ' ' ‘o '~ ‘ ‘4 7 ‘4‘ . .-_- a $4 ‘ ’
A z, 4 J ._ ’1‘: . ‘ .' r 1 ”'_ ‘ ‘ 4 4‘
' K _ ill 4 , a :7‘ . . I, 4% "4', ‘ 4 \ :
.51 [:J Beny Gathmg Area (Current) 4, " 7 ,- 4‘ “/2 4 5-... Z l: :5 ,4 -‘ 4
l . . . _ .2 ‘1‘ h. LCA ‘12 ‘3 '. A“ C A“. f1; {I ‘3'?" A ,p‘r‘i AA. . I ’-
2 m Huntlng Area (HIStOl’lC) 7 f’ , - g .4 3;- 14-x -. ' - ‘3? ‘5!“ \ ~- 4 m 41,344» - ,
- ,44 4 ~4 .3 . .. 1a 44.. .44 ...-~=- 4.. 47144:: j
m Hunt‘ng Area (Current) I 1 ‘ J.) ' ._’ I‘z‘ , . -‘ u. -_. ._ ‘5; ' ‘. —4 ~.. . ’I' J_Jr - g _. 7“; L"“5. -’_ 1. ,‘. ‘
g h ‘ 7..-.v9'wc, ‘ “ ' :9‘. ‘ ‘- 2‘ :9 ‘, "A' ' . , 1"; - l , 1' '
{53] , , ",4 ‘_ V m _‘ ,'. 4'-.‘ ,9” 1 ‘ . ‘C 5? g 3:“ ,f \—- ‘ ‘Ln :- §x- guy}? ?\3 “‘3 l;,
L , Provmcnal Boundary -' ' ,5... 4 314‘ X] * f; ,5“ ~- ‘ '1 -s 4. . 3‘ 15: -4. - ._._
1‘: m P" _ " "AF ‘A'AJAA-g‘ I 1 (‘34:; 4 J4, . _ . . pg. : )1 ' g. f T-A‘ .——
. . 5‘ "A o ' ~ ~ ’ . 'U 3., tv-' “" *" ’—A'A AA“ A“ '
.- "-‘J — - L": a-yrs‘fl’it 7:1: .-~ ' J ,. ; , J _, -432, 4..) . 7 Kay»:- 3 54.3-415' L_A“___;EE‘I_I_E'.-
Map ID: 008
' Traditional Use Areas identified by Louis Fournier
' 'n relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipel'ne
A ALLMAPSARETHEEXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA‘ FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DlSTRlBUTlON \MTHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBTTED.THEINFORMATION
‘. , CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINESWITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPEUNEAND IS NOTACOMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
1.15.4 DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION USES AND INTEREST S IN THEAREAS SHOWN ONTHIS ME FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENETHA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.

interview Summary 5
lnterviewee: Eric Kolay
Date: May 27, 2009
Location: Chateh Administration Office ~
Interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Adena Dinn .
Background
Eric was born March 16th, 1952. His parents were Eiise Metchooyeah, and Sam Kolay. They
were both horn in the Hebay area. Eric has 2 brothers and 4 sisters. He was married and has no
chiidren.
Hunting and Trapping
Eric started trapping in 1969 with his father on trapline #756T016 in British Columbia. He is now
the head man on th§s trapiine. Eric foiiows the 29th baseline and traps mink, marten, ﬁsher, 3
iynx, weasel, mice, squirrel and sometimes duck. 3
Eric used to hunt beaver in the spring for their fur, but he no longer does because of the Jew fur 3
pﬁces. 33;
He also hunts moose northwest of his trapline aiong the ridge. Eric explains that in January the 3 33
moose go towards the river [Shekiiie River). He tells us that he uses the roads to hunt moose as 3?.
well. He also hunts around Rainbow Lake and south of the Rainbow Lake area in the winter.
”There has been a lot of logging there. it’s just not the same.” 3
Eric gets most of his meat from the iand or from feliow hunters. Eric goes out in the summer 3;...

' when his supply of moose meat is 10w. He tens us that the moose meat is best in August.
Medicine and Berries 3
Eric’s wife coilects raspberries in a dear cut area aiong the river that is just south of the Hay ..
Lakes reserve, he aiso collects saskatoon berries or cranberries. 3

I . Sites

9' Eric knows of one cabin that is on his trapline that beionged to his grandfather Johnny Koiay.
There are aiso a couple old cabins along the BC and Alberta border on his trapiine, and a few
10g cabins around Kotcho Lake.

He also identified a gravesite that is located west of his trapline. Eric says that tots of people go
to Bistcho Lake for fishing and camping.

Travei Routes

There is a winter road that Eric used that runs from Kwokuiiie Lake 3!? the way down to Zama
.f Lake. He hunted along this road as we”.
5 in the past Eric has also traveiled to Ketcho Lake from Chateh.
' Observed Changes
2 2 h E Eric stiil drinks the ground water but notes that the quaiity of the water in the Hay-Zama area
5 " -__I has decreased: ”You can’t drink the water from here. There are too many oil weh’s 0n the lake. ”

w ' He notes that it was after the reserves were put into place that people started living in one
5 "'j: area. Before, they moved to where ever there was game.
Future Generation

Eric’s brother, Martin also uses the trapline, and teaches his children to live off the Iand.

. - 7 I: ~- — - . ‘ . "2 w: . . , J , ,. - ' ‘ _. , _'7 r r' ': 3f ,- —:_‘~.':s.:.— _ 2221,22A, 255—4" “mm f
I ‘1‘ -2 .- "- "Y 'KJ'.‘ 2" ‘ . ' 9:4. ﬂ - - ' om ‘ ‘4' l ‘ '5" ‘ :(l‘r. y 7 E‘- s“ ‘l ‘ I T". ”I f [‘4‘ .f' 2 .
{‘W r “‘r“, ’V . 3 'C‘z/ 5’ 11%;“- I Lt. {‘4 ' 2 ff I 2. (3! L l K? [‘9‘ 3‘.“ ‘ ‘
_. -._ ., 7 ,. 2‘32 5,0212, . 1. 2 ‘ i f”; b. 2“ Q1 29; . 1h, . Area of Interest
'* '1" ‘v 2 2: 2.2-; - .- 1. 2:2..- .22 ' * Ifx :13 «ﬁg * f IF -' «a -. .2 -
,' :7 .. ~‘ . ' ~21 - - - ' ' '
F, 71 9 . 3 2 ‘L r 2' \ w “‘3‘ .“'gv,‘~?::: f fi‘ 1“"? \ ..‘g'fjl‘. 5e ‘1' g”? 'M ‘
" .-. , ‘2‘ 24.2.3; _, J ' ‘1?! " I I 'rim [‘ ' “AN . \m I {\‘H w" I ‘-
.; ”u '_ ‘1‘ ': 4—,." 1 ,l "J 7.7“! \ --- - 2 ' , .41' '2‘
,. .2. 1 .22 . 2 ~ . ,2. , . 2 ,2 - .m. - - 1m. v
- “a ". . . " “ '. f - ——1 - -.-, ,_ 2 7 ” — ‘ A" ' . - «I . .- 1 1
l' : 3-» 2- _ , ‘ ' fr. ." . {E ._n 91° _' Hf '.‘ }l i 290 ﬂ'ﬁi.7 {3—}: _ '.
~.1 ' ,2 _ 11‘s.. .v 1 - a ‘3 3:" 3 5M. {MRL- 1'\ ‘1"
' ‘ ‘- 9’ ' _7 V L ' I o ‘ I F -- ' ‘.- ' I ‘ . . ' '. \ '
. *3, . ‘,~’ '1. 5;-5-2‘ 2/- ‘ . . l, - V“ "‘1.“| ”'1'; ‘al,; A‘g Aaﬁ :3 . _- . 9 ‘
u-L'. ‘ . : '.' " l 2 "‘ -2 I: 'r . _ -. : '“, g. _ ‘ 7 ,
, "I {'9'. - 2‘; " "J. . ‘ l . 2 ‘ ' ~ I Ii" .g1' J‘T‘ 1 J} h' @1175}: I “ : Q ;, _ ‘=- 35,9. I ' ' ‘ ) . W
. ”-3; 2' 's..-;.. ». ad‘s 32V » r” 2': t‘-. . ri
‘Z’ojé-‘l’ 1. 1" __< I... “I - > 9" ' \ i _ 'x ‘f P .‘I '2 I 7 1"} 7’ . r"? “ 1 ~ k ‘
r’" ~ ‘ 2:22;: "‘- 1' 7‘ 7 '7’ l. H '- - ‘ t fa .. #9335“ l :- M H ‘
51;,22 1.“ + 2- 2422 ii. Ir _,; I . ‘- l ; a2; ‘ u; . -« x;::.'.':q‘7'm~« ~ '4 ‘ 1 ‘. 2 4
' 3M4“, '-‘F—{J%‘KK$M. T”? ’ 2. 2 _..—~.:2.«3;,- .2 2 - -' ‘ ‘ t ‘ ' ‘ . -"‘ 1 i‘
' ‘ ‘— i" b J": ‘ ‘ '-' f 1?" —'__. ‘ ' 2-. -r— '-'——-—z 2"- ' ‘ n’
’ _%:"\ ' saw: 1?". , _ ' "“‘oL-‘Kd' |VJ_‘-ﬁ:r Id "4."..4. & a _
[ )1 __,,"5J;:”/?2 {f 2" 9.}. £5? "‘1: 2:“ _ [IE- 8 - 4 “2‘37-- "22;; - '1‘ .
~ ;/".4' ‘ . , \' H ' _ . 2y i" . > ; 2 7 * “1“?“ v S
w 2 .4571» 22,,.v - 3'“ 1 ’ ' ' » ' 2? ' '=~’ {=22 ..r " ,2 - .ev' 124?“: ‘7 2..
'1 if,¢-‘?s~2.~’- 2:111 12:2,“,- . ‘5 -, 12* 2 "7. -~ 2_ . * , r 2;:’-=:~..,,"',2,.r3m . -
1. ,_..‘__n_-*__.r;~€_:9~z-:J':-. Viiz‘r ‘2; \ 1, T ..‘V. ’_ . -l . ’2 ﬁ ‘2' — VF \ . _ 77 . ‘ s: I , “1'. ”#5):
"'1 Q'J‘b f . " kg. '. L. _ ' p ' $~h‘__\\i 2 __ . . 1|; _ ‘ L, k ...P 1 ;'\\. 2 _ ' . f ‘ ,0. 9:1». r M
‘ ', 77'.“ ‘23; - E; 7‘“:,k.f;iz r',’ #:g ,.—-_r ‘32F‘ " - "’ﬁﬂr ' 3.1: 2 ‘ a I: I 2
‘ 4 1 2 21; 217-453 ..-1 3'3. ..M” I 3" ' "“9 ' “1:2". _ . — 1:3. 2 3- 2'; T 2 I i
’ -.:. "’zrof‘. «32“ “'~ 9"». ~11 , '; r27" :1. d " ’~ * ~
«:41. 'Sl'rm‘vngv ‘ 2 'r" 1:33.12 -. “-r? F' . ' Q. ' '7‘ —“~. .~' ‘
2.2 .2 2... 2 -.-,.s -. - w. .2 .. l2 -2- . _. 2
2",, '5“:an- 2 .' ’ ”944303 - . 'I ‘ '.‘.— ' .9' '. - 3 ‘ 3‘ « ‘: ' J l' '
E’ﬁ ,. Mi '- ' " 11' A ‘ ' ‘ new Y'a' "'1‘, ' " ‘ 1.
25"" ”-1 .._ . « A1 ‘*\.--1"’ .7214" ?b- - ' ‘— 'Kv fiu"'1~‘ “- ' ' 5'
\ _ 2—._-—-' ~s - ‘ ‘ ' ‘ ' a ‘ “ .
‘ I’ :m'f .' WWW _ r; W _ '. :43} “‘.:'9k I V ' -9 k‘ 2- 1 $2,: '- ' ‘ 2.
7:. ‘ “x' ' ‘ ’ ‘ r ' ." A ‘13 ' ' JC,‘ * __L 4‘
5 ‘ t': “ kg ‘\ r h;. l ‘ v I . I Wk - b v: _ -‘ ‘ : ‘. .h 5'; . — 3 _,-l‘f-I ~. '
ﬁ _ {r _ 4 ]\ ()I (.II () 1-!{1‘5L} E I - ‘ “k } 2‘ A- i .' 151:5:‘3 '
_ _:‘—|‘/“ _.’. ‘77 2 I , K\ 2 ' ., ' 2 7' -— w.
i _,-"_,‘“‘_,:_4 :2; -2? 5;" f“: , ‘13? .2 .2 i‘lhk" __ 2 ‘§ . . ' '—. ’1' -2 > '5
[223.0 1...:- =‘?s="' 4 2 7“ — . “T". .355 "Y-ﬁ‘ 4W ’3" '- . -2 . f
1:2,... , ‘ ,.| , 2 '2 .. . " d. , ‘ ‘ .
rcr “14.2—12"+1=;"’- - . ‘ a ~- 2, 4 -* 2x. * 4- « 2 . 2~ :
~ .7 . 7 “ -. " . r, 22"" V 5' é. ' ' _ ‘ ' _ , “ "‘ F: :
~ -.-- ~ '5‘ —‘ I11. " ‘ ’ -. T. . I ‘ . I ' - ‘ - ‘- J" ’0 1"» l. - a .f‘ '
2.2 w » ~15 2 ., - -+ -~ 4|
1‘. ‘ ur . . - ‘1- ' . “ , m 1- .t . H? ‘ 1 .3 .. ‘ .‘2' , ‘ . 7..
I “.2 1‘. _ _ ‘12?! '3 I "3‘ g" _; “.',."-’ -.\ )2!” ‘5 5‘ ‘1' I '2 1 ‘2: .4"
l .2 hﬁ"*.\.r ‘ i 5.5-5-1 ;‘. _~ éy- Q \ (I ”i l s '5' ' ‘ 2 f: _
«‘3 ' . #2 '6». u; "77;? 1‘! :\‘ ‘ J g 2" ! t! 2 'l ‘ ‘ . ‘_ , ' ‘ ‘
5‘". . . I"'.2‘ fog‘ M .;z‘<‘—:"‘-;/ l" n" t" ,, 1! ~‘- . 'u‘ .-, " 1' O H I ;
t “3.. f . a.\ 12“?) . J .¢(\;"'rqyg3. 1 , 1 L ! ‘ ‘ '1 ' . ' ¥ ,
.‘. ‘ . - . ' '-" ‘w “2141;: 333?. .- ,l .' F W. ‘ ' "
3 a 5. K‘ ,_ . E _ :‘é‘ ‘r/ u _—“,‘{‘F‘3g— i . I .k “LR ! a r c I i! ' V -
1.4-1.1 “ '.;‘_ >-' -" L" "\\(_. 7‘)“ @5, .‘ ‘0'- ‘1‘: .fog-‘. 2-. ‘.,-- — [I _‘r ‘1 , . 7' 7 t ’ _ I
E . _.-—‘ ,‘3 T1 ~" :1- ..—-1_."'-‘.,‘.1ﬁ"“_r'~.~'. 1:. ‘x 5— ' r/ 3'37":- Lu 1' 1 ‘ ‘ ’ ~ ’ ‘ ' ‘ I ‘ ’ ‘
- . .2 1 a ..2- x -' 9 ... . ~ 1 ‘
!_ '1 2 m '2 .‘ r .2, 2. A 5 _ . PI . g ‘
2'“- : h 22 .x 2 . -' 1 3 ‘ U a - .
V“‘\ '3?!- "—“ ‘ ~ ‘ ‘I. ‘I‘ “~ " 2) ' . “1 ‘ " " ¢ ‘.2 ' _ r h ‘
‘ -“:s_ ' 1 - N \. 1 r: "-‘k _ ., ‘ ' I ‘
;- “‘ “=2 W24! ’1 ,2 p ' '1 ,’; ;
5c", 1 .J' - "I F I .— . \
____:_r'.~_-'_- - .“ ,\ ‘K “ ,2 ’ " ‘ﬁ‘; ,2,‘ 7! ‘ ‘ | ‘ , . * ' ‘- < ' t \—
‘. 2 ' t .’ g , - I ,A A ,‘ '
<1 _ ,.‘ ‘ v 1 .I :~ . _1 .1“ 2 .‘w m ‘_ . 2 ‘ . . ‘ . ' ‘ r I
‘ , ' ‘ -22, , --- ,2- l ( 2. 1 ‘ :-' ._ ..- , r") «5 ﬁ’*. 1-
. _ ‘ r 1 . ,‘ _ > _ ‘- -_ .3 ‘ _ .
r-\A ' ‘- ‘ y I .’ L ‘ N" ' 2
; - ¥ ‘ ?Jﬁ- -—/' "'— ii. — u “ i“ - I v I 3’ ‘ J J l: ' '~ ‘I ; . ‘ ‘7 :4. ' ll; ; . 1
k4-- " - 5‘" ‘ r . - .2‘ 2 226:. r 6* ‘2 57?
E2 ‘ ' ' ‘ ‘ ‘ ’ 4"‘. I 'U ‘4‘ ~ i
l“ i ‘ --‘ ..Q- :22 j a 2 ‘ _ 2 - r ‘ .2 ~ ' i 7.122". " ‘ ‘ Jﬁ. )‘ol‘ 1 '_ ' »- "I i;
. . “~ 17$-.2‘ ‘ .‘ ‘ . ~ _ .' 2: ~’ - * "‘- »'— I
1 “1,, ' ‘ 'ﬁxrzﬁ. .. .2 ~--" , +22 . , ., ' x. r 7.1%,} f?
v ‘ _ ; - _..-:—.__ 2,, .22:'2::;~«2=1'“"‘2~:::2;;;: " ,-- 3"" -" ’ ,2 _ .
a.‘ -‘ -' -- I W — ,» , .. .2 _ ,2 ‘_ ,. ‘2 , 2 7;“: t’cjz'ig . ‘ 1
. , u 1 ‘ .diﬂ- ‘ 2 '1 ' 2 . “ h . 7 ‘A'*:-_’.‘. -_—::’2-~. 1’ ‘
' > ﬂ t . 1 ‘. ‘I , . _. ‘ - — I ~ f. ‘ V‘ ._ 'LI 1‘ ‘ \ 1.33:?! 3
; ."-- '77 s ' ' ' F ' ' _ ' f- " .
u .. -‘ ‘ 2.2.. w. _l 2 ‘ _ _‘ . ". 2 4 . l1 2 . 1 i '1
_ 4 . ' ‘9 ﬁrm, 2- 2. '9 ‘ .‘4’2' 1 * . ' . :5" . . 5 ~ “i 71"
'f 1‘ - ’7 E I ‘ efrﬁ‘a. ‘I ‘ , ‘ ' 1 “ ' f " I z: “ ; ‘ ‘
r‘ 1 -22. < _, " :3 g. “_ -2 ' ‘2 _ .2: ; I ”11”“ ‘3 k 2,
1 ~ ‘ 4 ‘. ; - h ‘* - ‘ 2 " ' ‘-
1 h , _‘ ‘ . .1. "‘1 a ‘ >_ --._.' . l x ' ‘ .l“ K . .
< > ._.\__ ‘ 22- _. ‘ . ‘ I . ‘..4_ v1 2; r .- 3 g ‘ - i
‘ ‘2'. J t“ -5 x " ‘ . v-a ‘-' K " .“i‘é'v. ' - ""3“" A 4"- F... I “I 4' < ‘ .“ \‘xi:
3’ ‘ ‘ v. (5" '- t. a : ‘ﬁl "i‘d‘ . 512‘. ‘1 ‘ ’2‘ ‘ 17 ‘ N “f r A 4 " — r ’ ‘ c '5‘.“ .' ‘ﬂ ‘ . F x; ‘0 E} ‘ "‘TI‘" kit
TL;— . I 7. 4 2‘ ‘1 I f , ' q ‘ 2 ‘I 3“- ‘1 " :‘alﬁj‘ [I II .‘ J “ 1:! 1 I‘
2. “\‘\.~. _ . 1 , y - o . 2' 2 .? ' I
i L d r .2. -_- ._ ,2. 2 \ g ' . ~' 1 2 r.
I Egan 4*? - f' :- :q‘a‘a—_§I\- ‘v. =7 .— - . . " 2 Z'wi : l. W 0:; .1 “\ k3" ' ¢ ‘ Q ,
1 2 2 3:???” t- '9 3%.. L"- 8,:‘ , 21 " ' 2"! " l“ .; "-. '5' '7‘}?- vl 14 I
L2 = Ekwan (exnstmg) ’ 32-2.- 2 9:. r' 31— .' --'~ I - 1 r) w ‘1 * ,1 .2- .‘ 4
r ‘ 2 ' <2?“ ' « ' -‘ 'f [ ~' *1 ’ ¥-
? _ Horn River Mainline . -' ‘ j. - _ {2’ 7-2. :2 ‘32 J] ‘ :; .-_:
F; ,_ . -‘ . . , . o Cli’ -’.‘L [1, :d "f '1 .2 I . I
o ' 4 I ‘ 2. _.I .7 . . 1 ( y . ﬂ
‘. ——— Trave] Route (HlStOl'IC) m " - f 3' '- _ “’1 ._- x 2-,} _r . 4‘? ' h ‘i, r ‘
r. 4‘ 1| .' 1‘ ’1 ' , 7‘1- ‘ ‘ 1| '-_‘ ~" , ' . "(:2 ‘ 5 ‘ > 2 1‘ {'7} ‘1 I‘
. - ‘ ~ a J’ r,‘ 2 .; ‘ ‘. ‘ ’ 2 2;): ‘b' u»-
1 [:l Cabin Area (Current) . , ' *1 52-, 12-" 3,, ﬁ- 22*, -\- 1- ’ ’ $31. Lyfff“ 2 2
f3"! ' V “ l _ v’ t “ .l ' , 'ﬁ I “... -.,,‘_ _ . . ,- r 'l;- - ~ ’ 7-)
0 ~ I . ¢ ‘« ' ‘ _ . ' ,1 " -.‘ ‘ - ax“ I . | L
‘ - Wltdllfe Area (Moose) ;. ‘ J, ‘ , 1” » «,2 _. ‘32,: 2 ‘* f . 21. _ .-_.35'2521- 7g \\.‘ I 2
2 2 . 2 ~ 2 -.. _ 2:. - ; ‘ Mr; _2 ' J. —, » _ 2a» ‘ ., gr
' ~ 9 Provincial Bounda ’ -‘ ’ " .- - ‘ 7 ' i‘“= " -’. *2 ‘23? " xx" " “(.7 4 "Mi! Mi '

. 5‘ E W , - '7 . . 1.. :iﬂ-l'; .I‘ r' i ' '1 1‘- {H :F“ $4: 54‘ “ ‘ j 1; .- ,5 ' W“ ‘—“—“ .
K 7 ~ 2 -‘I v, .‘ . > ' : ’,' _ '4 I?" ..~ Q ‘9‘ ‘9‘ :f "I no" - ;. an?‘ , :0:
.- 22 L _'2 L_S‘wmfiL . - '22--. ' J. . J . 5". :2 \W; .u '.' .' . * il- _;:..- M] '32.: :

MaplD: 009

T d't' I U A 'de t'f’ed b Er'c Kola

. . I a I I I o :::}
R M l P l

In relation to the TransCanada Horn Iver am me me me .3

ALL MAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF 0315 THA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION 0R DlS‘l’RiBU'I’ION WOUTWRI‘ITEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED. THE INFORMATION

CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABN MAINLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLEI'E INVENTORY. ___ 2 _
DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION USESAND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOWN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACTTHE DENETHA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. ; , i

52 Interview Summary

Interviewees: Albert Lefou

Date: May 14, 2009

“2 Location: Chateh Administration Office

‘ ‘ 5 Interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Cathy Baldin

*lnterviewed with his brother Stephen Lefou

77 3 Background

Albert was born in 1966. He was born in Fort Vermﬂion and has eleven brothersand sisters.
Nine of his sibiings live in Chateh, one in Red Deer and another one in Rocky Mountain House.
. Albert believes his mother was born in Hay Lake, but he is not sure.

Albert has two sons.

:2 Hunting and Trapging

: Albert’s parents trapped in an area that ranged from Kwokullie Lake (BC) north to Juty Lake (BC)
1'”. and from Kwokuliie Lake east to Dickens Lake (Alberta).

His mother stiil snares rabbits in the Chateh area.

a Albert started trapping in 1981. Him and his brother Stephen both stilt trap and hunt today.
' f The trapline they use is #104 in Aiberta, where their father, Chariie Lefou, used to trap as well.
Albert and his brother also hunt on the trapline, though there are some disputes in regards to
.. who owns the trapiine at present.

The brothers both trap for ali kinds of fur bearing animals including beaver, marten, iynx, otter
3 and mink.

Their preferred method of travelling to the trapline now is by snow machine.

ﬁg}- Albert ta kes his two sons with him hunting and trapping. Both know how to hunt and trap.

The trapline is too far away to hunt moose, so Aibert and his brother hunt moose fifteen to
twenty kilometers on either side of the border, west of Zama Lake. They access this area via a :
winter road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson in the winter. :..
Albert aiso hunts in an area south and west of the hiiis that he just east of Tooga Lake, BC E
(eastern edge of the Etsho escarpment). He hunts for food for his family and goes out mainly in
September and in the spring.
Both Aibert and his brother say there are lots of moose southeast of the hiiis next to Tooga a
Lake. 3' f: ‘
Fishing
Albert and his brother used to fish around Kotcho Lake. ~ ..
As weli, they taik about people catching fish, trout and jackfish, in the rivers and how the fish
wouid be bigger in the summer and smaller in the fail and winter. ,
Medicine and Berries
When it comes to coliecting medicines, Aibert mentions that he goes to the same area he does
most of his hunting, the area south and east ofthe hills next to Tooga Lake.
He also coiiects berries there, though he doesn’t know the English names for most of them. '
His mother went with his father, to coilect medicines, a number of times to the area he trapped ; .
in. They travelled there by snow machine.
Albert and his brother recall there only being one cabin in the area of their parents’ trapiine, as
weii as many tents.
Aibert aiso mentioned there were cabins at the confluence of the Shekiiie River and the Hay "
River. He says the cabins formed a village of which you can still see the remains in the summer. 1'
He also says there are cabins and camps ail through the area east and south of the hills next to "
Tooga Lake.
Travel Routes

in the past Aibert and his brother wouid travel up the Hay River from Zama Lake to their

trapiine area by canoe. They stilt use the same travel route today theugh now they use

.. mote rboats.

Observed Changes

'f Most of the changes that Albert and his brother have noticed in the area are in regards to

industry.

Albert has noticed 3 tot of industry moving onto their trapiine. The industry he mentions i5 0%}

and gas and logging. The traphne has changed so much as a result of industry his father doesn‘t

recognize the land anymore when he visits the area.

Another change was noted by Albert’s mother, Margaret Lefou. She says the water Ieve! in the

Hay River has dropped about a foot.

Concerns

g When asked about their concerns, Albert and his brother are most concerned about industry

; activity on their trapline. They are especially concerned that they are not being notified of
developments ahead of time. They both mention a seismic line being put in without them

being toid. As well, two years ago a pipeiine was put on their trapline without them being

f notified and when they came back about one hundred of their traps were missing.

4 44:94:74 , ' .. :3 44mm .4 .44 ‘r- {if ‘ W3" g'-4.v-4",'.s"-;F,W 7 -"': 4* , 4:254 «<4 4:4-:snue-4y.4--2~,._v gay! ;
‘ ’ I ' ' " ' t/fiﬁ ‘x. \‘A ' . - ' ’ . , J 113% 5]“ ."z‘ W 1t 1“ 45' 3’;- .
r '4 ‘ v i ' P" _A ’ a-I' 4’ .‘4 ‘ ., ' I -" ‘ , ‘ 1' ‘ y ‘ - ‘ ‘3’ .d‘\‘ 21’ 4?; I , 7 K- ’47 . |
k 4 :f I r4 4 - .1444;- ’54” ":4 - 4Q; ~ ,_. 4 ‘ , , (NV, 5» ‘94:” 3‘4 :14 g 4,4 4‘; x‘. 2‘!- Area of Interest
54 ‘ w 4- ,- ..._-.. 4 , .4, .4-\.;0‘"s* mu a a
' 444-.— w.-.» . , 4—4“: -' a 'M‘ »-4 M4 1‘ 44 i ‘
‘ __l __ l ' ,5 W8 fit; 7:). - I: J 2.: “A’ﬂ/ ’ “ IQ; Cg 1 YA ‘51-" ' ~ - Al , d ’. 43$ , :
.r . 5 lg 1’ $- {'4}? 1' . ‘1" 1' ' ’ ‘ _. a9 .0 P‘ l: _ ﬁ‘!:b 7"» I - '2) A- A . " »€-:;.h.: ' I
\ IL" ‘A ‘ A, J V ' “’ "- ..If V 3:: 4‘ n 9.3"! 7°," ,4 .i‘ " t v f]? 5.1" i.“ w
-' 5.4.4:" , - f 4 4/24. 4- 3-5 ' ‘14 wk M4 b- I -
_ _'4 [f 4 4 , _ ‘4 A A f L! ., - ‘ - ., JI‘ '\__ *- g 1.
A E z, 4" f 5:?“ 1L5 4‘“ : " ' ' ‘2 ‘ A549}; : V V":
5444-4 4 . .4“ t’ g?" " }' , )9 35-41%: ’. S '9 '47 I r
. :4 _ "_. . :4. 3‘, - ' r .g ' A . 4.; " :"
_.'.".4ig¢ ~ ‘- 1M )5" i, Vfdﬁi’t‘ 1’6“?”(1: 4- - i %
r‘-‘_|‘ M”; — r” 4 o ' ' 5: ‘4 ‘H‘ ‘ 4 1: Km ‘
L ' A 45 4.: 9.3:” "‘ I. u A I ' g .h -- ‘ A . " I L- .
;-.4:4"~ 7. w 43:“ S 44: Ji‘ .24 E ’l “A 41.4" ‘ f 1 . 1
’ ‘ ‘3'... ;_‘_‘,-‘4c:’-' \ R'vq» ’ ...: 4 , _ , i! 3" _ .3 ' A‘s
' “i --;..4,_34 ‘ '\ ’$-*- x—d'ﬁ 4!— ' 1 ’59:?"- '3 u—a—a §_7A,__.- 3. ‘ 4r). .. ,, ‘
“-4 4-:- -*~>-'- " "" 3/94. 4 W‘Fii“'=x")‘~=* ‘4 ‘ 4—'
k 'r -,";-.cr 3-" ‘ A. - S—‘H :F-j" \ .7: r ?'T f . I i. t , '
21:) 'h 4 " "1:; f- r. “a £9.34 :5'E‘s ‘:‘ - v V A A» ' ' ‘ ‘ -0 -- ‘47. -~v ‘4 (‘4' $21 ' -:_r V": A
. 2 :ii-‘iF‘J; -4'- 444' ' I 4.444.; ‘4 41:“- - .43; ' ‘ ' :4.>‘.'~"4 i4;'*‘4.i;f-§42::<¢;3?4.2455'4-3’1 4 ,
A --’ w l a_r‘_ ,. ‘c 7.4- ~‘ A 7 - k ‘8‘- '_ I 7 . V ' ‘ ‘ ‘\ ‘ l . ’. , j 5 q 2. ~’ .' .‘ .t ‘ .' r. :
fy.?'_>7‘§h‘ ‘k ‘1. 1" 5531:. 3.- ‘Jrﬁr 4th h (1" ‘ u 3%- . .v . . .. q-“ 4 h. ’ r&‘(ﬂ . :._ --"" écm,
.‘ ' a ‘ *u ' "‘ "‘3 _z c] ‘ ‘. __ X. 4 y . 4 . 4 ,_q A k '1 - <. '. — _ 5", -', 1‘." V‘- 41.1
4'4 " Ae‘ﬁ 542.4% 4 t“ =__: 7741-1354444: ‘3‘ l ' 4" "‘4‘ . ' .‘.. ’. ax {Z 314‘ . 4'J"<2'<.-"'$J
v" '. ' if. ’53 A ...:539‘ ' “z- .Ft“¥d 4’ h’ "a . I -’-“—.'—.“: LJLV -"\ V‘ v f‘_ H 0 ‘ ~<‘45-": ‘rﬁ '4‘. 4 ' ‘
‘ 4‘ﬁdﬁ‘f'1-T" , , E 3%: 4 ‘ ‘s r, '. ‘ 4 ‘ ,_ v . - A...“ n '- ‘1 "(4 v . - :C ‘5- 1”, £ ,
I.' 't' Wh|(”‘5“2ﬁY§ " ‘4‘): H'Y? “‘_.*— , n, ‘ - ‘ ‘ﬁ .1 ’ﬁf' . ~ . ‘ l >. . ‘ 7‘ “ .-."r-4" ...“. ‘." :I" “ ‘.‘V‘A‘ ;
E-u'w ' 4%.ka I, “4.. ‘ t:- ‘ '3? “MW' ' ' ' ' ' -'-.4'4"- '4 ' : -. ’. 4' '4 ' w
“"4 3x - .i 4 -. "4 ‘4 4L. ,41'4 n; r ' I - 4 .' -..~‘--'1--'4' 4- t 44L 4\ l
P M - 49-4 m“ ., .4 ~44: ' w; r 4 - - 4 4;. -. . :4 . . 4 4
. -.L‘.“-'"~'-,~5/.— .. 4 ~ 43.544 44’4" :11“ 1‘ _- 1' ' ' "'4‘4-5” V ' ' 3" T 4 . 4.42“; ' . H '
4M1} 4. ,-4v~—:- 4:3,. E, 1' W ... - '. . ‘. ‘.'. '_ ' ;,~ - ,. 'v. .',
. - ‘\ 41A ‘4‘“ . R; r‘ * ill -' A 4J - ‘— . h -' u 0‘ ' > :; ‘- ‘ "A ..ﬁ ‘ “h-ff‘... ‘ 1‘ A I v—'
ﬂ" ‘— ‘ 4 4: h “x ‘ h A 7'5: - f ' .44- - 4. 77.4 .7 A - r f A 7 1 ", 4'3." ': 4 ~‘ ’ i 4f .15; 9
‘71-.— NL M A ‘f '- g!‘~L~~4-—_,:~::J"§Mé 4 ' 4 -‘ 4 ‘4“'~ . '4‘. i"7\" . ' @413?” ‘ ‘
" ' .. .u. _ _ ~ _ A . ~ ,- _ w . ‘.- ‘ _ -> ‘ .3. > It .. . a ‘
'.'_'-"¥".17 K I‘M, ' A n t. 4 n . ‘A. _ 4 ‘t I- V v , ~ ' V "rif‘Y' .1‘I-1 A
'.~— a ,-*' #49 Mr.» '4‘.. -_ rg' . . . ‘ ‘. 4 \ ' ‘._ ' " ‘4. ' ' ‘ \“, '. 3“: ;f_.._ _.j u
4;:13‘L’Z" " ‘ r" r- 9"?“ M5“: 4 4 - 4 .' ’ - .~ 4 " 4 . ‘ -“ ' ’ ' H“?
rx’c 4-4- ..l .‘ , I - 4 . . - y . 4 ., ,; , v, A_ . _ 4 ‘. (5‘ ‘f ,4‘
H‘m‘l‘. 9)" :' 4} . A ‘ " ’2“ "" ‘ .. '. I .. . 'l l " ‘ J ‘ . O A‘ ’7‘ h‘ \ A
r; 5W1“; ”'if;§‘{~;;\;gff :3, A " .. f i" f,”\\ '_* .- 6-,: " A '- _“ ‘ ' . .1 - ‘f .\ ’- ‘. 4 ' 3' f 311:“;‘173' ‘ ,
‘ ”’5"??? 'L°¢4=? 2"",4‘ " ’, 4', ‘ "~. —~¢i§ .;_4,“‘4~‘~\ -- 4’: ‘43-?» 1-. 7 . .'~. _i . ~- ' 7' .‘-,4.'€;:\,-2_:4. -
_‘__‘,. :x. T‘K ,; I . '25} 7 2: '3’ u h _a - 'fjf‘_‘.g‘z,- ... .. _:L\U\:\:.L -,.I_ _ ~ . ¥- . . _ ~. 7.. ‘ . ‘ .. ,--‘-. . 1 . «:2 \AS' 4. _. .‘ ‘
_ .Léaai-C 1', , ll .4 . 4 "A '4-"\‘,' ”953 3- "3 ‘ 3"" 4.544f‘-..‘-‘*‘-;41..‘-. K;- 4 .4 ' ' ‘ - "3 ‘4? ‘- ‘ .“4: \- ’~£~‘4.4‘4."\' 4.“
, A ' 36571—2"- - \ 43:92;- ; C: '41"!- f‘ ‘ ‘}‘~;‘«<J‘\t<V".~‘-‘.-‘.I' 7 ' '1‘: '1 ' , ‘ ' “ '~ "x_i" . ‘f, "'3"
7L, f: ".3 #1,. .L' ,3 .f. , ﬁg; 3., 5 - "'25:" 2.534;» '3 3,71. . 7 E. .. ' - . '. ' .4 ,.".- J‘x/[dé 7"
.' ‘ ' ‘I ~_4 3] 3) .v 1.: 4‘ LA ' ) ;;}¢ 1 ‘ ,1 i . ' ‘. W; ._ . .' ‘ 7 ', . ‘ .4_ , ‘ V 4 . - ’,' ': , _ . ,- ,’ ‘A.<‘..', Ix 7
“I .1 ﬁ 1‘? 1” ~" '3.- ag‘PI‘J 54mg, , h. 4;” 3 f " - '4' ' . ‘ A ‘ ‘\“' i : "I A 4 . ~ 4 - . . A - > 4 .- - 3'. - ' 13..“ p'. - . .'§‘ ’1.» _- '. ' A
\-y ‘X ‘1‘ ‘c I .__4’ 4 4 J .V I“ E" _ i‘ I . r "I . ‘ f ' _ . , ' ' . _ '4— At. — ~ 1» ‘ ' '4 .‘. ... ‘ 3f ‘1
,.._; k'. '1334 ‘ " .-\."':|.,/"1w>""‘ ‘ w: ' '51::9" 1 H 5 ‘5 . .' 4" ' a ‘ . 4 | - . " ‘X- .. V . ; ‘ K -.6‘..
f' - LA 1' * _‘ €45"- ﬁﬁﬁs '2 '3. ', .\ --1 " . - . J 74 ;' Vi T’T' .‘_. - ‘. . MS?
'n 3" ".4 \ r'u- , ‘A .— ‘ i 4... ' - ‘ ‘. ‘ H ' ‘.‘ . ' ". ' ’ . ‘ i
"‘l. V: ‘2‘)» {3-- 2'3 3‘“ A‘.’ ‘ ‘ l 4‘" q? E“ /" ll" ‘ﬁ;~:;-‘ ‘ I A I l a): . - ‘7 o ‘ — , v I . .r ‘ A V. ‘ 1.. ’. II I . '. . 65 l f'
‘ ’ t 3W} “ 1- --’4 1.3114 {- /‘ ‘1‘ ' "‘44 -' xv ‘ ' ' ' ' .‘ ' " . .4 '_ 4 . ' 41> -'
I 5‘...‘ - ‘L s - \f‘i’ " ‘.‘~:.‘.' 3‘ <4 _ I ct ‘ ‘- t. .' ‘ ‘ . V ‘. . 4 4" A n . V 4‘ . “ C ‘ ' ‘ . ‘ ‘ﬁ' ‘
;;‘ _‘ J‘ ' \4 5.1“ \ .1 }‘ Iv 4 . . '4 n v: ." " ‘ l I . _‘. ‘f' ‘ “ ‘ ~ ‘ ‘ y . C ' 4 f \
“1N ‘vr—x -‘—":~ ‘~ "f. p {“1“ V‘ : A ‘3 V . - . ~ 7- -' ‘ I ~ 4 . “.‘ .1 ~ ‘ 4 '4 4‘ ff‘ "
_ ‘\ ‘ ~ 32".» 4. a "-44-" . .. .' ‘ - -.'~ - . . . . - . -- ' ' - ‘M
, :3: 1?. .- _» . y .; . ‘ I ¢:“‘ ‘:L/ . '1 —v A ' H 9: -_"J' ... ‘\ _ V -- - 7- ‘ .7 ~_ ' . 1‘. _’ . " A‘ ‘7 ‘ ‘ ~-"~-." ' V ' '7 ' I1. ---
A‘;” . i':‘ .' - -, J '0 ‘ é, “:- I I H” :4 . '3? I . ' I . ‘ \ . " \ K" I ' - A” : ' . '. .... ' j
‘ ‘ v- - ,“4 ‘- 4 . .l' :, - l ' Q ’ '-4_ .4' 4
"u. .7 _‘ _ , \ . . 7_ \ , ' - ‘ ,
. F'V‘m “— ~L‘ '- ‘ I ‘ g ,A {I ‘ , .,.. - ' ‘ “’ ‘ ‘
— ,.- . .. - -._4_-_, -V. I i _ ,- . - . 4
t-s ” 4" . A ' r" V A. ' _ 'ﬂ' ‘ " '

:J‘_- ... r. ‘ L . ' .. . .
, . . . ..." _-.3‘_ i" l .
, ‘ «I .- _ . V __ L ' "Z I
'§ ‘ I : ,.—.-f\_~ ’ I

* §‘J/ “ ‘-~L_‘---_. ' ' " , ‘ ‘ 'v’ ‘ ‘
A 1 “.- "*7'~':-_« : ‘ ._-. -. -' - , ~‘ 4’ ' ‘
-h‘r ~ “4‘-1::~4L ‘- ' '4," - - '
.1 ‘. ‘3 '4 . ‘ 4 “x; ‘ _.-,. 1534.4;‘4’ "- f4 ' ‘. 7- . "7"
_ _ L) ‘ 4 _',--7,' ‘f‘_~ :n 1,. ." 4‘_ 1":4'3". ' :::‘13:;.:E':___‘\ 44 ' I _ ‘0 . _
54..-. 4 m .54 : " .4 4‘- .ﬁj“4-v— 4 __ ¥ " ""~':_",{4~~<-r‘;:4::¥wW,\ p , {:5 1 ; ' '
. . 7 -4 -. 4. . - ' _- -V\~::4- xx, «7:4 . ' 2
1“ Au: . 4 - '4. " m -' -- 4 ‘ .- 44—74:,43; '
'~ V a - - - 4 _ ‘ ' ‘ — in” ‘\"-~4— - - ‘
f . "1‘4" _ 7,." _ ,' ‘ " _"" 3.- “"~‘;:--_._:..‘; ::—4\:_ 4‘ 1.
, . ’ . ‘ ' ’- . - - :1"er—
i Legend , .4 - V21“!
4 . A — .- .‘ - r-—‘
. ‘ . — .' ~ '
. . . J ‘4‘“ ,
, -—-‘ Ekwan (eXIstmg) - ' ‘ 4 r ? 4
, n. _ .
‘A' A o I ‘ I' 4 ~ ' -I’; A L
— Horn River Mainline €42" _, -- - 7.4 .4 5:“ '
#1 --- Travel Route(Current) 75411“- — -- 4 ", , ' f 34"} ..
-' ' . - —. . — ~- , I3. 1- -f
.' [3 Cabin Area (Current) . ~ 4 {r ‘ v.13 ; ‘
4 -' 4— ~- . . . : sow- ' _ -.-4. - V 4 '4‘ Hir- 4_
7 I Fushmg Area (HlStOﬂC) :33: ‘3'- _-. ‘ ' ,, a ' ‘
. 'h‘ " I f ' '
. L? ’7 ’ -.~ . >_. '— g _ . , - .7
as. - Hunting & Fishing Area (Current) 3‘"- . g ' f 1 . 51" 5"
. .1544 .3. A ‘ - ‘1 . ;
5/)“ Use Area 5’" ' . A ,' J “x _ ." if" i
E . . . .4 '1 ‘ -o'lf :— - '1‘, A :3 L
:4; - Sacred Slte & Fishing Area (Current) a .- . x ,3; .v: . :4 '. _ 4;
94 V . .‘ r I‘— .L ." ’I V A" .‘a‘ t‘ V ' A
. m Trapping Area (Historic) ”4" -4 f .r-t' ’ig- § ‘33-‘- L. x ' 4 .,
i ' . .1, " ..., 1. g ...".L {8'32 ~_,_ a-_‘_»*. _ N» s
m Trapping Area (Current) '7 -_ (1..., 4 ...: ’41:“ ‘\__- g ‘ "3;.“ , {4-4,- . 1; -“1'.-.';f-~:'4-’ I '1 .4' f 14
' "'33:"? . . ‘ V - -9. ’ '2 ‘ ' 1 34M; 1’ - 3 Ib‘x‘ 41"; A 1"- "‘ "':' .4.‘ j: .-,;4',"I §X'wm ’:-
A' Provuncual Boundary , 4%.. '4 - .‘4' '2' far *9"? 4‘4" f“ l " ‘. 3 5w- SJ 1 z
,_ xtxgrﬁw 9» f 4’1 1mg, '. 4:4 7 s I I 'l —
5' ‘ '52 j- g , m4 3 .1 4“ 2" E —
.. , -4 -,.7 a -4: ,4. . 4 .4 '- L4- '54 4 '~ .4 '6; * rm
o- - ”.7 x-_ ‘ S‘.‘£“C:L L; if. L" J- " -..‘V n _ 7 g f M _:_ ‘1-’ 1.2. . . ad._ _ -..-L LELA ’ _‘
MaplD:O1O 7
Traditional Use Areas identified by Albert Lefou ‘
I I I I I o I .-A:
In relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
ALL maps ARE THE EXCLUSIVE paopsm or DENE THA‘ FIRST NA'nou. ANY REPRODUCTION on msrmsu-non verOU'r WRITTEN PERMISSION Is smcmr momarreo. THE INFORMATION
commso IN THIS MAP ms OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE or CWSULTATDN WITH TRANSCANADA PIPEUNES vwn-z RESPECT TO THE mam MAINLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOTA compamauswe on COMPLETE Iwanoav.
namemow 0R SUMMARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION uses AND mss-rs IN THE AREAS SHOWN ON 'n-ns MAP. ma specmc USEAREA MAPS PLEASE commcr THE DENE mm nasr NATION maecmr.

2 years ago Archie went on a helic0pter fiy~over with Steven and Robert Tsonchoke over his
trapiine area. They were given a map that showed 26 new oil wells to be drilled in their
trapping area He knows of 2 places on his trapline that have been drilled already and is unsure

what is going to happen to the land in the future. Archie is upset that he was not notified prior
to the driliings.
The increased activity does not discourage him from hunting or trapping in the area, but he is f
upset that he does not see any compensation for what is being done to the land on his trapline. ~

7 ' T’ - x ’ " 72?~'7 ‘ - ; 71 x W _7 "' ' ~ - —-— , :r, 7 = L r. 7.1 7 7 ' . ~ﬂ 7" ' ‘ '7 7' ._._7_,.—____‘77 ~’ ’ 7_‘- 7' _W'~'.".I:‘3::;:‘
7 f’ 7 rr 4;“: y‘f i’va‘ p.97 _ #j‘i ’L‘k 5‘ ~ I 2‘" 9 {J . ls ‘fﬂf 7 g 1“; If FR "" l L '7 3 J r; J; L
;77‘F" ’1 a - " Sf» nﬂégl'sv: 27W ~ r * 7 ‘ 4““?! i. 'L ' ‘2 . 5 1' L _;
L 4:: 5“ LL L L‘ L! ‘7'; L V. L ‘IﬁLLTLm L :2? F] ”gitg- L x -t '7 i/‘ 3% L LL; L 2' L “L!‘ L‘ " w " L L L L) IL"! ”(L 41." 1 Area Of Interest L
f7 H,‘ _’ -7 ,‘tr' " ‘I ‘M‘ —~ " v _ 7 \ \ 'v 7 L n . ‘3'" ‘ f‘. -/
4 L r , ‘- - L}. “2' ., IL .- . ‘, L ‘ s .0. 1' t, ,-‘L
r L 7 " _ ~;_;73°1LJLLLL\§We-_a§ez=-:; “r F- 7' T3“??? 17“; . ML $5 , ' :‘ , - 7" 3/" L '1 __7__ ﬁ 1"
g -_ ~ 7 , ,2 5—,: , ,7; : "7“ J' , 4'3? 7 {“1 \k? I 7 7 ‘ . J‘ v i. 1.
7 1.? 7'. 7,7,! . 7 “‘1‘ . ' h 7“" I” ~' .7 . “7‘ w \ - . ‘ ' 7-759») .
A if ,‘ g" '> IUJQ!‘ ‘ ‘ _ ‘ Rf, ‘ f L 'i‘ Ww/V: W J‘— 1 1 ILL ' . | "1‘ '\ L 7 r p .‘ J” "' "‘7‘ A l
1 § ‘ ' , ' 7» 7 ‘ 7 7 ‘ 71.575. A‘ "741351” p.‘;\'.f~ , -1 ) 7° L N “- \ 7 <7 7,‘ ,- ,7 ‘ L, 1 I #—.,L_, - ,:;
7' 7." I 7 v" -' 4'?" "I . 7 g 'LLLL‘L ‘YL‘L-L'LE‘L'LL'L—‘L'o ’L L 'v-L‘ lLL“L‘ LCL‘S‘L‘ - ”L D 7* - 1L ‘ ‘(Li- L IL L LL
7 L 1.! 7 1 L ‘ I “1?! 1r' _ I K 4 TL I L. 4" b "7 ‘ ‘\ ’ \N ".1." ??’LLAL \. v. 5. .L’ r‘. Y 1 7, .. ‘ ,
7 - - .W. » 7 -- 7 .- x7 \7 7:" 7,7 7
_ “97W 7 7 .13 37$ , 4 7 7; 7 - {5) 7, ‘ t. 77,—, \ «a , " 7 a:hﬁ 7;; 1'
3 L " 74's 2 43"2‘1‘1 :. ‘11 (“p .,..= .‘f! 7' ' :3 .17’ F? . 7; ‘ Q» - - L Li I ~:’ 7 LL“ L
3-3;, L!— ,-, w m .7 7 ,., .7 7 7» u? 't'mk 5 - f ‘ '=- - ' ' 7
t :l' >yd.%-" 5) "3 LL. 7‘ _L . ’(J .‘ L 1,, f ‘1 “5" 4 ll: f Q g. D . _ - - _ ‘7'“ ‘ ' L T
7-5 l'— 7“ A ‘ L| ', Lat ( v ‘ ‘V ‘)L h ,? r I L ‘N‘ ‘ i _‘ Q‘- V‘
L ' “‘ "f‘ -. _.._ . ' "-1 ‘ . ’ -,7 ‘ L ‘ v? v , ' ~- ‘ 5h...- - Rx ‘
L :< p") 7- 2?;3‘“ 13:- fa, 7‘. ;, j x: i :7 r" \ "LL .i‘ 1?; ’7 ”WT: " Vt *3. = - 7 7 L7
’ 7‘ — 777,473 hi; ?:K‘W.‘ ‘ 57' 7 ‘ -7- .-'. 31 I ' ‘ ’ 1; #3391913 . 464.415}? 57-1337; » ‘ g L
‘ 7L - 7 t- ‘ Lk‘Lfr} .- ‘.‘\ 'ﬁ-fm g 'L A‘ L Lkﬁ L ,;; ‘—LAL ~m‘ ,.’ 'IJ . d v; ‘ '5' 7‘ ‘L _\_ ~‘ ‘- If ‘ r
-; _., >..-~' ,—. WW 7‘ 2.4-" 7 ~77)? r; -- '5‘ -r 913.74%: 7" , ,.r - - 7
‘ .— _...7 , 7 _' _, -=. ’7' ‘ 7 _r, _ .~ .f - . 2.. _ j - ix ‘
L W 7 J '7’: : 1 .7 ﬁrxd L 5”-1“: ;~ :5 L “1* g ,7; L L' f" L 5’2“". L - 7 :17 L "7 LL
l L 'l ' ‘L -:; L’at—‘r. " '. -.-' L — \u‘ L‘ ‘ .‘L. /"‘Lr:r"/ h-ﬁw-ij . . L LL ' ’L — . 7’ - _ 1: I » ‘
3 - ‘ ‘7 {.1- 7- : 1333-". W»!- i- 7. x7 71% L «'3’! ' 33:" W m“ ‘ . , : ‘ 3 1’ "‘7 7—» 7" _
7 ‘ 37‘9“, 7.; 2-7 7‘1 7. WW .7-» f «27'; _ 7 '37 3:3 7'7"- 7\ ' 7 ‘ ‘ , . ' ’f—
.41: 7+7. «LL\7T“:“L 71-— LL . 4‘3; 2‘1 3‘ l :9 ‘ .;7_ 755,—.x: :‘g—a-x;1_ - _ 7 " a ‘
~ » 7 L_Vtga - -\.« __ ‘57); . 5‘ Lam: 7,7 L79: 'Séjjag-W ‘ : -- . ._ .-= . _ ;
. . ‘7; ‘i.“7i.'-.;-;L 7 _- L ‘54:; ‘. . - . ' ~‘5i’ ‘ .7 ‘ 5&3? V - 7; - 77‘ ' '~ L ’ ‘
, . 7 3,-- x =7: *7 W- “w J! ,,,'-"- m :— 7 .7 7; 7- 77-. 1,
L z I "t \; LL KL7‘LLTL L. L L . “ -‘_ ' W. ‘5‘ x: r .“'p_" ‘7 , t", LLJ ' Q'ﬁg" LT - - - L
‘ "a. 1 ”rs. 7.5; '1. L ' " ‘7 17-41926”: .7.“ 3“ L‘ 71.)?” L . ._ 7. :7: L L ‘ ‘ ‘
' 2.77:7; “fr“ ' .- -7; ._ w» 7’. 1r ,3» '7 t 41’73'?‘ ‘ — " 7'
:L 71»; ._‘. 7""“..~:~?:>Lé L-j ff: L_ g. "1; ' u- “ g" ; 7' “LL L'L L“; LL“ LL L L" ‘L *L - 7 7'7 7 ‘
.. < 4, '. ‘A 7 7‘. 9!: ., :x ‘ .5 :1‘ :I W ‘ (“w . K. '3! {o‘f:" 5' “ .'- 'I: _ L 3‘.- ‘ . g
’ " , ‘n _ \ L ‘,L_ L? ;\ "4‘74"“ i. . . . :v {‘3‘ _7i’:{‘\. L’Tag‘ttiga (7‘2“ 4 L L, 7 7, - _ ‘ n . “‘
’ L "q‘ f: '4‘. ':7‘ .. ‘4'. s‘ol’LL" ,’o—o‘l’o‘. -'L L’f -13.! :‘L \\_\._.1 /~ 1 ..‘.7L N 'L .1 ‘ L ' ‘ '2‘;
'L 3 ' ~-.».~‘ f— .- L '7 ‘5) ~ ' 9:, i}? v'} '27-. 7' “Z .' _7_,.
.‘j-‘t"? '- ._.,"”L 7 ‘L’L'; ‘ , 7‘ : +7; ‘13:“! L‘, ’. :1 73-7-- ..W §‘ J: i . .‘ l") L _ L ~_ A L‘ .
:;'ﬁ~*"~n,—‘~ ' "<75” L \ " 1‘!‘ ’1' I"? / .‘::;7 d ‘L “-\-‘ ,1“.- 7’ 4] ﬂ L L 1-5235“ 7-
I 7 ‘~ ; ,Il_ _. , __J .7 L , , n L :1 a ‘ ‘ L2" 7 7 H - L
7 : y- 3". :E/ f .. 5 _ 1". w ‘. 7. . 7
l 1 . ‘-W~~n z»? 7 ' a 4 L 7 7 7 ‘ 77 7.. 7- ‘
u A I "2—1,, ‘ L I [3 £8: 0“- ‘ L ‘
! ' 7 ‘ .—.-' r 7:: 7 7. .,¢\ 7 7. . 7 .
L i L "7», 7L1 . :2: ?W/ ,‘7 L” L L L 7- s; ‘ ‘45 1‘ 7% ?\"— . 1.- ' “L LL— ' L Q
2.» L\‘ )5" LL» , L“ ’IL'L 43 ‘ L L ' L "‘r L 7y" ' - L '1
7 w 7 7.5—; 7 .1 ‘I L I 7 31731 7 . . .- . 1 r 7
L L~‘+~* 3.14“ —' k—Jo": 7s" ‘ L55“ »‘ '1' I I '. | ' ‘L-‘7
7 7 ' 2:. 7L ‘ LIL ' 7 LL - l :_ ' ! U A r L
I “‘ 5 K? t“. ‘L‘fr‘n ( '1‘ I a 7? h .J ’ LL " ' r ' ‘
7 Y 7 ‘ . 7" ¥ :- ‘ZL , ,-‘.‘ 7‘ k“ 1‘ »;LJ'.’-' -‘. L _ _‘ ‘ ,
w 7 7 ~ '.-..~-" , 7 . ' 7, I ‘ ' ‘ ‘ 7
‘.J‘v ﬂ “ 1 ‘ ; — . I ‘ ‘o’— —/ ‘ 7" [7:841 1-71 \-I . ;L ( ' ‘ . . '
f‘ 3“ _ > ‘ ' l. 613 ‘1' -1 ‘I'L -f ';7 ‘ _, \ \ L. ' >
‘ ‘3‘ LL— ‘L‘I $1.7; »;7- L ' PN.‘ ‘ L: L j.“ L_ ,7 r- 71 l- -L I ' '«L Lh~»’".‘ -. LL- -- -. r x L, LL ' - , _
: J :‘g I ,_. 'i‘ “‘ "“7" ’39" 317 3:4, 1’ ‘ " "L 7 7 ~ . 7 '
:— L'i 1 “W ’ ‘7- ' . . . :3 7
‘ _\‘_ ‘. . d" ‘- 7 I A K L " ‘ .‘ 7 . - L 7.
:.. “' .' ':, ' 7 7 7 ‘7 " ""J ‘ . L ' . .
l ‘B - I .J 3‘ L: - ‘ﬁ‘ . ;
‘7’ LL ‘ “ ; - 1. {_ L L L L .— L J L L ' ‘7
— r I - _’ < ‘ ‘ ' ‘ I | I ‘ ‘ VT - ‘ I.?v ‘-
7 ' ‘L ——:«.\\_> _ __‘ “7 .7 __ , _ ‘ _ ‘ I‘ / , - ‘ t “
.7 ' -'. ‘1- r ‘ ‘ L A . . — . 7 L
ii, 75'" ' , '7 L L' " L ' " . 1. 7
1> ‘ ,_ \
-. t. _ 7 " . » 7 F f ,_ r ‘ ‘ ' ~ '
. '2. 'L ' - ,W ' L . " a r ‘:' ' L "
.’ 7. ~. ' ‘ . _ '7)“;-_-—-7 x:: ‘ 7 - _ - _ ., - .. \' .' ‘ . . 'L
I L “t ‘ L V? ‘L ‘.“‘\_‘~\: >_'\ M _ h '. n. . “ I“ L w. - ~ ‘ ’ ‘ Vla “0L \ 3L
7. . "‘ . - ~47 -7 ‘7 7. L' ' l . ' . — 7 : {7’ - ‘ :{l' V
. 1 —_, - ‘5 A 2 _7.~' Q :f-F‘ ' fa :Lit;_7m_w‘ .f" _ ' . ; ‘ .. 7 ‘ ’
far. L. ' 0‘ . ‘ ”fr L L 5-. -.-v-.-<~~_'_, L ‘ _ _ f -_ “L ' ‘7'11; ~' m :~_‘__ ,7 t ‘1- ‘1)“ ‘ _ 77
— 3‘. ‘7 t " ‘ 7 7 J 7 _ - 7 ‘7‘77 “ ‘7 ' 744?: 5771723“? ' 77‘
7 7 - ‘ ‘.-_ - l ‘ z 7 ~. - , - . '_7_ W ‘ “3‘; ‘\7:V:‘ :j‘“_ '7 L L -
L L L ‘ ; 7-Lr 4L 7 ' 7' ‘ l -- ' L‘: \ —;L‘~L A :3 :. :,—_ 1“»-7, 7 L
7 .7; .n 7‘ 7 . : ‘r. ._ ‘7 T774727;
.L‘ y '. - .. “- .\ '. 7 L 7 J _ L L’ J _ L L L
" - u ‘ W 1, .L '2‘ ~ 1 'L“
L L 'L ‘g L» 1 ‘ L Q? ' 4‘ 7 F L .' 7 . "M -L L ' 'L ‘
L , " ' E27 . , L 7... . 5’7. ‘ _ 7 x, ,f—.
m. ~74 'r" ‘ ‘35::0 L I 7 r - g. . l l 7 .7 ‘V‘
_L- . .. L, 7‘,r‘ 1 T "“‘I " L. “L I, "r ‘ ‘ 7, ,_,L g ' | “ f 7, -‘ ‘1
‘L LL P «’L " I 5‘" " '- L t ‘3: 1 Li L ""' ‘L L L‘ La
; i“ <_._ D -’ L. 0‘ V I. a, L" ‘- — ‘L “ '1". . ~', $ ‘ L 'Jigt \ 9L
' o?” . L; 77x ~25 LIL .aL‘ 1‘4"“ "7. - ‘7 ’ ~'." ’ 13‘ 77 - ' 7 .. “*7 x 7- '7 -7
N a 7, 1' ’ ~37 "7 ~ 7“- -W“ ' . ,_ ‘ 3""? " ".5“ ‘ 1' ' ‘7
'L L 773‘ .7' _ . .Q. "L J 2‘ : 7. ﬁ ' ' L — 7 ‘ / \ l g. y ‘ L .
' I 7 ‘ -_ . —J x . } 5/
; ‘ _ ‘L ‘ - L }. ’v‘d :4 7‘. ,
I 3"” ‘ ' , ‘ ' I. 7 _ -. ; ‘
, Legend g—f-T‘ 7 K L »-- " f." .7 ‘ H :ﬁ' ‘ 7 “‘L‘ ’
r - - ‘—_ 7;, (7 " ~ u_‘ - 7 \ v 4 " “ — ‘1 L
t 5’ ' ' .7 ‘ ‘ I L I L( "V L Ll
. . p _ A _ - V. .
‘ (J g Ekwan (eXIstIng) 7457‘ 7. -- '~ ,‘ M. 7;: ,, LL ‘ I
7‘ ' " 7. “ - . ' : - -. t >+
7 — Horn River Mainline ‘ v 1 v ‘ .' '7 ' £- ". ‘ ,
—‘ 5'. _ , L . f}. . 3 ‘ '7“ ‘ .1 C L ,
:9 --- Travel Route (HlS‘tOflC) . 7 ‘ 7‘ .7 t, , “f ~7 7 _ 7}
‘ I ~ ‘- I f. L- L“ ‘L:" ‘5 ‘ ‘ ' fr‘: L ‘7‘
' L -‘ 7'2‘ ‘- ~-. - ‘ L N ’,.\;:I ' "
, l L Fishing Area (Current) _. J 7 r: - 7 7‘ ~ 7‘ ~-__ 1377. 7‘ -~ '1‘?" . 7?.
L: .‘ \\..‘ I 7* ' _ .u. ' - ‘V 7 4. \‘ rs ‘ 1 ‘ ‘IL .. ' I I
'1 . . . 7 -v, _ “4‘ 3 . .W .9 "- ~s— I
‘7 m Hunting &Trappmg Area (Current) ‘7) ' _ . 7 . - _7 7 21. 7f —7 * _. 7- _‘ a g“; 7:777 7’7 . ‘3
‘ ?,A‘nc‘ . . ¢ - L :g? \q‘ ‘ I L‘ " :1). II .- —‘~a-‘ ,1 L ’ _ ‘ f 1 ”A,“ N ..“f --7 ~‘\‘ 1; .ffj‘
7 ' 7 Provmcnal Bou da .7 ' ? -., ' 1.7 ' 4“ 1* ‘ ‘ ”h; I ‘1‘.“ ' 7
V Lg; n W 7. 7’2“ , ’ '. "LL 7- . L 71/ L 7‘4 ‘7'-“ 7. [l : ', .1 h) —L‘___T
‘7 L- 7 W . _ 7 7 . 7- 7- , . 7 L" 1” 7s" *3 a w," {'77 ,' ?‘J L 7' rpm? " “" L
L 4.: V - , L__ . gm;:’~.';._'_. WA... $ ‘ L ‘1 ,7 :‘l ._W— - ‘xvi u 7 LL 4: mm 'L i x 1 - , 77L, l.— — —__— ELL.._§:— _
Map ID: 001
I I O I O I
._ Traditional Use Areas Identified by Archie Ahnassay
in relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
ALLMAPS ARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA'FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBLH'ION WITHOUT MUTEN PERMISSiON IS STRICTLY PROHIBFTED.THEINFORMATION
7 CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES WTH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPELINE AND IS NOT A COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLET E INVENTORY.
7 DELINBR'HON 0R SUMMARY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION USES AND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOW ON THIS MAP. FOR SPEClFIC USE AREA MAPS PLEASE CON'I'ACTTHE DENETHA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.

interview Summary
interviewee: John Ahnassay Sr.
Date: Juiy 20, 2009 ~ "
Location: Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Adena Dirm
Transiator: Agnes Gaiiant '
Background
John Ahnassay Sr. was born October 27th, 1928. He grew up with 4 brothers and one sister. He
has 9 chiidren of his own. John’s famiiy still lives off the land as he prefers food from the Iand '.
over store bought food. 5;
Hunting and Tragging ~
Iohn’s trapfine is #2928 in Alberta, and he has been hunting on it for as long as he can
remember. 5~
He {earned everything he knows from watching and iistening to his father, Manny Ahnassay,
His father used to trap in BC around the Beaver River {Shekifie River) area, but switched to their .“
current traplihe because he wanted to trap with his friend Pat Beauiieu. .
John hunts and traps from the Chateh reserve to Zama tower along the highway and is stil! able .: ..
to make some money off the pelts he gets. ~
john said that a hang time ago he did not make money trapping because there just wasn’t very e
much wiidlife. He is happy with where he is hunting now because there is an abundance of
beavers, fisher and wolves.
John also hunts moose, and if the opportunity arises, bear. .
John says that there are lots of animals but there has been a decline in moose. He thinks the
decline might be because of the buffalo that were introduced to the area and there might be
some conﬂict between moose and buffalo.
John does not go into British Columbia to hunt and trap because there are no direct roads :
except in the winter and it is a far distance away.

Fishing
in the fall, John would fish around Ekwan Lake (called ’Ahago—tfeh’ {phonetically} in Dene, which
means "in between the shoulder blade”) and Kotcho Lake. He caught northern pike there.
Sites .
a John reports that that there is an old cabin that is in the Beaver River (Shekilie River) area.
He also remembers that there are burials of two children, one of which was his little brother, in
the area between Kotcho Lake and the British Columbia/Alberta border.
'1; John also knows of a burial of an older man on the Shekilie River. The burial structure is still
; visible today.
His grandfather Ahhassay was buried at the Old Man River.
I ' John recalls that as a child he saw graves that had a fence around them, but he does not
5 remember their location. He heard though that an oil company had ploughed the gravesite
away. He is sure that that has happened more than once as there are burials ”all over the
z place”.
John identiﬁed a few settlement areas the Dene Tha’ moved to in the past including Bistcho
: Lake, Rabbit Creek (located just east of the BC border) Old Man River, Zama Lake and Amber
River.
I Trave! Routes
xii. John says that in the past, people used to travel along the Hay River. From there they would go
.. along the Beaver River (Shekilie River) and travel all the way to Ekwan Lake (’Ah—go-tieh’
' [phonetically]). People would travel by canoe and trap along the way.
', Observed Changes
3' Years ago, John says that they could just drink the water from the rivers and lakes on the land
when they were out hunting. Now he has to take store bought water with him.
He does not stay out in the bush much anymore over night as it has become much easier to
return home in the evening since he has owned a vehicle.
5 i John says that he went out last fall and did not see any moose; he said the only thing he saw
i. was the non~native people driving around in company vehicles.

He said he goes out far to hunt moose but found that they have become very scarce. He
befieves that the oil and gas activities scare the animals away. :

Future Generations :
John says he wishes that the younger generation would continue hunting and trapping. He says 3
even though he still goes out to his trapline many other people don’t anymore.
He believes the younger generation has lost interest in traditional ways because they get free
food (weifa re) and they do not have the means of transportation to go out.
Areas to Protect
John said that he wouid like to see his trapﬁne area preserved. He told us that at one time they I.
were going to plough it to pfant trees. He said he did not want them to do this because he had

just set up his traps, and the Oil and Gas company had ploughed over some before and had not ,
replaced them. .

' - ' V y T'.. 77 V 7 '7 W" " ‘k i' "' ’2' r? ’ T ' ' "7"“? ' ' '—-" ' . "" ' ’ .’ ~ .‘7" ‘ " 7,: J ‘ ‘." ——~—-—-—-—“‘" "—+——-" 4M "" 7" 45-51-3'
J x a r f ' 1:; .3 S.“ 3‘. -’ ML - . ,‘J J. ’J', ‘ c) ‘r "m". f :1"; r
. J’ J.» ~ 35%,»: x . ~ «J» M q 5 r l
J I ~ - ; . v .m‘ ' ‘ I‘ . ‘ ' ',, . ‘ . -- . . .
3' J 0 J z w H .r“ » JJ,‘ Jag" ~‘~\ . ~ , . L? <3 a 5 ' r. . H K, r '1 3' Area of Interest
. Xv ' 1“ r-‘ﬁ‘ *1 ~12“ k —t' ‘ JV ' x : 1 g ‘ r J .’l / .25" 1 3' " E
1 .~ " ’ “d. f" " Wk- n . l\ J, ' . ‘ . ‘ 1 4 ._,V J ". : Z.
J ~ =3 ._ “:1. '7 ~‘"‘ 3-:26’? \r‘“ r-' ' ‘3‘ '{x 7 * = ‘ ' 1 I i i V ‘3 r" " w I‘ 1 F
‘ “ t_rI"-‘s ) W : - ' , .l- j J ' '. . ~ . f d < _. ~= IJ
I x - \_ - v _[ P Q I L , _ \ fl,» . ‘j v‘ " l'h . A ‘ ‘ ‘ ' J J . i" 'I‘ ,«Z d
. ‘1' 4‘] '4. 1‘ -‘- 1 2")». .- , ’J‘ . - “ \ $1,: \ 1 .J \, t, ’_ Jae) r
z’ W'- J" 7? 7:10;- . - J " ; J V ;’I£‘.?=ar-',.»»té.r ’3 J 3.x {4.5: :K‘JX - . '. ”(612:5 {I
J ' a - 'J‘ T ;‘ ~ > J- “ Jr“??? _ J-< 'i‘Ja-‘zvszrs , .- ‘ “ J‘TJ w 21*" .~ .. 3 $.95 1"“ . .
2 1 1" l ’ J'-’ '/' _ _ rI/f‘é‘l _ l.‘ I ~ )fn’hk 1 ‘.."-‘£ ex“ Q‘JII .f". 2 IA. '- ac . ﬂ, ‘ _ \‘ ‘5‘; 5" J- ' . {I
‘ V .34" rd ‘ - \ -— J " 1 ’ - 9 ‘ . . N , x3 J'p'. ‘3 ‘ e ﬂrx/ ’ﬁ‘ .\ ‘1‘. Y 5.- 323' 3" l ‘ i4
.9. i ‘4‘ ,7 “xi." :1? .1. . I 7 . 1| I L 7. «.J‘ é; h _ 31" ‘C; I'x. v- .' /‘?f:~, .. 3!
- w- «'-' -. 7» 43"?) R“ -‘ J J 1, . 2 'J ' a J7 ,5» -e- ‘- ‘ _ n - ;-... ‘33: . -- t
-"‘ . . .. . , . _ . _ .‘ “ ’ . i
‘74}, ‘32-: i ‘=—— ~ﬁ . \ Ia ~— < \ #1,). [I 3‘ h“? L '11.-..“ ,I!’ . ‘ n J J
. 73.17;?! "J 4.". 1 K} ”J J} ”J ; 7"} ' 5‘ 5/ {.5 8m. If - ’42:: K‘ ‘ f:
l ‘J’J‘ . " . _ .3... 5' ' { ‘J 'qftt -‘f , , '-T_ I .7 . '1‘“ I 1‘ ‘ 1» ~ . I.
J = a 4. MWJX "f; ‘ 2 :y 1» ,‘ix '3‘ Jr?" .57 —: .‘V t J . “f
"55; .—,«=* .J..-i‘~=r-:\j:€f' '2‘-” J m‘ 3 ‘ “xx" 7. -. _. i2“ ":59 ~.. ‘ x ‘
‘ ‘5 -‘ if” x’ J'. " .'- ‘ ‘\ " :4: v' .7.» ’ ' . I ‘>‘ - j 5", ”I . _ 3 - " ‘ l.
i ' - 4" “.SV‘L: ” ' -':~_"’ '&-:__- ,- ’ ‘ " J',‘ ~sﬁ' :‘3 1" '. u 2‘ 3-" ' - >1
' 1 2.: .'-‘ I—x \"_—;~ 2"";2 ,‘JI; ._ | £ -/ fa ‘} ' * .‘ .2 . . . r a r
$ . I I: 1:; I-.(;;:’ .- ‘ . £4.95: ~" . .~ “ . Y . “ I: I u ‘ 7; ’ g . . - ’2’.
‘ . r'i) .J "r *1 - ~ ‘- 12:". ‘ ‘-"‘~"'J ‘-'-.~ :35 r 1 " < ' " ‘ ' . 2 '
I i - ‘ I .f 7...; v". ’17 "‘ J. " ;‘." ‘ . \\ I IA. .‘ ‘ ;?' J - .‘ ‘ — ‘ l ‘ . ~O- —: ~1
J. 3 4;: 4:232): .54 L ,_ ' ‘39 » >" -, a ‘ .. 4 ‘ ‘ . . m.
‘J .‘=‘;:*:=+=*?-.asg z.‘ '91?" _ “‘ ' ig. T-' ‘-r‘.—_ "g. , ' ' 7'.‘ 4’ 7 " ~‘,~_ 3 “3 : v'“
‘ e .5 ‘3. Y" ~H‘f: ._\. ‘I '“ (Z .9179 ~‘.‘. '1‘; ' m J -' - . s - ' ' ‘
IA 3" .:‘\::; “. ‘J :5 -~- " ‘uu t ’7» - _' .T _ ' ‘If‘.’.':' :I‘ 1:7 ' 'D‘ ‘ ‘ :N “ ‘ ~ ‘ A
J I. A ._ ”rrvi>i\ - 5‘“: " J 1“ ‘ "2“‘v ﬁ‘r‘z' 'I‘I‘IIF':\S - ’ ' ‘ V I A.
“ ”p —-‘ "1’ r‘. 7-“- ,3 ‘ 'vc‘ ' x; '.‘Jl! l. _ .' ,' I .. J‘ '_,_ -
' " - ELX' v" .n‘ 17““ " 1' V "V ‘3 '- .‘ - 7‘ ‘7‘ l I ‘1 I J‘ l" .' r ’1 I ‘ "y 'l ‘ \ ‘0—
4-. ‘1 *‘ 321‘47“? :."‘"" 5 .‘f .V :1— -‘<.~ -;_ . , "1 ’1'! "‘ ,3" Iv‘ r ’ r"-‘ .- , ' 'v ' "I .' r. - '- ' '
'7 H.?.m' V. . :A‘ . :52" ‘ 'V A. "11‘." :2 “, 1' V 47,-?! ’4‘ :2, 1, ."(j’ 1 v '. J J 7
“‘x , "5.3.x. " . “-. ‘7' If. I j"), ”'2" " " ‘1‘ "',".' 'r' ‘. I~ . - .'. J
V2“. ' ?Hw$‘ ‘ ‘ .f ‘ .i, "‘- w" "2' , ‘1 ‘ .—' ,rjxfr'I-f .,0 J -) f .‘ ." ' . ~ J , ‘
_J. ,‘Ffj’ _— ‘ ,‘~_, qr‘ ... J_f' .J'r.’ 'ﬁy/ﬂ,‘ ' ﬁ/ ‘ ’,J' ‘ f1 ' t" " d" ‘.
J \I _ r.1*""'""7~‘-.§L , {<7 ‘_' Mufxﬂmjf I , ' n."‘,-('.".a7 ' - .l‘ " ' ' ' ‘. , A
. . ‘ 3"! ‘4 f \‘3‘ " L“—‘-. ‘ '(34: n‘ ""14 " /- ‘f' ‘L‘M ' t H i! -_ ' '
, "?N‘ f, I‘I —‘\\ , 9“] ;-5\ |f.(:/‘lr.' ’1' I, ,' . I ‘v.— I '& -'. ' ' f ‘ . . . I.
" .,. .2. "x, " 4 K ’-‘ n r’uﬁ‘k' 71' ,-’..J:’ u 3 ‘ A ': -, ' - ' -'
u 'q k}: ' a N “31' f“). ﬁ,(.::‘<‘u7¢ " ’76-?" ' 3 , ; . . '1 ‘ .v-_ '. ' ‘ " ‘ ‘ T
“It — ,_ . 1--“ .31,- i" I , 7‘, j -. ’ \I .. Ii _. . J. .
E __ 1‘ v: 4‘: _ .-‘ J 3' Ir ',.1 , ,1" . ./ / c~ — . . .- u - —
l ‘ v : IE? -'.1n.6"" .5 ' J": ‘t~'.‘¢l..' i- "I? " r. * /, I o”- s L w x; ' 9’
g . ¥,'_..__ "5 J "-m' ,5 ’ ‘ ‘J 3“” V . ' X'ﬁr" 1“” :35 .1 / _.’ 13'/J,‘ ’ 3 ‘ ~ . ‘ , » t '
PﬁfJ-l-y “‘4 ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘IV- ‘ﬁ‘vf/l/{z "LY '//’ ' I 1"" '~ ‘ ~ 3 as“. - ‘ I i A '
- FE'ZQ-s".’ , - ~4. IL- T Q 4"" .r I " ‘ I '{f 'I’ r l (‘1 f I '0' ‘
>. F 3‘» 2” ‘~’ -.~«' , . , ' * u”! '.”-r '. . ' ‘ .
J ‘ 3.7 "13:”?ng -“ ,, " ‘ x .. ‘ 2’“ 95";éﬂ'fl’ .4 - - ’ -
" .f'él‘.‘ v.5 3 , :V f ' F 2513 I . - - ‘ 4"? — ‘T - Tc» : 4 I F} Y -
‘ ;~ ’ 5.1. 9-12,“: -.-1. w" .r ,l = .3 r’L ? K” ‘ ' r ‘ ' ‘L
4L . ‘_J >1 . “I J; I a F‘ .l‘. . . .‘ -.\\, -‘ (I 5“ u
1‘") "L . “2:4 J ' ‘ f ,7 ‘ ‘3 Iran» .
; . 3, ‘57? >7 ' .74: u.‘ r . i"- .' .a . . J . .
- _ ‘ . t: .' ‘ . \ . ' ‘ , ‘ ‘7 ' , .
J 5 . _ ¢ II . J
“N 7 ~ \1 ".- “i 11"." ‘ I “ HR} in g .. ‘
, I\\ ‘ . ‘ W‘ :I '4 ‘ .. . {(4 K‘L" 1"" f .5“ I" g V r .
‘ ‘ ' 1 - ' I {Ilkk s 6') 4 ’ h ' D g
T. “. r ' r. * J-“ (1- u" '- \ ‘~ .
r1__ ' -' M. , - 1;;11" ‘ } __‘_rf’ ‘g—J 'I.‘ j: I
5‘4 3‘ ‘. ' , _. ‘. w — \ "2'; n »'—4:. 'I .‘I :LI K x ‘
“. “. - ‘g ' .—f‘»‘ "' -'””'. ‘ J J" ' '
~ :8 H v- ~- z r . L. . 7 - >
: ':\ L {t J” i‘ V ‘ ‘rI: ‘. 4 -, . .‘\ _ ".‘4‘;_ _I. " . ‘ - I)" l" '- .,. . I- v - ~ ~ 3
J.' 7 ".4 a! .j; -"" 4‘ ' J_gr :v' 2: E ,' - .
'- ~ -I ‘q—Ig ”'41:. . , '. ‘ -. v “I“ I ’J A k
'1‘ 5-5 . 3 - E.“ ‘ II , II ‘I I I! . . V ‘ I. . I‘
‘51-?" -.‘ ’ ;:A ‘. ‘ 1‘ :k" 1‘ I. I ‘ 'j 2‘; 2. 'A > ‘ r ‘r
"3“” ‘-' x. - _ .".—: . ‘ I 'I j ‘ - - '
.\ I- , _' 5‘... . ' J . J . ~ --_
I ‘ - .7 ' - ..' ' ~ I ' . . - ‘ . 74 “
:::\—“‘."‘°¥,— l1? I; ._.. .' ‘ . I- . ' I I} ,v/ ‘ : ' d‘
.5 $ . . J _ ‘ I ‘- '. A I I ’ ‘ I _ . -- .
g ‘-_.7- ; ."'. J - —-“ ~ _ . T
:2; v 3 . .‘ . . .
i 1‘ 1‘ y K - I 0 ' I .‘ .0 ' .
l l "L-r - ‘ , , I ,,——\\ I . . A ~, .
. ' 3 "‘I ( “~ “C: "—‘ ' ' “:12; 7-: . - ‘ ' .ﬁ,. '
} x. I "’ . . . ~ ;~-~- .- .. '3 ”:R ;:;Ff;~‘,. ,...T ;-,1. . , . ‘ 3; ‘ 1?
" “ , I Fm ‘ ‘ "’7 f “‘3 ""- -‘ *3:— ' "~‘-‘ ‘ ‘ ‘7 ?:V-P: 'T—iz : - ﬂ ;‘ . ~ ‘39— . ‘
‘. Far“- I 3’ - " ... '9“; ‘ _ -' V \SJH'Fk‘I‘"Etru;v‘ , .V - V ' u A . '
ﬂy ' 'l, J ”(I T ' I ' ‘ , ﬁr ‘ ‘ ‘ “"“2 ”32%;: .2 < ‘~ 1
‘ ‘ -4. ' . “ J ' 7 ‘ ’ ~ ~ ,~ —‘“':i:—J': ' - -
I '. II I -. ‘_‘. A _ ~ I ‘ __ _ 1“ ‘J ; 1:§._f\ , _ .x*~ ~47" .k.
- J | ‘ ‘ I l q I , -- Q _» - 7‘ I I ‘ _‘—ﬁ N “-‘;::~_:\\‘,_f ' '3
, , . I. 4-22-1. I I J ; . 4 _. — . . l ‘1, - I- _ :th r~——.
v ' J "' “ “”4 " .ntn; ' ' '-.' . J": ' ' .
1‘ 3‘ l‘ ,1 ‘ w “ ' 1' (I .. - ‘ 1 I (. .‘ I H y (.,<.’
f '._ 2:1 . 1 r Fm - c ~ :. * ".I1 . ; ‘ ' ‘; 3 ‘ ‘1' Hi
_ _ - .rﬁ‘: ‘ Mﬂ» ; , A .' " ‘ . . , II. III. “2-
. '3 1": 1 J: ‘3 _' .375 ‘ . . 'L 1 F 1' “q . " ‘ x. I ' ll) l ‘ I 7- l I ;. J’\ 1 J
u w J" ? , .l - ' "C \l ] 3'". ‘ '- ‘ 4
1 i- “ ?,i-. I , 'L -/ - - . . _L w _ ,u ". ‘ .(
> \ a 'L" ‘t\ ' r , o, . - 1. Z | o ' ‘3 1t ‘ I
,2, ~ - - , _- ._.J- J' v , 1:: I ‘ - ; -‘ x. 2‘ . ..
--- ‘h Legend qi" E’.‘ ‘\ ." ‘~~ - —H\ ‘_ ‘ l- .— -'l- -V ’ " ‘ V I i! ‘2'“. . ’ ‘ J 1', ‘ "'~ ’3 ‘ 0 ‘l‘ .\V
- [ J_JI “.4 i) ‘ "‘ ' A .' l) ' t 2.535) .0 _ 1 $3
. _ _ 2 . - o ‘ I 2. ~‘ ‘I ' f, ) . Q
7 I ,5 = Ekwan(exust1ng) ; wH-fx‘ I . 3. 94 ,- e I; ,- 1 'J I
. ' ‘ I2 ~nr ‘ f . ' J —
. u o v 5]) ‘. -1“- , _ -J I :.\ ' 3 .‘ -:: D. '7; J
} — Horn River Mainline m “,ﬁhgj \ “x. ,_ - \ . 'xi‘ . I, 1. I
e ’3‘. "’ I. T‘I‘bf" V . I, I 'I l .. II A: .
: II. 3. g 1 3‘ ~ - _ . . I; l I M 2 II '1 h I t E
» --- WaterTravel Route tam, tr», ‘ ' ' 3 J’ . ~ -. ;
‘ "=‘- H ‘9’ ,3 J , . , J, a ’L x J
I . . . 2‘1. r: ' r' f . ' . . " " ‘ ~ 3
—-- Travel Route (HlStOI’IC) .* ‘ .' 2 . g»- _ 5 .L if
- ,5; . ‘ .- , ' J L I , '1’ ‘ ‘. _
1’" Burlal V -. - ‘. A. ~ '- t ' I i o '3 ‘2 i 1’ ,
I r 2 a ‘ l : I I‘ J] 7.0 ' ‘ ‘L' F" » .-;., :9 I ‘5‘!” J'I:_III 1:35": '-
' - s in ea Historic ‘v , A 1 :‘ﬁ 3-3 «:4. x. a . u in «,2 - -17 ---
t ”A Fih gAr ( ) ‘ 1" " \ ‘1 k .‘ ~ﬂ J =‘ . V: Iﬁ‘ai'u I ‘ ’7}. é'ﬁ" :Ii
. . . l ‘ o I ' \ ' "W ‘ ‘ § '3 . I ." 2:, “ II 7 _ - 4
- Trapping Area (HIStOI‘IC) I1. ‘ . — ML “A . J *7 J, - 9,. . "42}F'W", , k I
I 1"" l” l I ‘ " "" - - " ‘ ~J ‘ '3- I , J ~ “£735 ~15: _ 3 '- .wv- ,
'5 J: . . ' . 2; r " y .3» i .23 .. '. 'J‘p '. 1 -' ‘ F i .31? : '.." 3‘" 531,
EL ,Provmcnal Boundary 1: ~ 3 J . : nae) -. . *? ’4! ' X n. 7 } - '4'“ L_‘ ~‘ .J
'9 ‘22:" J | 1" ‘~ ' , '3. ' Q, ‘ 't" 1 « I ”t — u
.1 MM . , - , u ‘ I l ,’ 'y — —
_ ~ _ _- . - , . ,_ .. 1 ‘3 3‘ L a :9 -, x '5' 1-7 “ a, ' "srim \ 2' ’
j: .- A 5 , A L _, 713383;.” ‘_.-- ' J. n: - . VJ. ,u ._ T." ‘2‘52‘4'1‘ - , L1 1 k“. 1.. 3---...“ "d! " ' ._ L
3. Map ID: 002
Traditional Use Areas identified by John Ahnassay Sr
' ‘ I t' t th I C da Horn R er Ma'nl'ne P'p I'ne
‘ ALL MAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION \MTHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITEDTHE INFORMATION
, , CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FORTHE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPEUNE AND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE lHVENTORY,
i1} DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION USES AND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOVW ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USE AREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.

Fieid Survey Summary Q 3
Participants: Charlie Chissakay, Robert Metehooyeah, Ernest Chonkoiay I
Date: March 13 ~28, 2009 ‘
Field Survey: TransCanada Cabin Mainline Rare Plant Fieid Survey
Hunting and Tagging
During the field survey Charlie, Robert and Ernest identified many sites that contained suitable ﬂ.
habitat for furbearers that are important for trapping such as beaver, rabbit, marten, mink,
muskrat and weasel. . Additianaliy, Charlie, Robert and Ernest identified habitat suitable for s ..
unguiates such as moose and caribou.
Charlie, Robert and Ernest noted that these focations were atso habitat to a number of other 1? ~ '
animals such as deer, lynx, cougar, coyote, bear, fox, woif, wolverine, otter, squirrel, badger,
buffaio, wiid horses, porcupine and a variety of birds such as grouse, eagie, hawk and owl.
In addition to animal sightings, a number of game migration traits were observed by the fieid
crew as well as tracks and animal dens. . .~
' Medicine and Berries .
Charlie, Robert and Ernest identified many of the sites as medicinal piant gathering sites as they '
exhibited several medicinal piants of importance to Dene Tha’ such as fungi, common juniper, ; i ~
ground juniper, wild mint, tamarack and rat root. .
They also identified some trees such as birch that are used for traditional purposes (collection '
of tree gum and sap). '
Charlie, Robert and Ernest also identified the harvesting of berries and plant resources as a
traditional resources activity on these lands. Berry resources on these sites include high and low
bush cranberries, northern gooseberry, Saskatoon berry, wiid red raspberry, buffaio berry, '
black gooseberry, chokecherry, common blueberry and wild black currant. '?

Sites
5 M Jean-Baptiste and Abraham identified an old settlement, hunting and fishing camps and
E numerous gravesites at the confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River. They
‘ consider this area a spiritual and historic site, which is also valued as a teaching area. The site
. _ also has a source of drinking water.
' At the south end of the Kotcho River channel lean-Baptiste and Abraham identified a
' hunting/ﬁshing camp. The area is considered a spiritual/historical site and is valued as a
; teaching site. The site also has a source of drinking water.
Travel Routes 1
Jean-Baptiste and Abraham identified an old foot trail and some dog/horse pack trails at the
Little Hay River crossing.
At the confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River, Jean-Baptiste and Abraham
identified trails.
They also identified an old foot trail and other dog/horse pack trails at the Hay River crossing.
Jean-Baptiste and Abraham reported that Townsotoi Creek was used as a water travel route by
Dene Tha’ in the past. They used to travel by canvas canoe.
There are also old dog/horse pack trails by the Kyklo Creek crossing that were used for the
' annual migration.
At the south end of Kotcho Lake river channel Jean-Baptiste and Abraham identified annual
migration trails to and from Kotcho Lake. These trails are dog/horse and foot trails.
The Kotcho River channel was also used for travelling by canoe in the past.
I . Gbsewed Changes
Jean—Baptiste and Abraham explained that, in the past, before the creation of borders, people
" hunted, trapped and fished anywhere.

_e_..d ,, ..$.... U. ..m i
DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah -
Harvesters: Steven Tsonchoke, Robert Tsonchoke
Date: August 311:0 September 1, 2009 3 ‘
Survey: TLU Fieid Visit i;
Hu nttm and Tra
Steven Tsonchoke holds BC trapline # 756T014 where he hunts and traps. ; ';
During the field visit Steven and Robert identified traéls at the Little Hay River crossing that I
Dene Tha’ people use annually.
Steven and Robert used to go hunting at the confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and g '
Kotcho River as well as the Hay River crossing. i .
At the Townsotoi Creek crossing Steven and Robert identified annual hunting and migration
trails. ' 2
Steven and Robert used to hunt in the area of the Kyklo Creek Crossing. In the area there are ;
also trails towards Kantah, Fontas and Fort Nelson. : '.
Both Steven and Robert used to hunt ducks, geese and other birds at Kotcho Lake.
Fishing " .
Steven, Robert, and other Dene Tha’ harvesters fished at the confluence of the Hay River, .
Shekilie River and Kotcho River and at the Hay River crossing.

l I Sites
Steven and Robert identified a historical site at the confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River
and Kotcho River. The site is located north of the fork and east of the forks around the river
bend. The site consists of cabins and grave sites. Two of Steven’s sisters are buried there.
5 There are also campsites at Kotcho Lake (south end of Ketcho River channel and west end of
f, . the Lake Creek channel).
Travel Routes
; ' At the Little Hay River crossing Steven and Robert identified hunting trails that were used with
' dog/horse packs. They explained that, in the past, 5 groups of families used to travel together
to go on an annual migration throughout their territory to hunt and trap
Steven and Robert said that in the past they would use canoes made out of canvas or birch and
spruce bark to travel home from their trapline.
Steven and Robert identified trails where the Hay, Shekilie and Kotcho Riverjoin and at the Hay
River crossing. These trails would have been used in the past with horse or dog packs.
Steven and Robert explained that the rivers were also used for travel by canoe.
Similar observations were made at the Townsotoi Creek Crossing. The creek was used in the
past as a travel route when the water was high. Otherwise dog/horse pack trails were used to
get to and from this area.
Steven and Robert used totravel to Kotcho Lake for harvesting by dog/horse pack and canoe.
Last time they visited this area was in 1996.

DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah : 5
Harvesters: Victor Talley, Andrew Talley a
Date: September 2 —3, 2009
Survey: TLU Field Visit 1
‘ Hunting and ﬂagging
Victor and Andrew trap on BC Trapline #756T001. They also used to hunt and trap during the I
annual migration at Little Hay River crossing. They used to have a trap cache in the area. "
During the annual migration they would live in tents.
Victor and Andrew hunted and trapped at the confluence of the Hay, Shekilie and Kotcho Rivers
and around the Hay River crossing. ;
While visiting the Sahtaneh Creek crossing they observed mink, otter and beaver in the area. i ..
ﬁshing '
Victor and Andrew used to fish at the confluence of the Hay, Shekiiie and Kotcho Rivers and at
the Hay River crossing. ;
While visiting the Sahtaneh Creek crossing they observed small fish in the creek. '4
Medicine and Berries
They used to pick diamond willow fungus and mint at the Little Hay River crossing. . .
Sites
Victor and Andrew identified hunting camps at the Little Hay River crossing.
They also identified a historical site at the confluence of the Hay, Shekilie and Kotcho Rivers.
Victor and Andrew expiained that Dene Tha’ people used to live in this area. "I

j... Trave! R0 utes
‘ At the Little Hay River crossing, Andrew and Victor identified dog/horse pack foot trails and
explained that Dene Tha’ people also used canoes made from canvas, spruce or birch bark to
travel on the river to this area. They also traveiled the Hay River on their annual migration using
E ‘ rafts, canvas canoes and Spruce/birch bark canoes to go back home to the Hay Zama Lake area.

. Victor and Andrew explained that they have not been to Townsoitoi Creek or Kotcho Lake
(south end of Kotcho River channei) before, but race” that their parents and grandparents
traveiled in this area. .

DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah E ‘
Harvesters: Howard Tsonchoke, Charhe Chissakay
Date: September 4*5, 2009
Survey: TLU Fieid Visit a
Hunting and Tregging
Howard Tsonchoke holds BC trapline # 7561014. '
Howard and Chartie used to go hunting in the Little Hay River area. They trap just northwest of '
the Little Hay River. '. ‘2.
Howard and Charlie also used to go hunting at the confluence of the Hay, Shekilie and Kotcho .
Rivers. They also do winter trapping southeast of this area.

They used to hunt at the Hay River crossing. A few years ago they made a raft to ﬂoat 5 moose '
down the Hay River. .
Howard also used to go hunting at Kotcho Lake (south end of the Kotcho River channel) from .
1980 to 1993. He recalls that his father, Emile Tsonchoke and other Elders (Johnny Chonkolay, , '
Charlie Lefou and Billy Kipling) a” used the Kotcho Lake area a long time ago.
Howards further explained that the name of Kotcho Lake (Kotcho ke’) means “a big place/iake”

in Dene.
Fishing '
Howard and Charlie fish at the Little Hay River for pickerel, jackﬁsh and suckers. ,
They aiso fish at the Hay River and at the confluence of the Hay, Shekilie and Kotcho Rivers. _

Pi. a_d____ Suwa. mam

: DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah

§ “ Harvesters: Roger Sutha, Rocky Yatchotay

‘ Date: September 6—7, 2009

0 Survey: TLU Field Visit

~ Hunting and "framing
Roger traps on trapline #7567001 in BC.

' He also uses the Sahtaneh Creek crossing for hunting. His iate father and other Eiders hunted
and trapped in this area.
Roger used to hunt at the Kotcho River channel in late 1980’s to earh/ 1990’s.
In the past, his father and other Elders used the Kotcho River channel and the area around the
Kyklo Creek crossing for hunting and trapping.
More recentiy Roger hunted and trapped around the Hay River crossing. He was last there in
the winter of 2007/2008.
He also hunts and traps at the fork of the Hay River, the Shekiltie River and Kotcho River as Wei}
as aiong the Little Hay River.
Fishing
Roger’s father and other Eiders used to fish at the Sahtaneh Creek crossing.

. Roger used to fish in the Kotcho River channel in late 1980’s to early 1990’s. In the past, his
father and other Elders also used to fish in this area.

5 ' Today he fishes at the forks of the Hay River, the Shekilie River and the Kotcho River.

Shes gt
Roger has a cabin 7 miles west of the Alberta/BC border and another one northwest of the
confluence ofthe Hay, Shekilie and Kotche Rivers. 5 ‘
In the late 1990’s to 2001 Roger used to work in the winter time around the Little Hay River. ;
Travel Routes " ;.
Roger used to travel around the Sahtaneh Creek area in the winter. ;
Roger’s father and other Elders used to trave! through the Kyklo Creek crossing area. He reports E
that there are migration trails that were traveiled by dog or horse pack in the area. People also
travelled by canvas canoe. I '
Roger said he had never been to the Courvoisir Creek area, but recails that his father, Louison 1
Ahkimnachie and other Elders have visited this area in the past before the creation of trapiine
boundaries in BC.

Roger identified annual migration trails near the Hay River crossing. These trails were travelled ..
by dog/horse pack and the river was travelled by canoe (canvas or spruce/birch bark). In the 2
spring time they used a raft on the river.
The Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River were used as travel routes by canoe in the past :
and more recently by motorboat. g 5

: DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah,
i“ ‘ Harvester: . Albert Samantha, Chariie Tsonchoke
Date: September 8-9, 2009
t h Survey: TLU Field Visit
3. ~ Traditionai Knewledge
Aibert and Charlie are eXperienced making moose callers from birch bark.
' Hunting and "nagging
: Aibert traps on Alberta trapline #88 and Charlie traps on BC trapline # 756T014.
Aibert reports that there is a grizzly bear near Long Lake/ Rainbow Lake past White Muskrat
Creek.
' Albert and Charlie used to hunt in the Little Hay River area and aiong the Hay River.
During the fly-over they saw two bull moose at Townsoitoi creek.
Albert and Charlie used to hunt and trap around Ketcho Lake (south end of Kotcho River
channen.
Fishing
They both have fished in the Little Hay River and in Kotcho Lake (south end of Kotcho River
. channeD.
; Sﬁes
' Albert has a cabin southwest of Rainbow Lake.

Travei Reutes
Albert and Charlie identified annual migration trails in the area of the Littie Hay River, the Hay
River and to and from Kotcho Lake.

They used to travel by dog/horse packs and canoe made from canvas or bark (birch/spruce).
Occasionally they made rafts to travel on the river. z.
They used to travel northwest of Kotcho Lake, beyond Three Hills towards Fort Liard around to
Fort Nelson, Kantah, Fontas and Hay Zama Lake‘ They were East in this area in 1980 when they 5
travefled to Fort Nelson and back. .
Neither Albert nor Charlie had been to the Sahtaneh Creek crossing, but they reca” that their
parents had been in this area long time ago.

5 Sﬁes

Charlie, Robert and Ernest identified cabins, a historic settlement and historic/spiritua! sites;

: grave sites were also noted on some of the sites.

‘ “ Some of the water bodies encountered were classiﬁed as drinking water sources by Charlie,
‘ Robert and Ernest.

' Other areas were identified as teaching areas. - -

.F......§..e...3 .d. _ Su_..e.. ..ay

DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah

‘ Harvesters: David Wasp Colin, John B. Wasp Colin

5 Date: September 10—11, 2009 -

e ‘ Survey: TLU Field Visit

Traditionai Knowledge
David, John and Robert found a spruce tree structure at the Little Hay River site that Dene Tha’

~ people used for tanning moose hides.
Hunting and Tragging
John traps and hunts 0n trapline #88 in Alberta.
John started trapping at the age of 13 years. His father wouid travel with the family to Kahntah
and Fontas during the Dene Tha’ annual migration on horse pack traits.

' iohn used to go hunting in the Little Hay River area.
John had never been to the Kotcho Lake area before but he remembers stories his father

~ shared with him about the area. His father used to hunt and trap there a tong time ago. During
the field visit, they saw a cow moose with a calf and a bald eagle in the Kotcho Lake area.
During the field visit at Courvoisir Creek the crew observed one bull moose and one bu” caribou
just east of the pipeline right-of-way.
Fishing
John’s father aiso used to go fishing in the Kotcho Lake area.
' Trevei Routes
_ john identified an old dog/horse pack trail on each side of the Littie Hay River.

-aeld ..;S..U..r. _m . . ;
DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah E ‘
Harvesters: Steven Lefou, Thomas Didzena ‘ “
Date: September 1243, 2009 ‘
Survey: TLU Field Visit H
Traditional Knowiedge
Steven and Thomas explained that birch and spruce trees were used to make canoes. . f
Neither has used the Kotcho Lake area, but both remember stories of Elders using the area.
Hunting and ﬂagging
Steven traps on BC trapiine # 7561014 and Thomas on EC trapiine # 756T001. '
. Steven has hunted and trapped along'the Little Hay River with his father since he was 12 years ..
old. They would get to the area by foot with dog/horse packs.
Steven and Thomas hunt at the Hay River crossing area. :.
Both used to hunt and trap at the confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River. I
Both harvesters used the Sahtaneh Creek crossing area for hunting and identified an annual ' _
migration trail. Their parents and other Elders used to travei this area many years ago. "
Steven and Thomas both hunt in the Kyklo Creek area. ‘ '
Fishhtg A
Steven remembers fishing with his father at the Little Hay River crossing since he was 12 years
01d. :
Steven and Thomas use the Hay River crossing area during their annual migration to dry their
fish before they travel home on the river. .- .

Both harvesters used to fish at the confluence of the Hay, Shekilie and Kotcho Rivers.
‘ Sites
Steven and Thomas identified an old settlement at the confluence of the Hay, Shekilie and
5 ‘ Kotcho Rivers. This site was also used as a gathering place. Steven and Thomas also reported
: grave sites in the area and that Emile’s Tsonchoke sister (McCarthy) is buried in this area.
Travel Routes
- Steven remembers that he would travel with his father to the Little Hay River area from Chateh
to hunt and trap. He remembers the trip they took Into this area in 1974, it would take 6 hours
. one way. It’s a one day trip breaking trails with snow shoes for the dog team.
During the field visit Steven and Thomas found an old foot trail in the area of the confluence of
the Hay River, the Shekilie River and the Kotcho River. They also observed a hollowed poplar
tree (Culturally Modified Tree) with axe marks and an old 5 gallon pail.
They reported that Dene Tha’ people used to travel on the river to and from the forks using
canoes or rafts.
Steven and Thomas identified trails leading into the Kyklo Creek crossing area that are still
being used today. They explain that Dene Tha’ people also use the creek to travel by canoe
when the water is high after spring trapping.
' Concerns
Both harvesters expressed their concern about the Project and its impact on land, water and
especially on muskeg. They are concerned about the reclamation process and think it is
. important to ensure that there is no damage to land, water and wildlife.

DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah
Harvesters: James Danais, Curtis Talley " ‘
Date: September 14—15, 2009
Survey: TLU Field Visit ~
Hunting and Tragging
James traps on Alberta trapline #88 and Curtis on BC trapline #756T001. ; 5
Both James and Curtis remember their parents telling stories about hunting in the Kotcho Lake Q: .~
area and other fakes north of Kotcho.
Curtis’ family used the area of the confluence of the Hay River, Shekiiie River and Kotcho River
for trapping and hunting during the annual migration until 1999. 1:
James said that they go hunting in the Little Hay River area where the proposed pipeline is .
crossing. ;
Both harvesters said they go to the Hay River crossing area for hunting. i
Fishing ' "
Both James and Curtis remember their parents telling stories about fishing in the Kotcho Lake
area and other lakes north of Kotcho.
Sites .
Curtis’ family has 2 cabins in the area of the conﬂuence of the Hay River, the Shekilie River and
the Kotcho River. They use these cabins during the annual migration when they go hunting and "
trapping. One cabin is located m the south west, the other in the south east from the forks. He .;
was last in the area in 1999. ,

Travei Routes

Curtis’ family used to travel to the area of the confluence of the Hay, Shekiiie and Kotcho Rivers
by dog/horse pack or canoe. Some peOple used a saddle horse to get there.

James Danais reported that he travels on the high ground through the Little Hay River crossing

i area for hunting. Curtis’ trapline is just northwest of this area and he used to travel through this

E area by dog sled, dog packs, snowshoes and later with skidoo.

.f ' Both James and Curtis identified a migration trail around the Hay River crossing that they would

' take to go hunting.

' They also used to hunt at the Townsoitoi Creek crossing area which they would access by trails
ieading into the area.

DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah
Harvesters: Harvey Denechoan, Thomas Talley
Date: September 16—17, 2009 e _
Survey: TLU Field Visit
Hunti. and... .ua ,
Thomas Taliey traps on trapline # 88 in Alberta.
Thomas and Harvey used to go hunting and trapping in the area of the Ekwah meter station
(east end of pipeline). z~~
Both Thomas and Harvey used the Little Hay River crossing area for winter, summer and fall '
hunting. ~
Both Thomas and Harvey used the Hay River crossing area for hunting and they pointed out .
annual migration traiis leading into the area. ;
Harvey’s father, Wiliie Denechoan and Thomas’ father, Jean Marie Talley used the Kotcho Lake f
area for hunting and trapping, 3
Both harvesters used to hunt at the confluence of the Hay River, the Shekilie River and the
Kotcho River.

Fishing :
Harvey and Thomas used to fish at the Hay River crossing and at Kotaho Lake. . .
Theirfathers used to go fishing in the Kotcho Lake area during their annual migration route. ' '

;ﬁ Shes

1; Harvey and Thorrias identified the area around the confluence of the Hay, Shekiiie and Kottho

Rivers as an old Dene settlement area.

u Travel Routes

Harvey and Thomas reported a travel route from Chateh to the southwest of Ekwan Lake, back

southeast to Long Lake (Rainbow Lake] and from there to Bassett Lake. From there they wouid

go back to Chateh and the Hay Zama Lake area.

Annual migration traiis lead into the Hay River crossing area that Dene Tha’ used for hunting.
Harvey and Thomas eXplained that major rivers and creeks are like highways for DTFN.

.l A trail Eeads into the Kotcho Lake area, which was used by their fathers to go hunting.

1 , L, f , ”1 .J;{ J: :r- .2”:- . » “v..- -: Y -~ w “'1 - ‘! f "1' "” Amumrn-Ilr-r} i
’ l1 1 1 v1. 693% 9.14“}:3! 53,1”. * - 1, ‘1 ?;ezﬂ ;
1 r \1 1%.?)743 {AV 1 13!?» J g» A; g: -_ ,. Area oflnterest i .--J
A . M 11%;” ~a:;{ﬁ:fi;m- t 2: g n. A:Tfﬁt‘ j”; “\- ‘52" .43A- ’3? .1 H l | f .
- .- ~ - . -' *172:,;._ _ " ,-1 s ~1 -« -9: A' .T ‘- a "V 1, ,' $425,333.34; -- ‘ ‘ I
- ,/ - . ~44 <'1 A315» «1 > m m A =
" v’r’ ] ' .,1*f': ~- 7‘1””35‘ 1 i; , IL§£§,—’g.. «Tsvaaa ' . I ~:
- ; ‘1; >1 1 '1 '1 5 {_ . , V \1 . “¥r‘sesugq ‘ a? 2‘ '
.— \Q” N} 9 f ‘x Q i " J 1 f ' 5 \\ '{Aat’ii'ff-E‘ 1, :3}?- ‘
1 . A AA _ 1/1.“ ~ K , 1 . M A A « . A
~ @4003 - - : , -- e - \ , v - A r 4 :
‘ 7 ' 5 _.1 5 1. -‘ $2: -~ .~- \\ I I 1 ﬁf'si’ ”" 1 3 “- ‘ 1'
.‘f 1" -' ‘ " ¢ .11 ?,‘é ' ‘5 , pplif-w, H‘ h. 3‘“ ‘ﬁ‘ ‘ '{‘ ‘ : -:."A‘:y-‘11-‘:;Iifl . . \ ; '
I 1 :2. x1; I *1"? Q ‘ -*. ' g“ {A 09 AA. :f/ ‘31; A 1: *
.. fl _ 3.45501: » -..'/"' 4 . ‘ (Q \-‘ a \\'E\_\ ‘ gi-g'xf“ 1.“:i; »- - 1 ;
f} f)" 1 ' 4‘ J"? ‘2" ~A- .'- ' " I I ( ' J K . ltﬂ 'T. ‘\‘\-n_\ ’8' ﬁ%;_‘ ‘ 1 ;% r
3‘ ~ W... " ' (jﬁjAJﬁ/z w..- I ,3? r ' ' \ 71 54312:; x 1-: ~41» s»: . 17:33.?! . I
“‘“M‘T‘” Tsy L: 9 z - r‘kﬁ I'L '; g 3T»; ‘QQTT =1, “T: :‘--A:'1*C ' ‘ {5, w
A . h gatiti ’i’iﬁ. “,3, , ‘ ,_ ‘H _ n o I k‘. 7“... - j ' OaT-u‘a’r~ 5—7; ; 77 - ‘7 1 - '1 1 \_ -1 : . j . ."ig‘ﬂ a .
' ’ r1171“ Wm = .é‘ilw -- 1‘ “AVLV‘T/ ﬂ *5: - 6““ ????Am j. - ’. a
‘ Q ‘j {6% ‘ A i' —. 5-1c. I I; " " . £6“? 7;. ”1“. . ﬁr FE": - '--~; 11%
- ’ ‘ ‘ -' A V - '1 P» . . LA. \ V * , ' IFL‘ ‘7 “74"“ - j". -‘.c 1 {i IAJSJm 1-. v . ‘ ’
.. . . 51-1..- h» 1, _ _. , .61. 1. E? - . 1, - ~ , _ g .
-/ .. , -*- AA ‘Eﬁ‘ '_ ‘véjAz-m , ."El’ \H‘ ' “€ng gl;ﬁ:7;1_é,{}l«-1~ °Cabins 1 l
11‘ ."Vju, ‘ f’ ~Hunting&TrappingArea . _ = ‘1 MM” ‘. r a; 094"” ‘ ‘ﬁﬂ: 2c»_ -CMTs A ‘
‘T - «1‘ , — A wk flax”; ,. 31+ ~Horse Hold , 1 *
4”" IQ WW 1 x , W1; PW ° 1 “5; "Jr”; -5 .Trails "1 ,' : j
ﬂ {s} ' ' 1 . -' 1.1 R 6% M . w . ‘t A *3}? ~Hunting,Trapping&F'Ishing Area ’ “
1- +3551. ‘ 1 49'. 5g / '. .‘o‘i‘ " _ 1 1 ’ , . tj-Ezfr . -Hunﬁng&Fishing Camp
‘3; ‘W E '7 , Vz‘ '- ‘ f -- "5*" y " ~ 1 I . .5 A ~.,%-?'<1i AEPT: °Berries ‘ . ,
.25" -. ‘55.: . - ' .. 1' 1' r 1‘ ”11ft: ) i." 1" :uggt 1\; 1' ‘V .— -MedicinalPlants .1'
, -1 ~ '5’" ,.- V " .. - . ‘ ' 3’9 .1 \ ‘ . . ﬂ, , -Gravesites g x
W ‘ » >1}! 1'1: "'— 7 4" .- ’1 — " w. ‘ 'Humi"9'T'aPP!“9&Hs”"9 A'ea -Historic Settlement 1 ‘
’ * -' 1 . 1 .~ . 1- ,;.»_1. _. -Huntmg&Fishmg Camp _ .
J . 1 ,. 1. . 1 1. Gathenng Place ~
1 new 321*, r e9, .1“ 1 A 1 ‘11.: *MedicinalPlants . .. .
1-19:- Jt— . ,gq,.1.,14._.. , g _ _., ﬁ _ { vBerries SplntualSrte 11 I
‘1; f" ‘37:“ :1? ’1'; mg? + j -SpirituallHistoric Site 1 'D""'“"9 waterswme « 1 A
' i " #23: £1; LLR f-W - . ' '5 ~Drinking WaterSource J
.' )‘W” -Snare Post ﬁr "NI I w" J oTrails .
‘ 1-3-1... 1‘ eSquirrelDen $2.6” " :3 51 - W8” 7 .
.1 2. > _ 1 -Trails !,*r— ' - ff 1 . ‘ ‘
r‘ 7 11- -TrapSet ‘ .1- J , 1
*5»: -Medioinal Piants 7‘3 — - _ ‘ f 4
‘ 1 'Hunting.Trapping&FishingArea ' 1 1— . , a

1? 1-“: “1 H’nﬁngArea I " - ‘3' ' . _ - 1- R H ﬁ arr ingArea A A

V 1-17.35 ‘A '7 . . . ~' -; -~ 1 ' 7“ :T a 213:7-1-151-95‘ - 7 ~ I ‘ ‘
‘ g ,‘ ~MedlcmalPlants *"xeqp,ﬂf¢1”dg : ‘T “:8 ‘3“, 1} 1. If..- ., 1 A
7:, 1 - 11:.31'1.$:,,,“:“:—T""" «~- —- - —~ -' ~ 4, ' 1 _ , - 1 z, _:_‘_%_W ‘ a ”fl - . ,‘ ..-

’ - " — . 1i-3—“l.‘:1=';"‘ -Trails - 1 '- ‘ ’ _ '- T?" -' “ “.i-“T '

- ,:_-.1 '- ~3-r11f‘ . . ~ .—‘ 1 '- . -

e' ’15??? A '6'; 4.9! .geMTSCIa M rk .41} -Hunhng& Fishing Area ' - ' ‘ 37" a @1153” ‘7 1‘. q“ 1 '1 4 f‘ ‘ .

. 1 .. 1 1 ' ?4 ‘1-11-f-'«' ‘ 0 ar w a s ,. L1 . ‘1 .. 1| ‘ a 1
-. ' 1&1! ' ,.~*1'Sp*:f€§ 3*": .‘j °Hunﬁng&FishingArea ,_ r -/ 4".4;-«Ue=.iﬂﬂ.igllmxk 1 i
" ‘1‘231‘.—; $1 'HWIZ 3 .l' 11:315.?I ¥ J ‘gii 52;:1J; .‘ .1 4. :_ 2;)“ - 1. 1‘ 1. , 1/6 '3’. OCMTS fit A“ I l

'3 ,;5;.§_‘.,§.1 {1‘5 .‘dg1f_¥¢a g;_1:3;1”§5§~1 oHunting,Trapping&FishIngArea ;- . . 1 ;_1 "*ln' Berriesna a ‘ |
‘;o If . t * “t a .I' '_l '0 ' v - A ‘ )T' i '1 ‘ 1“ - ““ﬁfA $.39: : " “ v Q 'V‘ r - : :7‘21‘: - V J" I “ IL‘Q " 'A' . o I ' j’- ,* I
1’. . ‘\ . »\ 1‘ :7 _ . A $1 -’ >2 ;,.','_‘,: >(\; .A,;.-1 r , ‘- . . :9] .. 5. W oHunﬂngCamps ’a'f . 3: 1
leg“! . “ﬂ; ___ {J T—f; IT -.-‘;’v~;_-‘:3':.. .1” _ l*‘“ J. .{ 1;“;1‘": loHideTanning Structure . 3131'} ' :_.J
3202:7111 sz_ ~31»? “11;;511'1g‘;-é:; ' .1- 71".)5" _..,-:[_14_,‘.; .W , +7 I 1’ / ‘ 1~" 1'1“; ‘ :3- '1’ us"; ' 1 -Hunting.Trapping& ﬁshing Area 1 1," 1 1 ,-
51:1” -. 1.1;; 3.2-1. 1$1- - .4 AMA“ 1-3.5. :; A ﬁgﬁl", * ‘1 dpa-w ,. \‘u- r- 7/1.!

- I '1 ,1 .' w?" ‘1 hrTL' " ' 3.11m; :.:-:-,;1c“ .; ---r~ ‘ ' 1 ‘~ 1- .~ .-1'.'7‘. .A' 1 1 '
'l a Legend ’2" .51” *- 3»: -1 21315-1- ,, gr.“ ’ 084L615 , rhjrﬁj" {A 2
Fir: 1,;‘TH “2-.- 112‘: 31ft}: 1 ~ K _ “f {*1}; , - 1
‘1 9;, E Ekwan Pipeline (existing) 29'»? 1;; ’1 ,1 {3-1: I, -'_-T_ :éz'g-T, ' .- 'y , " ,. ,; " ‘
.’ l": ‘, . . ‘ "l’;T 1." :31. r :1: _, Ir"; 5 7 .‘TIJ.‘ ’7/4 ' t d ‘ f _‘ I . _
‘ -' — Horn River Mainline ---." ‘ 7‘9; " £47”: £3“ Q ' 7 f: 14 , ; 1
'5' ‘ - “55.1- *1" 2”)": ' I "P‘b-‘v‘ ‘-'-.'*" 1- jwhk- - ‘ 1.. 1—” ,— ». A ‘9; 1, “ :
I D TLU Survey Locations: {3:53,}? gin; ‘-;5?7I~.§35‘1 A (r, > __ . ‘v 7 RT. . 1.1. ‘ W
, .. fl" [ 5",»4 . . 4. 1‘ . P...
. - ‘.' ‘ 1 ,ﬂ‘ ’1’ _ ~ 4“ I .
A . .1 _¢ m ~ a 1
' 4 2 Little Hay RiverCrossing ‘91 -‘.af";_'_1',.f ’ 3-1 I W - - 1 - L’ ‘
- 3 Conﬂuence ofthe Hay R.. Shekilie R. and Kotcho R. ‘ 5 7‘; :- 1' i .1 ‘3; 1. 1' 1' '1 Kv’ ,,Z .1 L ﬁ- A
1* ’4 4 Hay RlverCrossing 1 1. _ 1 '3' r" _ ‘7 \ 1 1, o’, '1‘ g A
, q 5 TownsoitoiCreekCrossing . g» . .1 — ~1 , > - . J. «I ’. ‘ . I . ~ “A “J
6 Kyklo Creek Crossing , 1’. ‘ 2‘ ‘ ‘— x my ‘ 4f 'Q , '1
1 1 7 Metladoa Creek Crossing \ﬁ . T. Q A . . \\_ i (1; 0/ 5 g 1 ‘ I
7' 8 Sahtaneh Creek Crossing ;.-_ -. J 1 - ° ‘ 4- _ , ‘1 ' “NJ; ,. 4f ‘ I
i 9 Courvoisir Creek Crossing ”.3 2 .. so .. .. , 1_ - k < .‘ 1 . ,' , 1 1‘ r1 _ _ i || ‘
> u"; 10 Kotcho Lake(south endofriver channel) . 1 m” 1 “‘f- ,f—DTL—«1 / 2” ‘ 1 _- '7 4 3f _ 1: ,_ wind? _'_‘,'
‘ ~ .' , n h" 1 _ _ :y‘!: 1' ‘.. -.., _ ,r-A T _._ ‘ a, f "‘ 1 1 ‘ , V l I. ; ' 5 H I‘;-v*}_¥:’i’.- T-x _'.,' —.
:, V39! 4 'O'WQ: ﬂ? 2 a I; o «2 l "5.5 .WwA. f I M6 ' 1 Q, 9—:— 1
. 1 'ﬂ .1 d ‘ ., . :q '5 .1? r' . ' ' .* i - __ ‘1 1.";1. j: » J '
‘- .4‘311 Q4»? 1‘ , l A , , J9 “’-, _A a» S I
DRAFT DATE i i
1 0/29/2009
. - SOURCE A 1
TLU FIeId Survey Locations Dem. AAA", NAAGABATAL L;
FIGURE NUMBER 2 2
j .
11,1

Participant: Ernest Chonkoiay
Date: June 16—25, 2009 ' hi
Field Survey: TransCanada Cabin Mainline Wildlife Survey 3
Hunting and TraQQing I
Ernest observed various signs of wildlife activity on the survey sites including moose rubs, bear
markings on trees, animal tracks, animal dens and migratory bird nesting areas. A groundhog '
den was also observed on one of the field survey sites. ~ "
Ernest identified many areas as prime habitat for animals that Dene Tha’ hunt or trap such as '
moose, black bear, grizzly bear, caribou, wolf, coyote, rabbit, beaver, marten, mink, lynx, deer :
and grouse. :.
Medicine and Berries . "
Ernest observed the presence of wild raspberries, northern gooseberries, common blueberries

as well as high and low bush cranberries on many of the survey sites.

Other harvesting activities Ernest identified on those sites include medicinal plant gathering .. ,.
such as Iabrador tea and tamarack. ‘
Shes '
Ernest identified a trapper/hunter camp at one of the survey sites. Some sites featured drinking

water sources.
Travel Routes ,
Whiie on the Wildlife Survey, Ernest also identified a number of game migration traits. ;

Fem Sume _

Participant: Ricky Pastion

: Date: March 16 ~ 18, 2009 (wildlife) and July 13 -— 23, 2009 (aquatics)

, u Field Survey: TransCanada Cabin Mainline Wildlife Study and Aquatic Resources Field Survey

AA (Phasein
Methodeio

Z. The methodology for the wildlife survey included both aerial reconnaissance and ground based

g ' monitoring which focused on wildlife and habitat on or near the existing pipeline and facilities.

2 Ricky explained that the equipment used for the Aquatic Resources Survey included minnow
traps and an electro shocking device. He used the electro shocker 25-50m upstream and
downstream when no fish were found in the traps and he recorded ail survey sites with GPS‘

' The Aquatic Resources Field Survey crew conducted tests at various river and creek crossings as
wel! as beaver ponds along or near the Komie and Sierra Yoyo Desan Road.
in these areas, Robert observed water features inciuding muskeg, swamps, drainage run off and
a natural spring.

Hunting and Tagging I

On the Wildlife Survey Ricky identified habitats for many animals that are hunted or trapped by
. the Dene Tha’ such as bear, beaver, caribou, deer, grouse, marten, mink, moose, muskrat, otter
' and rabbit.

He 3130 identified habitat for wolf, wolverine, coyote, fox and lynx.

Fishing

. During the Aquatics Resources Survey Ricky identified a number of fish species such as stickle
backs, finescale dace, northern redbelly dace, and long nose suckers.

Concerns
Overall, Ricky noted that the Wildlife Study suggests there is very little known about different :
animal distribution and habitat during spring, summer and fall. Therefore, he recommends ” 9
further studies.
Ricky explains the importance of conducting further studies by saying that ”keeping forests : A:
intact is the only way to keep pOpularlons healthy for secretive animals such as wolves, lynx,
moose, caribou, deer and other small mammals.
One of the endangered species is ”caribou”. It was listed endangered in 1984. Caribou hove "
been pushed towards extinction from human advance and activities such as pipeline roads, '
logging and poaching. These kinds of interrUptions will not only damage caribou habitat, it will .
bring increasing numbers of predators and motorized vehicles into its country. Caribou ls unlike
other mammals, they’re special, and they migrate through northern North America.” 5
Ricky explains that rivers, creeks and streams are very sensitive ecosystems for ﬁsh and other
animals. If these sensitive ecosystems are disturbed, it has a major effect on environment and
animals. Ricky sees a need to develop techniques to preserve these sensitive fish ecosystems.
Under certain conditions fish can die from oxygen depletion. When the water gets too low, ﬁsh '
may suffocate if they cannot escape to more oxygen rich waters. ‘
”Rivers, creeks, lakes and ponds are ecologically sensitive wetland. It is very impoffont this
beautiful vast wilderness and wetland be protected from future all and gas developers. This f
protection will strengthen the restoration offorest, preserve land, water and will also protect .
historic burial sites.” -

1 Participant: Rocky Yatchotay
Date: July 20 - Juiy 30, 2009
E: ~ Field Survey: TransCanada Cabin Mainline Wildiife and Wetland Field Survey
‘ ‘ Methodoiogy
The Wildlife Survey consisted of helicopter fly-overs and ground visits.
:; The survey crew visited a number of sites along the pipeline Right of Way ("ROW”).
' Huntiﬁg and Tragping
' Rocky reports that many of the sites visited during the wildlife survey showed varying degrees
of wildlife activities such as bear (incl. grizzly), moose, caribou, iynx, rabbit, coyote, squirrel,
mink, wolf and beaver. White on the survey Rocky observed many wildlife tracks and game
' trails.
Rocky also identified a number of bird species inciuding sandpiper, red tail hawk, spruce grouse,
kingfisher, duck, woodpecker and chipper sparrow .
Frogs were also present at many sites.
Medicine and Berries
Rocky also identified cloudberries on some of the sites.
Wetiands
Rocky was also part of the Wetlands Study. 20 sites were visited and classified as gramminoid
fen (5), marsh (4), moist forest (3), mineral based (2), bog (10), treed fen (1), rich treed fen (1)
" and fen (1). Two of the wetlands were not classified.
:1 cher
. Some of the sites visited included old growth forest

Fie
Participants: Charlie Chissakay
Date: July 6 ~July 20, 2009 t ‘
Field Survey: TransCanada Cabin Mainline Rare Plant Field Survey E
Traditianal Plant Use
Charlie Chissakay identified a number of plants along the pipeline Right of Way (”ROW”) that
are traditionaily used by the Dene Tha’ such as common pink Wintergreen and cranberries.
Charlie also observed numerous occurrences of wild sarsapariila which is traditionally used to '
cure venereal disease or as a tea used for teething pains. Some Dene Tha’ members also boii
the rhizomes (horizontal, underground stem) as a stomach cure. :.
Charlie also identified heart leaved arnica, which serves as an external antiseptic and is used to ;
treat bruises and swellings.
The sites visited also showed an abundance of peat moss, which was traditionally used as a : ~
diaper. . T
Blue Listed Sgecies ~ ' .
Charlie identified a number of rare plants that are listed as blue species provincially. These '
include Northern Bog Bedstraw, White Adders Mouth Orchid and over a hundred occurrences ; ~
of Western Jacobs-Ladder. . f '
Rare Piants .
Charlie also observed plants that ha categorized as "anecdotally” rare such as a hybrid between 2
Jack pine and Lodge pole pine, which is considered rare in some parts of British Columbia.
lowa Golden (Green) Saxifraga was abundant on the sites visited. Golden (Green) Saxifraga is .-
very common in the boreal forest, but Alberta and British Columbia government classify it as '_..L'
rare. :
Charlie also observed yellow collared moss {yellow moose dung moss). ; .

.gF... .ie! 5 51.. t.V.....e.... m

:5 DTFN Lands Department Representative: Robert Metchooyeah

‘ “ Harvesters: Jean-Baptiste Talley, Abraham Talley

‘ Date: August 27 —28, 2009

: ‘ Survey: TLU Field Visit

} Traditional Knowledge

' ' Jean~Baptiste and Abraham observed birch bark harvesting markings on a mature birch tree at
the conﬂuence of the Hay River, the Shekilie River and the Kotcho Riven
Hunting and Tragging
Jean-Baptiste holds trapiine # 756T001in BC.
He also traps and hunts at the Little Hay River crossing. During the field visit he observed a
beaver dam at that location.
Jean-Baptiste and Abraham identified the confluence of the Hay, Shekiiie and Kotcho Rivers as a
hunting and trapping area. They speciﬁcally identified this area as good for migratory bird,
grouse and rabbit hunting. While there, they observed bear, moose and wotf tracks, but
reported that the habitat was also suitable for deer, caribou, coyote, wolverine, fox, rabbit,
beaver, grouse, marten, tynx and otter.
On the field visit Jean-Baptiste and Abraham noted that bears are very active in the area where
the proposed pipeline will cross the Hay River.
They found an abundance of animal tracks at the Townsotoi Creek crossing and explained that
Dene Tha’ harvesters used to hunt in this area in the past.
Jean-Baptiste and Abraham identified the location at Kyklo Creek Crossing as a great hunting

' area.

f At the Metlahdoa Creek Crossing they observed ducks, swans and a number of beaver lodges.

They identified the Courvoisier Creek Crossing as prime beaver habitat. i i
lean—Baptiste and Abraham identified hunting and trapping areas at Kotcho Lake at the south
end of the Kotcho River channel. The habitat at that location is considered good for moose,
bear, deer, caribou, wolf, coyote, wolverine, fox, rabbit, beaver, grouse, marten, mink, lynx and
otter. : H
Fishing ;
Jean—Baptiste and Abraham used to fish in the area of the Little Hay River crossing.
They identified the forks of Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River as fishing sites and "
observed fish jumping in the river during the field visit.
Jean-Baptiste and Abraham report that the Dene Tha’ used Townsotoi Creek crossing area as a E
fishing spot ln the past.
They also identified the Kyklo Creek crossing and the Kotcho River channel by Kotcho Lake as i j
great fishing areas. ~
They identified the Sahtaneh Creek crossing as prime fish and beaver habitat. ' ~
Medicine and Berries
On the field visit Jean-Baptiste and Abraham identified various berries and some medicinal
plants at the Little Hay River crossing. ;
They identified the confluence of the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho River as great berry - '
and medicinal plant harvesting resource area. They found berries such as wild raspberries and :
high bush cranberries and a number of medicinal plants such as wild mint among others. , ,
Jean~8aptiste and Abraham also observed a number of medicinal plants at the Metlahdoa Creek
Crossing.
They also consider the south end of the Ketcho Lake river channel as a medicinal harvesting
area and identified common Labrador tea at the site. The area is also a berry harvesting area ..
and there were low bush cranberries present.

Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory
          – Northeastern BC
                 Prepared for
            Dene Tha First Nation
              31 October 2009
                 Prepared by
                                  207 Edgebrook Close NW
                                           Calgary, Alberta
                                         T3A 4W5 Canada
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                         List of Contributors
Technical Review,
Project Management                                  Dr. Petr Komers, P. Biol.
Data Analysis, data management                      Mr. Zoran Stanojevic, B.Sc., M.F
Review and Research Support                         Ms. Sarah Hechtenthal, M.Sc., P. Biol.
                                                                                           Page ii
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                                               PAGE
1.0      INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 1
2.0      REMOTENESS AS AN ECOSYSTEM SERVICE............................................................ 3
         2.1      Past and Current Disturbances ........................................................................................................ 3
         2.2      Projected Decrease of Natural Surface.......................................................................................... 6
3.0      MOOSE .............................................................................................................................. 7
         3.1      Evidence of Moose Habitat Use in Disturbed Areas................................................................... 7
         3.2      Moose Use Habitat Less When Fragmented and in Low Supply ............................................. 7
         3.3      Evidence of Moose Habitat Decline in the BC Focus Area....................................................... 8
4.0      RECOMMENDATIONS AND CLOSURE ...................................................................... 9
5.0      REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 11
                                                      LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Satellite Images Covering the DTFN TLU Focus Areas in AB and BC ............................................... 2
Figure 2:         Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development on Natural Surfaces in the BC
                  Focus Area............................................................................................................................................. 5
Figure 3: The projected conversion of all natural land cover to industrial surface, including areas
                  of zones of influence, in the BC Focus Area................................................................................. 6
Figure 4: Moose pellet group density (indicating intensity of habitat use) in moose habitat
                  increases as the amount of moose habitat increases in the landscape (up to
                  approximately 70%, there were no landscapes with more than 70% moose
                  habitat in them; reprinted from Stewart 2007)............................................................................ 8
Figure 5:         Possible Moose Habitat in the BC Focus Area...........................................................................10
                                                 LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A:       Change of Land Cover Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                Page iii
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
1.0           Introduction
Wildlife habitat and vegetation communities entail resources traditionally used by First Nations. The
disturbance of these resources directly affects traditional land use (Freeman 1994, NRBS 1996) and,
using satellite imagery, can be measured as the change in terrestrial land cover (Seto et al. 2002). In the
environmental management context, changes in the environment require that traditional resource use
adapts to the changes. The environment varies naturally and the societies that developed in that
environment are resilient or able to withstand the challenges of environmental variability (Folke et al.
2003). However, if the magnitude of disturbance pushes the system beyond its natural variability into a
different state and different set of controls, then social resilience may not be able to withstand that shift
(Folke et al. 2003). For ecologists, therefore, the task is to provide the information on the amount of
environmental variability including the degree of ecological disturbance that may lead to the system
shifting into a different state with a different set of controls (Gordon et al. 2008).
When undertaking this work, we were mindful that a significant concern of the Dene Tha’ First Nation
(DTFN) is the impact of industrial development (existing and future) upon the exercise of the Treaty
and Aboriginal rights (hereafter “Treaty Rights”). We have been advised by DTFN that those rights
include the right to carry on traditional resource-based activities within their traditional territory, such
as hunting, trapping, fishing and gathering.
MSES Inc (MSES) was retained to measure the changes in land cover within certain portions of the
Traditional Land Use (TLU) area of DTFN. In this study, the focus area is located in B.C. south of 60˚ N
(Figure 1). The total area that was analyzed is 31,908 km2 . For the purpose of this study we focus on
the disturbance of traditional lands which we understand to mean the loss of natural land cover resulting
from development or human activities. Natural land cover presumably includes the vegetation and the
wildlife required to exercise Treaty Rights compared with areas where there has been industrial
development, which (as explained below) do not permit the exercise of Treaty Rights or make it much
more difficult for DTFN to do so.
To calculate the rate of disturbance from the past to the present and into the future it was necessary to
determine the density of linear disturbance (such as roads, pipelines, or power lines) and the area of the
footprint disturbance (such as plant sites and well pads), asking the following overarching questions:
•    how much of each kind of activity (linear and footprint disturbance) was there previously;
•    how much of each activity is there currently; and
•    how much of each activity will there be in the future if current rates of development continue?
                                                                                                      Page 1
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                         Figure 1: Satellite Images Covering the DTFN TLU Focus Areas in AB and BC
                                                                                                                   Page 2
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.0           Remoteness as an Ecosystem Service
In this section, we focus on the “deprivation of traditional lands”. These lands include ecosystems, and
the biological diversity contained within them, that provide a stream of services which are essential for
the well being of people. There are very basic, essential life-supporting ecosystem system services such
as the provisioning of food (wildlife and vegetation), water and air. However, there are also less tangible
cultural, spiritual, and aesthetic services (Daily 1997). Through such essential services, ecosystems
sustain societal development and progress (Folke et al. 2003). Remoteness appears to be among the
essential ecosystem services as First Nations often comment on industry disturbing their experience of
remoteness which they require to exercise their traditional activities (ACFN 2003, FMA 2009,
Woodward & Company 2009).
Here, we focus on natural land surfaces that include the vegetation and the wildlife required to exercise
Treaty Rights versus surfaces disturbed by industrial activities which do not provide for the exercise of
those rights or which make it much more difficult to do so.
2.1           Past and Current Disturbances
The rate of disturbance through industrial activities was calculated based on satellite imagery. Using a
series of satellite Landsat5 images we calculated the yearly rate of converting natural surfaces to
industrial ones from 1993 to present (as captured in the satellite image of 2008). We applied a change
analysis using publically available data which were processed based on the image algebra method which
allows one to compute the change in each pixel between two images of different dates (see Appendix A
for detailed methods).
In our ecological research and evaluations we typically find that animals avoid the disturbance by humans
near industrial activities. This area in the vicinity of industrial features is typically called a “zone of
influence” (ZOI). Moreover, in our experiences working with First Nations, we have learned that local
hunters and trappers also avoid the areas near industrial activities. Consequently, in addition to analyzing
the effects of direct vegetation clearing and the simple length of linear corridors, we have applied a ZOI
around each footprint and each linear industrial feature.
A 250 m ZOI around the footprints of developments and the centerlines of linear corridors was applied
based on the potential for reduced animal activity and hunting and trapping activity near industrial
features. The distance of 250 m was chosen because, for example, moose sign (such as tracks or faecal
pellets) was found to be reduced within 200 m of roads (Rolley and Keith 1980), woodland caribou
avoid industrial features within about 250 m (but avoidance could be greater or smaller for some
features during some seasons, Dyer et al. 2001), and other mammals have been observed to avoid
industrial features within this distance (Forman et al. 2003). Birds in woodlands have also been observed
                                                                                                      Page 3
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
to avoid roads, power lines and seismic lines by up to about 300 m depending on species and ecological
context (Kroodsma 1982, Machtans 2006, Bayne et al. 2008). Our own measurements in wildlife surveys
and field courses with university students and graduate student research show similar avoidance effects
(Appendix E from Imperial Oil Resource Venture Ltd. 2005, Gavin and Komers 2006 and Parent 2008).
Finally, the authors of the recent Terrestrial Ecosystem Management Framework (in North-Eastern
Alberta) also used the 250 m zone of influence in their calculation of disturbance when planning regional
land use, adopting the understanding that animals are disturbed within this distance from industrial
features.
Clearly, the ZOI differs widely with parameters such as wildlife species, the type of industrial features
and related activities, and the ecological context (reproductive cycle, hunting or predation regimes,
habitat structure and quality). However, it appears that in the absence of detailed information on any of
these parameters the 250 m distance is a reasonable approximation for a zone within which First
Nations could not effectively exercise their Treaty Rights.
Assuming that the sensory disturbance includes a ZOI of 250 m near any industrial feature, of the
31,908 km2 land area in the BC portion of this study, 19% was disturbed in 1993, 27% in 2002, and 31%
in 2008 (Figure 2).
Combining all linear developments that we could detect on the Landsat images, by the year 2008, there
were 21,041 km of linear corridors in the BC portion of this study, representing a density of
0.66 km/km2. To put this density into context, there may be density thresholds of seismic lines of as low
as 0.3-0.8 km/km2, depending on the ecological context, at which caribou and moose populations may be
excluded from the area, or predator and hunting controls would need to be implemented (Weclaw &
Hudson 2004). At 0.66 km/km2 some thresholds may be reached or exceeded. In such a case, the
effectiveness of traditional resource use near linear corridors could be compromised.
                                                                                                   Page 4
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                        Figure 2:        Accumulating Effects of Industrial Development on Natural Surfaces in the BC Focus Area
                                                                                                                                 Page 5
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.2                                            Projected Decrease of Natural Surface
If one assumes that the yearly rate of disturbance remains constant in the future at 260 km2 per year, as
it was in the past 15 years, then the projected disturbance of all natural land cover will be 100% by
about the year 2095 (Figure 3). In other words, past the year 2095 there will be no area left where a
person could go to be farther than 250 m away from an industrial feature. However, if development
intensifies to include activities such as shale gas exploration and development, the date when all natural
cover will be disturbed could be substantially sooner than 2095.
As to the density of linear corridors, 586 km are added to the area each year. This leads to a doubling of
the linear corridor density in about 35 years. If 100% of the land cover will be disturbed by the year
2095, then the density of linear corridors will be 2.2 km/km2. These estimates only reflect major linear
corridors that can be detected by satellite images at a resolution of 25 m (our experience indicates that
satellite image analysis detects only about 36% of seismic lines). This means that most thinner
developments remain undetected in our analysis, but it is well known that seismic lines affect wildlife
distribution (Dyer et al. 2001, Weclaw & Hudson 2004, Sorensen et al. 2008). In other words, because
of the relatively low resolution of satellite images, our projection of disturbance underestimate the
actual effects.
                                            35000
                                            30000
        Undisturbed Land Area (square km)
                                            25000
                                            20000
                                            15000
                                            10000
                                            5000
                                               0
                                               1950         1970        1990       2010       2030        2050       2070       2090     2110
                                                                                              Year
                                            Figure 3: The projected conversion of all natural land cover to industrial
                                               surface, including areas of zones of influence, in the BC Focus Area.
The black diamonds and line represent actual measurements from the satellite image analysis. The first diamond, in
      1964, represents the area of the BC Focus Area and is an approximation, showing that some time before
                                                    developments, this amount of land area was available for traditional resource use.
                                                                                                                                                Page 6
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
3.0           Moose
3.1           Evidence of Moose Habitat Use in Disturbed Areas
There is a great deal of evidence that moose do not readily use disturbed areas. For example, in the Oil
Sands Region (North-Eastern Alberta), no moose sign on reclaimed or disturbed sites has been found by
Suncor Energy Inc in either their 2007 Annual Conservation & Reclamation Report for the Millennium Mine
or their Wildlife Monitoring Program March 2006 for the Firebag Project. Similarly, no moose sign has been
reported by either Shell (Shell Canada Energy Jackpine Mine Phase 1) or Albian Sands (Albian Sands
Energy Inc Muskeg River Mine) on their reclaimed areas. Moreover, no empirical documentation of
moose re-establishment has been provided by Syncrude in their 2006 Closure and Reclamation Plan.
Finally, moose used wildlife corridors significantly less near disturbed areas compared to undisturbed
control areas (Golder Associates 2008). Numerous other studies conducted by MSES researchers
showed similar relationships of moose avoiding industrial disturbance in the Kananaskis Country
(Alberta), in the Mackenzie Valley (NWT), and in Alaska (USA).
3.2           Moose Use Habitat Less When Fragmented and in Low Supply
Based on the findings above that moose avoid industrial features, one could expect that, at a regional
scale, moose would be less abundant where industrial disturbance is high. Accordingly, increased
fragmentation and decreased habitat availability result in higher isolation of moose habitat patches and
smaller patch size of moose habitat. Moose have been found to use small and isolated habitat patches
less often because it may not be worthwhile for moose to reach them (Figure 4, Stewart 2007). The
implication is that the number of moose in an area declines faster than expected from the decline in
habitat availability alone because moose are unlikely to use habitat patches that are small and far apart.
Moreover, surveys conducted by regulatory agencies or private industry between the years 1960 and
2008 in the Oil Sands Region showed that moose density is declining in that region. The declining trend
is statistically highly significant (Spearman rank order correlations rs=-0.52, N=44, p<0.001, analysis
based on Table 5-1, Attachment 1 of Suncor 2008). The declining trend of moose population density
appears to coincide well with the declining availability of moose habitat in the Oil Sands Region.
                                                                                                     Page 7
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
             Figure 4: Moose pellet group density (indicating intensity of habitat use)
   in moose habitat increases as the amount of moose habitat increases in the landscape
        (up to approximately 70%, there were no landscapes with more than 70% moose
                             habitat in them; reprinted from Stewart 2007)
There is a great deal of evidence from research in landscape ecology that fragmentation and isolation of
habitat patches affects the ability of animals using the patches (Collingham et al. 2000, Laurance et al.
2002). Research on moose in Alberta appears to support this evidence (Stewart 2007).
3.3           Evidence of Moose Habitat Decline in the BC Focus Area
The rate of decline in habitat availability was calculated based on satellite imagery. Using a series of
satellite Landsat5 images we calculated the yearly rate of disturbing moose habitat between 1993 to
present. We applied a change analysis as described in Section 2.1 and Appendix A of this report.
Moose habitat in the BC Focus Area declined from 8,134 km2 (in 2002) to 7,061 km2 (in 2008). This
represents a loss of 13% of moose habitat or a yearly loss of 77 km2 from the originally available (in
1993). Moose habitat was determined by calculating the area of vegetation communities that are
preferred by moose. The data on distribution of vegetation communities were obtained from federal
mapping sources (Canadian Forest Service, Pacific Forestry Centre, EOSD Land Cover Classification).
However, the accuracy of both the vegetation maps and the preference of moose for any given
vegetation community should be tested in the BC Focus Area, because we have currently no field data
that would allow us to verify our assumptions for this particular area.
                                                                                                  Page 8
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
We also assumed that habitat normally preferred by moose that is within 250 m of industrial features is
avoided by moose; therefore, we assumed all habitat within 250 m of industrial features as having been
disturbed. Our assumption is based on many ungulate studies in peer-reviewed literature (Rolley and
Keith 1980, Dyer et al. 2001, Forman et al. 2003, Gavin and Komers 2006) as well as our own
measurements in wildlife surveys and field courses with our students. The Alberta Sustainable Resource
Development, in its Terrestrial Ecosystem Management Framework (in North-Eastern Alberta) also used
the 250 m zone of influence in their calculation of disturbance when planning regional land use, adopting
the understanding that animals are disturbed within this distance from industrial features.
In conclusion, the declining availability of moose habitat combined with an increasing fragmentation of
the habitat has probably already resulted in local reductions of moose density. If the disturbance trend
continues, the moose population within the BC Focus Area will likely cease to be viable within a few
decades. A map depicting the declining availability of moose habitat and increasing fragmentation
between 1993 and 2008 in the BC Focus Area is provided in Figure 5.
4.0           Recommendations and Closure
Information is now needed on how much land is “sufficient land” to exercise traditional rights. In other
words, an analysis is essential to show how much land a First Nation requires to exercise its rights. Is
the remaining 69 % in the year 2008 sufficient for this purpose? If yes, how much more development can
occur until the threshold is reached when First Nations can no longer exercise their rights in the BC
focus area? Whether it is at the current state or at some future development scenario, the observed
rate of development begs the question: Will the First Nations and their culture disappear from the
landscape or will regional development planning somehow accommodate the existence of First Nations?
Our results provide a basis for discussion between the DTFN and industry and government, with the
hope that such discussion will lead to avenues by which the DTFN can be involved in regional land use
planning, setting targets and thresholds that would achieve a balance between industrial development
and effective traditional land use.
                                                                                                   Page 9
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
                                                     Figure 5: Possible Moose Habitat in the BC Focus Area
                                                                                                           Page 10
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
5.0           References
Bayne, E.M., L. Habib and S. Boutin. 2008. Impacts of chronic anthropogenic noise from energy-
         sector activity on abundance of songbirds in the boreal forest. Conservation Biology, 22:
         1186–1193.
Collingham, Y.C. and B. Huntley. 2000. Impacts of habitat fragmentation and patch size upon
         migration rates. Ecological Applications, 10, 131-144.
Daily, G. 1997. Nature's services: Societal dependence on natural ecosystems. Washington:
         Island Press.
Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Neill, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2001. Avoidance of industrial development by
         woodland caribou. J. Wildl. Manage., 65, 531-542.
FMA Heritage Inc. 2009. Traditional Knowledge Study, Chipewyan Prairie Déné First Nation
         Meg Energy Corporation Christina Lake Regional Project, Phase 3. FMA 147908.Tk
Folke, C., J. Colding and F. Berkes. 2003. Synthesis: building resilience and adaptive capacity in
         social-ecological systems. In: Navigating Social-Ecological Systems, Building Resilience for
         Complexity and Change, ed. by F. Berkes, C. Folke, and J. Colding, Cambridge
         University Press, Cambridge, pp. 352-387.
Forman, R.T., D. Sperling, J.A. Bissonette, A.P. Clevenger, C.D. Cutshall, V.H. Dale, L. Fahrig,
         R. France, C.R. Goldman, K. Heanue, J.A. Jones, F.J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and
         T.C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: science and solutions. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
         USA.
Freeman, M. 1994. Social and human issues associated with large scale land clearing and
         development of boreal ecosystems. Executive summary of a workshop on the impacts of
         land clearing on the hydrologic and aquatic resources of boreal forests in Alberta,
         November 18 and 19, 1994. Northern River Basin Study Project Report 63.
Gavin, S.D. and P.E. Komers. 2006. Do pronghorn (Antilocapra americana) perceive roads as a
         predation risk? Canadian journal of Zoology, 84:1775-1780.
                                                                                               Page 11
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Golder Associates Ltd. 2008. Jackpine mine - Phase 1 wildlife corridor monitoring, Year 2
         annual report 2007. Prepared for Shell Canada Limited.
Gordon, L.J., G.D. Peterson and E.M. Bennett. 2008. Agricultural modifications of hydrological
         flows create ecological surprises. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 23, 211-219.
Imperial Oil Resources Ventures Ltd. 2005. Wildlife models used in the assessment of potential
         effects of the Mackenzie Gas Project. Prepared by AMEC Americas; submitted to the
         Northern Gas Project Secretariat, Exhibit Number J-IORVL-00072.
Kroodsma, R.L. 1982. Edge effect on breeding forest birds along a power-line corridor. The
         Journal of Applied Ecology, 19, 361-370.
Laurance, W.F., T.E. Lovejoy, H.L. Vasconcelos, E.M. Bruna, R.K. Didham, P.C. Stouffer,
         C. Gascon, S.G Laurance and E. Sampaio. 2002. Ecosystem decay of Amazonian
         fragments: a 22 year investigation. Cons. Biol., 16, 605-618.
Machtans, C.S. 2006. Songbird response to seismic lines in the western boreal forest: a
         manipulative experiment. Can. J. Zool., 84, 1421-1430.
Northern River Basin Study 1996. Report to the Ministers; Section 3.4 Traditional Knowledge.
         Canada, Alberta, Northwest Territories. ISBN 0-662-24356-0
Parent, A. 2008. Monitoring protected areas: habitat use of ungulates in the Evan Thomas
         provincial recreation area. April 18th 2008, Environmental Science 505, University of
         Calgary.
Rolley, R.E. and L.B. Keith. 1980. Moose population dynamics and winter habitat use at
         Rochester, Alberta, 1965-1979. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 94, 9-18.
Seto, K. C., C. E. Woodcock, C. Song, X. Huang, J. Lu, and R. K. Kaufmann. 2002. Monitoring
         land-use change in the Pearl River Delta using Landsat TM. International Journal of Remote
         Sensing 23:1985-2004.
Sorensen, T., P.D. McLoughlin, D. Hervieux, E. Dzus, J. Nolan, B. Wynes, and S. Boutin. 2008.
         Determining sustainable levels of cumulative effects for boreal caribou. Journal of Wildlife
         Management 72:900-905.
                                                                                              Page 12
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Stewart, A. 2007. The effects of habitat amount and fragmentation on ungulates in the Alberta
         foothills: mosaic versus binary perspectives. A thesis submitted to the faculty of
         graduate studies in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
         Science, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Alberta.
Suncor. 2008. Suncor Energy Ltd., application for approval of the Suncor Energy MD9 Mine
         Waste Dump; Supplemental Information Requests, Attachment 1; submitted to the
         Alberta ERCB.
Weclaw, P. and R.J. Hudson. 2004. Simulation of conservation and management of woodland
         caribou. Ecological Modelling, 177, 75-94.
Woodward & Company Barristers and Solicitors Law Corporation. 2009. Interviews conducted
         with ACFN Community Members in December 2008 and January 2009.
                                                                                         Page 13
         Appendix A
Change of Land Cover Analysis
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
1.0           Change of Land Cover Analysis
We estimated the change in the landscape based on the:
1) digitized linear disturbances that are visible on the Landsat5 images at a 1:50,000 scale;
2) change analysis of the Landsat images which extracts areas that have been changed between two
     consecutive images; and
3) footprints digitized from regulatory applications for the planned and approved projects that are not
     yet visible on the most current image.
Linear disturbances that were visible on the Landsat images were digitized and used as a separate layer
of lines. We did not have any reliable information on the width of linear disturbances because they do
not have a footprint per se, unless they were buffered by 250 m (see below), so as a result, the change
analysis only addresses footprints of non-linear developments such as clearings, facilities, mining
operations, etc.
The Landsat images used for the analysis were taken in 1992, 2002 and 2008. The image resolution was
30 x 30 m and they were orthorectified using geodetic and elevation control data to correct for
positional accuracy and relief displacement. Large blocks of Landsat data were adjusted through a
patented procedure that uses pixel correlation to acquire tie-points within the overlap area between
adjacent Landsat images (USGS 2008). Ground control points were fixed, and images were projected to
the Universal Transverse Mercator map projection. All bands were individually re-sampled, using a
nearest neighbour algorithm. The result is a final product with a Root Mean Square Error of better than
50m in positional accuracy (USGS 2008). To estimate the disturbances other than linear, we performed
a change analysis using data processing based on the image algebra method (Wickware and Howarth
1981, Singh 1989 and Stanojevic et al. 2006).
The image algebra method is based on a mathematical manipulation of the values of two input images.
Methods within the image algebra method include: simple differencing, image regression, and image
rationing. Rationing and regression are useful when considering more than two dates because a common
relationship is established between the images in an effort to normalize areas of non-change. We have
used the simple differencing method, which employs a simple equation for the differencing of a common
band of imagery for two image dates as shown below:
                                           Dijk = BVijk(1) – BVijk(2) + c
                                                                                                Page A-1
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
where: Dijk = change in pixel value
         BVijk(1) = brightness value at time 1
         BVijk(2) = brightness value at time 2
         c = constant
         i = line number
         j = column number
         k = band number
The image algebra method allows the analysts to define the level of change that they are interested in
describing. In our analysis, we specified that the change in pixel value had to be at least 10%. We
compared the satellite image from 1992 to the images from 2002, and the image from 2002 to the image
from 2007 in the south and 2008 in the north, in order to detect changes caused by anthropogenic
disturbances between these periods of time.
The 4th or 5th image bands were used for differencing within the image pairs. These were used to
minimize the atmospheric effects on the spectral signature of any given land cover type. A raster file was
created based on the output of this image differencing. The output raster file depicted all pixel changes
greater than (approximately) 10% between the two dates. In some cases, the bands being compared
were evaluated for minor differences in reflectance unrelated to changes in cover type. Discrepancies
were treated by evaluating and matching the histograms of the bands used in the analysis. This process
aided in the reduction of in-between scene variability as a result of potential differences in atmospheric
conditions.
All of the raster files depicting change were compared with the image pairs to ensure that the
appropriate data were captured. In order to reduce the data “noise” that resulted from the processing
routine, the initial processed data set was re-processed using a filter to eliminate the smaller, scattered
clusters of pixels that were less than 0.27 ha in size (3 pixels). Upon visual inspection of the image pairs,
the vast majority of these small, scattered clusters of pixels appeared to indicate “natural” and/or
phenological changes, such as varying water levels in wetlands and lakes, or varying leaf colour and
cover. In some cases, the filter eliminated linear disturbances such as roads, seismic line, etc., but these
were manually re-inserted into our “anthropogenically-disturbed” data layer during the visual checking
stage.
An unsupervised isodata clustering process was also applied to the image files in order to provide an
additional dataset to assist in determining whether specific identified changes were anthropogenically-
caused disturbances. Clusters which fell into both classes were identified as “crossovers” and these
pixels were subjected to another round of isodata clustering (with a greater number of specified classes)
                                                                                                    Page A-2
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
and then classified accordingly. This complementary data layer was especially useful in identifying areas
affected by wildfire.
In addition to the classification of pixel clusters in the differencing output raster files, the analyst
manually “cleaned” the borders of some of the detected changes. Some of the changes that were
eliminated by the “noise” filter that was performed were manually recovered and added back into the
data set of anthropogenically-disturbed clusters. The pixels classified as “anthropogenically-disturbed”
were used to create a digital disturbance layer.
1.1           Disturbance Buffer (Zone of Influence)
A disturbance buffer or zone of influence of 250 m around the footprints of developments and the
centerlines of linear corridors was arbitrarily applied based on the potential for reduced animal activity
and hunting and trapping activity near industrial features. The distance of 250 m was chosen because, for
example, moose sign was found to be reduced within 200 m of roads (Rolley and Keith 1980), caribou
avoid industrial features within about 250 m (but avoidance could be greater or smaller for some feature
during some seasons, Dyer et al. 2001), and other mammals have been observed to avoid industrial
features within this distance (Forman et al. 2003). Birds in woodlands have also been observed to avoid
roads, power lines and seismic lines by up to about 300 m depending on species and ecological context
(Kroodsma 1982, Belisle et al. 2001 and Machtans 2006).
Clearly, the zone of influence differs widely between the species, the type of industrial features and
related activities, and the ecological context (reproductive cycle, hunting or predation regimes, habitat
structure and quality). However, it appears that, in absence of detailed information on any of the
situations, the 250 m distance is a reasonable approximation for a zone within which First Nations could
not effectively exercise their rights.
1.2           Atmospheric Correction
The solar spectrum electromagnetic radiation signals that satellites collect are affected by aerosols and
gases in the atmosphere. Performing atmospheric correction on the satellite images can account for this
modification and lead to improvements in classification and detection, and therefore, atmospheric
correction problems have received considerable attention from researchers in remote sensing who have
devised a number of solution approaches. Sophisticated approaches are computationally demanding and
have only been validated on a very small scale (Tucker and Sellers 1986), and, in fact, some researchers
have determined that atmospheric correction is unnecessary in many cases (Tucker et al. 2004).
                                                                                                 Page A-3
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
We addressed the issue of atmospheric influence in our study by first creating a cloud-water mask and
then performing differencing using only spectral band 4 or 5, because these are less influenced by
atmospheric conditions. Other studies also dropped the bands most influenced by atmospheric effects
from their analyses (Skole and Tucker1993, Collins and Woodcock 1994, and Foody et al. 1996).
1.3           Accuracy Analyses
Accuracy assessments determine the quality of the information derived from remotely sensed data
(Congalton and Green 1999). We include both qualitative-positional and quantitative-classification
assessments.
In previous assessments we tested the accuracy of our disturbance mapping over a large area. In
qualitative assessments, we determine if we correctly assigned disturbed versus undisturbed classes by
comparing the class extracted from the imagery with what we see on the ground. In other words, we
tried to answer the simple question: does the map correctly show what is on the ground? We visited a
number of sites and we travelled along major roads to verify the existence of disturbances that we
detected on the Landsat images.
Quantitative assessments attempt to identify and measure remote sensing-based error such as
misclassification. There are two main types of common errors including omission (underestimation) and
commission (overestimation). Processes that use medium and low resolution images produce larger
errors than high resolution images. In this part of assessment, we compared our data derived from
Landsat images with reference data. As a reference, we used AltaLis 1:20,000 transportation data sets.
Data were obtained from four randomly selected sheets from the National Topographic System (NTS).
Each NTS sheet covered 215 km2.
The main reasons for the selection of the data from AltaLis were data accuracy, availability and cost.
According to AltaLis, “The 1:20,000 Base Feature dataset is the most accurate and detailed of the Base
products, and was created to populate GIS applications” (AltaLis 2008). Base Features is a GIS-ready
dataset that has been compiled internally within the Provincial Government since 1996, and is now
available to the private sector through its distributor, AltaLIS Ltd. The Base Feature Project merged,
connected, updated, restructured, revised, and attributed several topographic themes covering our
study area, using various resources such as provincial 1:20 000 Provincial Digital Mapping Program
(accuracy ± 5 m), Indian Remote Sensing satellite imagery (accuracy ±25 m) and other data sources
including Orthophoto imagery, Aerial photography, and Spot imagery (accuracy ±10 m).
                                                                                               Page A-4
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
2.0           References
AltaLis. 2008. Bring data to life; base overview. Website accessed 8 October 2008:
         http://www.altalis.com/products_base.html).
Belisle, M. and C.C.S. Clair. 2001. Cumulative effects of barriers on the movement of forest
         birds. Conservation Ecology, 5.
Collins, J.B. and C.E. Woodcock. 1994. Change detection using the Gramm-Schmidt
         transformation applied to mapping forest mortality. Remote Sensing of Environment 50,
         267-279.
Congalton, R. and K. Green. 1999. Assessing the accuracy of remotely sensed data: principles
         and practices. CRC/Lewis Press, Boca Raton, FL. 137 pp.
Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Neill, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2001. Avoidance of industrial development by
         woodland caribou. J. Wildl. Manage., 65, 531-542.
Foody, G.M., G. Palubinska, R.M. Lucas, P.M. Curran, and M. Honzak. 1996. Identifying
         terrestrial carbon sinks: classification of successional stages in regenerating tropical
         forest from Landsat TM data. Remote Sens. Environ. 55, 205-216.
Forman, R.T., D. Sperling, J.A. Bissonette, A.P. Clevenger, C.D. Cutshall, V.H. Dale, L. Fahrig,
         R. France, C.R. Goldman, K. Heanue, J.A. Jones, F.J. Swanson, T. Turrentine, and
         T.C. Winter. 2003. Road ecology: science and solutions. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
         USA.
Kroodsma, R.L. 1982. Edge effect on breeding forest birds along a power-line corridor. The
         Journal of Applied Ecology, 19, 361-370.
Machtans, C.S. 2006. Songbird response to seismic lines in the western boreal forest: a
         manipulative experiment. Can. J. Zool., 84, 1421-1430.
Rolley, R.E. and L.B. Keith. 1980. Moose population dynamics and winter habitat use at
         Rochester, Alberta, 1965-1979. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 94, 9-18.
                                                                                         Page A-5
 Rate of Disturbance in DTFN Territory – Northeastern BC
October 2009
Singh, A. 1989. Digital change detection techniques using remotely-sensed data. International
         Journal of Remote Sensing, 10(6):989-1003.
Skole, D. and C. Tucker. 1993. Tropical deforestation and habitat fragmentation in the Amazon:
         satellite data from 1978 to 1988. Science 260: 1905-1910.
Stanojevic, Z, P. Lee and D.G. Gysbers. 2006. Recent anthropogenic changes within the
         Northern Boreal, Southern Taiga and Hudson Plains Ecozones of Quebec. Global Forest
         Watch            Canada.            Website    accessed      8     October         2008:
         http://www.globalforestwatch.ca/change_analysis/downloadQC.htm. Report needs more
         info for access.
Tucker, C.J. and P.J. Sellers. 1986. Satellite remote sensing of primary production. International
         Journal of Remote Sensing 7, 1395-1416.
Tucker, C.J., D.M. Grant and J.D. Dykstra. 2004. NASA’s global orthorectification Landsat data
         set. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 70(3): 313-322.
USGS. 2008. Landsat orthorectified TM imagery (Landsat_Ortho_TM); Product Readme. USGS
         Earth Resources Observation and Science Centre (EROS) Website Accessed September
         2008: http://Edcsns17.Cr.Usgs.Gov/Nsdp/Tm_Readme.htm.
Wickware, G.M. and P.J. Howarth. 1981. Change detection in the Peace-Athabasca delta using
         digital Landsat data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 11, 9-25.
                                                                                          Page A-6
       BOUCHARD & KENNEDY RESEARCH CONSULTANTS
DENE THA’ PRESENCE IN
   NORTHEASTERN BC
Prepared for: Calliou Group, Calgary, Alberta
   on Behalf of the Dene Tha’ First Nation
                    Randy Bouchard
                      14 July 2009
 Table of Contents
1.0    INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 1
   1.1   Linguistic and Ethnic Affiliations of the Dene Tha’ ........................................................ 1
2.0    SOME DOCUMENTARY REFERENCES TO THE DENE THA’ PRESENCE IN
NORTHEASTERN BC .................................................................................................................. 4
3.0    PROPOSED DENE THA’ TRANSBOUNDARY HUNTING RESERVE ........................ 7
   3.1   Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC, As Documented in the Early 1930s ............... 7
   3.2   The Proposed 1934 Dene Tha’ Transboundary Hunting Reserve.................................. 14
4.0    CONTINUED DOCUMENTATION OF DENE THA’ TRAPPING AND HUNTING IN
NORTHEASTERN BC ................................................................................................................ 21
5.0     CONCLUSIONS............................................................................................................... 23
6.0     FIGURES ..........................................................................................................................24
 1.0       INTRODUCTION
This overview report of the Dene Tha presence in northeastern British Columbia is based on
Randy Bouchard’s literature review undertaken over a four-year period between June 2005 and
June 2009. While this review of known and available ethnohistoric, ethnographic and linguistic
source materials has been wide-ranging and thorough, it is not exhaustive. A number of sources
remain to be reviewed.
1.1       Linguistic and Ethnic Affiliations of the Dene Tha’
The Dene Tha’ have been referred to in the literature by a number of names, including: “Upper
Hay River Band of Slaves”; “Hay River Indians”; “Hay Lakes Indians”; “Chateh/Assumption
Indians”; “Slavey Indians at Hay Lake(s)”; “Upper Hay River Post Indians”; and “Bistcho Lake
Tribe.”
In 1978 the name of the “Slaves of the Upper Hay River Band” was officially changed to “Dene
Tha’.” As stated in an April 1978 Band Council Resolution, “Dene Tha’ . . .is a name which the
people have been using to address themselves for Centuries.” 1 This change of Band name was
made because the terms “Slave” or “Slavey” are derogatory and offensive to modern generations
of the Dene Tha’. According to present-day Dene Tha’, the terms “Slave” or “Slavey” came
about not because of Native terms used by neighbouring tribes to refer to the Dene Tha’, 2 but
through a series of mis-understandings by early explorers and other non-Aboriginals as to who
the Dene Tha’ really are. 3
“Dene Tha’,” the preferred ethnonym, 4 will be used wherever possible in the present overview,
together with another preferred term, “Dene” 5 —referring to single groups of Northern
1
  Band Council Resolution 1978/79 – 06, 14 April 1978, of the Slaves of the Upper Hay River Band, together with
letter of 29 June 1978 confirming this BCR, from H.H. Chapman, Registrar of Indian Land Registry, Indian and
Northern Affairs Headquarters, Ottawa. Instrument No. 59565, Indian Land Registry, Indian and Northern Affairs
Headquarters, Ottawa.
2
  See: Michael Asch (1981). Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic. Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. Pp. 347-348
3
  Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 11-12 July
2009.
4
  An ethnonym is the name used by a group of people for self-identification.
5
  A number of tribal groups speaking Athapaskan languages (see the footnote that follows) use variations of the
Native term anglicized as “Dene”—meaning ‘man’ or ‘person’—to identify themselves. See Beryl C. Gillespie
(1981). Territorial Groups Before 1821: Athapaskans of the Shield and the Mackenzie Drainage, Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 6: Subarctic. Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 168. “Dene”
also means ‘people,’ as well as ‘man’ or ‘person’ (Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to
Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
                                                        1
 Athapaskans, 6 several Northern Athapaskan peoples collectively, or to Northern Athapaskans in
general—although it will also be necessary to use the term “Slavey” (“Slave”) when citing the
literature.
The term “Slavey” (“Slave”) has commonly been used by anthropologists and linguists to refer
to the larger entity of which the Dene Tha’ are a component group. 7 Linguists Michael Krauss
and Victor Golla in 1980 referred to this larger entity as “Slavey-Hare” because their research
indicated that the groups known as Slavey, Mountain, Bear Lake and Hare all speak closely-
related dialects of the same language. Krauss and Golla classified the “Slavey-Hare” language, a
dialect of which is spoken by the Dene Tha’, as one of 23 languages comprising “Northern
Athapaskan,” a recognized geographical subdivision of the Athapaskan Language Family. 8
Anthropologist Jean-Guy Goulet, who undertook extensive research among the Dene Tha’ over a
six-year period beginning in 1979, pointed out in a recent publication that when anthropologists
adopted “Slavey” as the English term to refer to all the “Slavey proper” populations, “they
collapsed into one general category various groups dispersed over a wide area.” 9
As Krauss and Golla have pointed out, the most widely spoken of the modern dialects of the
“Slavey-Hare” language is “Slavey proper” which is the dominant dialect not only of the Dene
Tha’ communities in Alberta but also of other Dene communities in the southern North West
Territories at lower Hay River (now known as “Katlodeeche Dene”), Fort Providence (now
known as “Deh Hah Gotie Dene”), Kakisa Lake (now known as “Ka’agee Tu Dene”), Trout
Lake (now known as “Sambaa K’e Dene”), Fort Liard (now known as “Acho Dene Koe”), Jean
Marie River (now known as “Tthe’K’ehdeli Dene”), Nahanni Butte (now known as “N’ah adehe
Dene”) and Fort Simpson (now known as “Liidli Keu Dene”), and in British Columbia at Fort
6
  “Athapaskan” is an arbitrary designation introduced in the 1830’s-1840’s to denote “linguistically related Indian
groups in the interior of northwestern North America beyond the Churchill River”; see Gillespie 1981, p. 168.
7
  Asch 1981, pp. 338-339.
8
  Michael Krauss and Victor Golla (1981). Northern Athapaskan Languages. Handbook of North American Indians,
Vol. 6, Subarctic, Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., pp. 67, 79-80. In 1995, linguist
Keren Rice proposed a slightly different sub-classification in which the “Slavey-Hare” language was classified as
part of what she called the “Mackenzie” grouping in “Northwestern Canada” within the overall Athapaskan
Language Family. See Ives Goddard (1996). Introduction. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 17,
Languages. Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. Pp. 4-5.
9
  Jean-Guy Goulet (2004). The Dene Tha of Chateh: Continuities and Transformation. Native Peoples: The
Canadian Experience. Ed. by R. Bruce Morrison and C. Roderick Wilson. Published by Oxford University Press,
Toronto and Oxford. P. 160.
                                                          2
 Nelson; there are also significant numbers of Slavey speakers in Fort Wrigley (now known as
“Pehdzeh Ki Dene”) and Fort Norman. 10
While the Dene Tha’ speak one of the dialects of the “Slavey proper” division of the “Slavey-
Hare” language, they also recognize sub-dialects within their own speech area. The Dene Tha’—
sometimes written as “Dene Dháa”—refer to their speech as “Dene Dháh.” Thus, “Dene Tha’”
(“Dene Dháa”) means ‘ordinary people’ and “Dene Dháh” means ‘ordinary people’s language.’
Linguist Patrick Moore identifies three “Dene Dháh” dialects: Kegúnht’u, the Bistcho Lake
Dialect; Xewόnht’e, the Assumption/ Habay Dialect; and, Xewόnst’e, the Fort Vermilion/ Eleske
Dialect. 11 The Beaver people, who speak a different but closely-related language to the Dene
Tha’, . 12 refer to themselves as “Dene Dzaa,” 13 which is said to mean ‘real people.’ 14
10
   Krauss and Golla 1981, pp. 79-80. For the contemporary names of Slavey-speaking groups, see Michael Asch
and Robert Wishart (2004). The Slavey Indians: The Relevance of Ethnohistory to Development. Native Peoples:
The Canadian Experience. Ed. by R. Bruce Morrison and C. Roderick Wilson. Published by Oxford University
Press, Toronto and Oxford. P. 196. See also: http://www.dehchofirstnations.com/members/fort_providence.htm,
accessed on 9 May 2006.
11
    Patrick Moore and Angela Wheelock (editors) (1990). Wolverine Myths and Visions: Dene Traditions from
Northern Alberta. Compiled by the Dene Wodih Society. Published by the University of Alberta Press, Edmonton,
Alberta and the University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. Pp. xi, 94-96. Additional clarification is provided
by Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay, who points out that “Dene Tha’” means ‘regular; normal; common’ and that
“Dene Dhah” means ‘people’s language’ (Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to Tracy
Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
12
   Krauss and Golla 1981, p. 81.
13
   Robin Ridington (1981). Beaver. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic, Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., p. 350; also, personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James
Ahnassay to Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
14
   Ridington 1981, p. 350.
                                                        3
 2.0       SOME DOCUMENTARY REFERENCES TO THE DENE THA’
          PRESENCE IN NORTHEASTERN BC
A map of the Hay River valley and surrounding areas appears as Figure 1 in the present
overview report. 15
Maps of overall “Slavey” territory circa 1725 and circa 1850 appear here respectively as Figures
2 16 and 3, 17 and a map showing the approximate twentieth-century boundary of the area used
by the Dene Tha’ appears as Figure 4. 18
A map illustrating Aboriginal occupation of the Hay River area circa 1870-1875 appears in the
present overview report as Figure 5. 19
Despite the wealth of existing documents from the North West Company’s and Hudson’s Bay
Company’s Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District fur trade, there is little in this early
historical material that distinguishes the Dene Tha’ from other “Slavey-speaking” groups.
Occasionally, groups were distinguished on the basis of clothing, such as the Hare Athapaskan
being known for their use of rabbit skin, or the group who called themselves “Embayo dinnah”
being known to the traders as the “Gens de Mouten” on account of their use of sheep skin for
clothing. 20 Sometimes linguistic distinctions came to the fore when translators’ abilities were
found lacking, but culturally-similar subgroups of Athapaskan peoples remained largely
undefined until the mid-19th century. Moreover, nomenclature used during the 18th and early 19th
century fur trade was not consistently applied, a situation that researchers have acknowledged
throughout the region. 21 Traders seldom attempted to seek out knowledge of ethnonyms—the
names by which groups of people self-identified—and instead applied murky generic terms such
as “Slave” or ‘Slavey” to people of the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District; sometimes this
15
   David A. Ian Harrison (1984). Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of Site and Situation.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Alberta, Edmonton. P. 28.
16
   Diamond Jenness (1932). Tribes of the Mackenzie and Yukon Basins. In, The Indians of Canada (Sixth Edition).
National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 65, Anthropological Series No. 15. Reprinted in 1963 by the Queen’s
Printer, Ottawa. P. 378.
17
   Michael J. Asch (1981). Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic. Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 338.
18
   Moore and Wheelock 1990, p. xv.
19
   Harrison 1984, p. 101.
20
   Lloyd Keith (2001). North of Athabasca: Slave Lake and Mackenzie River Documents of the North West
Company, 1800-1821. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. Pp. 237, 333.
21
   Gillespie 1981. Pp. 161-168.
                                                      4
 identity included people known otherwise as “Beaver.” Similarly, the term “Beaver”
occasionally included groups more often identified as “Slavey” and very likely included in some
instances the ancestors of those identified today as Dene Tha’.
Not even documents remaining from fur trade activities located in the area used by the Dene
Tha’ provide acknowledgement of the Aboriginal people’s own form of identification. Instead,
semi-nomadic groups of people, when distinguished at all, were sometimes associated with a
general geographical area. An example of such a practice can be seen in the records of the North
West Company, compiled for publication by historian Lloyd Keith. Historical accounts indicate
that as early as the fall of 1806 the North West Company established a trading post on the Hay
River, at a site subsequently identified as being within the general area where ancestors of the
Dene Tha’ commonly travelled for resource harvesting. Summarizing documents of the
Company’s activities in the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River regions, historian Lloyd Keith
wrote:
                  As early as the fall of 1806, the Nor’Westers established a post on
                  Hay River, a stream that empties into Great Slave Lake near the
                  head of the Mackenzie River. Although provisioned from Fort
                  Vermilion on Peace River, Hay River Post received peltry from the
                  Slaveys of the upper Mackenzie and Liard Rivers and was intended
                  to serve as a buffer to deter any Hudson’s Bay Company expansion
                  in the direction of Mackenzie River. 22
Geographer David Harrison concluded, on the basis of his review of the documentation, that this
trading post was situated at some point upstream, on the bank of the Hay River near the junction
with the Meander River. 23 A site up the Hay River in this same area—the confluence of the Hay
and Meander Rivers—is clearly identified on Murdoch McPherson’s 1824 map as an abandoned
post. 24 McPherson had knowledge of the country, for in 1822 the HBC had ordered him to
construct a post at the confluence of the Liard and Black (Petitot) Rivers that would become
known as Fort Liard. 25
Natives identified as “Slavey,” as well as Beaver, Chipewyans and possibly an occasional
Iroquois traded at Hay River Post, although Harrison notes that the Chipewyan had to be
persuaded and induced with presents to stay in the region. Hay River became the depot for those
“Slavey” who had traded at Fort Nelson and the Mackenzie River outposts prior to the closure of
these establishments. 26 Harrison concluded that at the time the North West Company operated
22
   Keith 2001, p. 70.
23
   Harrison 1984, pp. 74-75.
24
   Keith 2001, p. 45.
25
   Keith 2001, p. 70.
26
   Harrison 1984, p.77.
                                                    5
 the Hay River Post (1806-1820), “the Slaveys inhabited the area between the western edge of the
Hay River basin and both the Liard and Mackenzie River Valleys.” 27
Oblate Missionary Émile F.S. Petitot’s toponymic work among the Aboriginal peoples of the
Athabasca-Mackenzie region from approximately 1862-1883 has been inventoried and analyzed
by Donat Savoie who provided Petitot’s classification of the “Slaves” as follows, to include the
Hay River people and the Horn Mountain people:
                  . . . The Slaves properly speaking, who are divided into People of
                  the rivière au Foin [Hay River], of lac de Truite [Trout Lake], of
                  the montagne la Corne [Horn Mountain], of the Fourche du
                  Mackenzie [Fork of the Mackenzie] and of Fort Norman . . . 28
Geographer David Harrison’s map depicting the period circa 1870-1875 shows the “Hay River
Indians” [Dene Tha’] occupying the upper reaches of the Hay River drainage in British
Columbia (see Figure 5). 29
Government records for the general region of northeastern BC are very meagre until
approximately 1930. Very little information is provided in the Treaty 8 records from 1899-1900.
As well, the subsequent records of this region in the Annual Reports of the Department of Indian
Affairs are cursory. While brief comments on this region were made every year after 1900 by
H.A. Conroy in the report of the Treaty 8 Commissioner, these are lacking in useful detail.
Because of this region’s Treaty status, it was not administered through the British Columbia
Indian Inspectorate. Instead, the area became an adjunct of the Lesser Slave Agency, in Alberta.
Since the Indian Agent was based far from the region, and generally only came to visit only once
a year, in the summer when treaty payments were made, comments about the area in the Alberta
Agency's reports in the published Annual Reports are brief and generally unhelpful. The Royal
Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia which conducted relatively
detailed investigations between 1913-1916, kept detailed records, and is generally a major source
of information on Natives throughout British Columbia, is of minimal use here. Members of the
Royal Commission did not go to this region, stating in 1916 that the region's remoteness, and the
lack of dependable information about the local Native peoples’s requirements, made a visitation
pointless until basic preliminaries like a census were undertaken. The Sessional Papers of the
Department of Indian Affairs for British Columbia contain nothing of value about the region
until about 1930; these documents indicated that northeastern BC’s Aboriginal inhabitants were
"nomads" about whom little was known. It was not until 1934 that a Sub-Agency was established
at Fort St.John within the British Columbia Inspectorate.
27
   Harrison 1984, p.77.
28
   Donat Savoie, editor 2001. Land Occupancy by the Amerindians of the Canadian Northwest in the 19th Century,
as reported by Émile Petitot: Toponymic Inventory, Data Analyses, Legal Implications. CCI Press, Occasional
Publication No. 49. Ottawa: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. P. 17.
29
   Harrison 1984, p. 101.
                                                        6
 3.0       PROPOSED DENE THA’ TRANSBOUNDARY HUNTING RESERVE
The 1934 plan to set aside a very large transboundary “hunting reserve” for the exclusive use of
the Dene Tha’—encompassing the northwestern corner of Alberta, the northeastern corner of
British Columbia, and portions of the southern North West Territories—came about, in part,
because of concerns raised in the early 1930s when it was realized by government officials that
Dene Tha’ people had been trapping in northeastern BC “for generations.”
3.1       Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC, As Documented in the Early 1930s
One of the first government documents that refers to the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC
in the early 1930s is a radiogram of 5 March 1932 from the Commissioner of the BC Police to
his Commanding Officer in Prince George. The Commissioner stated he had been contacted that
same day by the Indian Commissioner for BC who complained that “some Hay Lake Indians”
[Dene Tha’] who had been trapping in northeastern BC “had been sent out of the Province,” even
though, he added, these same Native people, by Treaty, “are allowed to trap in British
Columbia.” 30
Further details about this incident were provided on 7 March 1932 by W.E. Ditchburn, the Indian
Commissioner for BC, who wrote to BC Provincial Game Commissioner Bryan Williams.
Ditchburn and said that it was reported in a 4 March 1932 telegram from Indian Affairs
Headquarters in Ottawa that a telegram had been received that same day from “Chief Tallay
Slave Band Haylakes, B.C.” complaining that:
                  ‘Police at Haylakes has ordered immediate vacation of Haylake
                  Indians from British Columbia who have trapped district for
                  generations.’ [underlining added]. This means added privation.
                  Please endeavour to have this order cancelled and wire reply. These
                  Indians have no reserve if chased from hunting grounds this winter
                  means hardship . . . 31
This same incident was also noted in Lesser Slave Lake Indian agent Napoleon L’Heureux’s
diary entry for 4 March 1932 where he wrote that the “Hay Lakes Chief” had wired him that
same day, “stating that the B.C. Police had ordered immediate evacuation of Indians from B.C.
and requesting the Dept. to endeavour to cancelle [sic] this order.” 32
30
   Radiogram of 5 March 1932 from the Commissioner of the BC Police, Victoria, to the Officer Commanding F
Division, Prince George. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
31
   Letter of 7 March 1932 from W.E. Ditchburn, Indian Commissioner for BC, Victoria, to A. Bryan Williams, BC
Provincial Game Commissioner, Victoria. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
32
   Glenbow Museum and Archives, Calgary, Alberta. M2216, Accession No. 35, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agency
Papers. Daily Journals kept by the Indian Agents, 1911-1937. Box 2, Journal entry for 4 March 1932 by Indian
                                                       7
 It was Ditchburn’s opinion, as expressed in his 7 March 1932 letter to BC Game Commissioner
Williams, that evicting these Hay Lakes [Dene Tha’] Alberta people from BC was wrong
because “the Indians in the western part of Alberta have by Treaty the right to trap in that part of
the Province of British Columbia west of the central range of the Rocky Mountains, as this right
is given to them under the conditions of Treaty No. 8 . . .”. Ditchburn concluded that in light of
the Game Wardens’ “misunderstanding on this point,” Williams should:
                  take such action as will permit of the full terms of this Treaty,
                  particularly with regard to the matter of hunting, trapping and
                  fishing, being carried out to the fullest extent by notifying your
                  Game Wardens to permit of the Indians coming under Treaty No. 8
                  continuing their trapping, hunting and fishing in that part of British
                  Columbia lying west of the central range of the Rocky Mountains. 33
Williams’ initial response to this 7 March 1932 letter of Ditchburn’s was firm. On 10 March
1932 Williams wrote that he was “very much inclined to think that we have every right to
prevent these Indians [the Dene Tha’] coming here.” He cited Section 6 of the Game Act which
at that time, he noted, specified “no Indian who is not a resident shall hunt of kill game in the
Province [of BC] at any time.” Thus Williams concluded “my Wardens who are enforcing the
Game Act are perfectly right in turning these Indians back.” While he acknowledged Treaty
rights to hunt, trap and fish, Williams pointed out that “such rights are subject to such
Regulations as my from time to time be made by the Government of the country.” Williams
concluded his letter by stating that he would seek the views of District Game Warden T. Van
Dyk on this same matter. 34
Also on 10 March 1932, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agent Napoleon L’Heureux wrote in his
journal:
                  Received reply from Ottawa re telegram of the 4th inst. stating that
                  the Province [BC] had been requested to allow Slave [Dene Tha’]
                  Indians to continue to trap in B.C. as formerly, as provided with
Agent Napoleon L’Heureux.
33
   Ditchburn to Williams, 7 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
34
   Williams to Ditchburn, 10 March 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                      8
                   treaty. Wired H.B. [Hudson’s Bay Company] Manager to notify
                  Indians. 35
Van Dyk was quick to respond to Williams’ request for his views on the subject of the Dene
Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC. On 15 March 1932 he sent a brief report to Williams that was
entitled “Alberta Indians (Hay Lakes) [Dene Tha’] trapping in British Columbia.” According to
Van Dyk, it had been the Game Department’s custom to enforce the Game Act in its entirety. He
also pointed out that “special instructions have been issued from time to time regarding Section
6, to the Constables and Game Wardens in the Peace River and Fort Nelson Districts.” Van Dyk
added that during the last two years he had given “special instructions to enforce Section 6” to
the Fort Nelson Game Warden, in response to complaints about “Alberta Indians” trapping in
northeastern BC. It was Van Dyk’s position that Section 6 of the Game Act should be
“maintained and enforced.” 36
Acknowledging Van Dyk’s report on 18 March, 1932, Williams commented that “what you have
written is almost identical with my answer [of 10 March 1932] to Mr. Ditchburn on the subject.”
Williams instructed Van Dyk “to continue to keep these Indians [Dene Tha’] out [of BC] until it
is absolutely proved that we have not the power to do so.” 37
Meanwhile Ditchburn, who was not satisfied with Williams’ response of 10 March 1932, wrote
directly to R.H. Pooley, the BC Attorney-General. In a 15 March 1932 letter to Pooley,
Ditchburn described the situation of the “Hay Lakes Indians” trapping in northeastern BC,
referenced Williams’ views on this as set out in his 10 March 1932 letter, and asked for Pooley’s
views “as to whether Section 6 of the British Columbia Game Act overrides the conditions
mentioned in Treaty No. 8.” Ditchburn concluded his letter by stating:
                  If I am right in my contention then I would strongly recommend
                  that Section 6 of the British Columbia Game Act be so amended at
                  the present Session by making provision that the Indians under
                  Treaty No. 8 will in future be permitted to enjoy the privileges
                  guaranteed to them when they surrendered their interest in the
                  territory covered by the Treaty mentioned. 38
35
   Glenbow Museum and Archives, Calgary, Alberta. M2216, Accession No. 35, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agency
Papers. Daily Journals kept by the Indian Agents, 1911-1937. Box 2, Journal entry for 10 March 1932 by Indian
Agent Napoleon L”Heureux.
36
   Report of Van Dyk to Williams, 15 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
37
   Williams to Van Dyk, 18 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
38
   Ditchburn to Pooley, 15 March 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                       9
 However, the views of the BC Game Department would soon change, as a result of a remarkable
“patrol report” dated 20 April 1932 by J.S. Clark, the Fort Nelson Game Warden. 39 This report
is discussed below.
Game Warden Clark, assisted by his colleague, Special Game Warden B. Villeneuve and using
two trains of sled dogs and toboggans, undertook a 90-day patrol between 21 January and 19
April 1932, covering a total distance of 1,430 miles between Fort Nelson and Hay Lakes,
Alberta, via the Shikillie, Hay, Black [Petitot] and Fontas Rivers. The primary object of this
patrol, according to Clark, was “to see that there were no infractions of the B.C. Game Laws by
the Alberta trappers.” Clark described the patrol as one of the most difficult ever undertaken
from the Fort Nelson detachment. The patrol was made during one of the worst winters in 20
years, with temperatures ranging from 10 to 60 degrees below zero, almost continuous winds,
and deep snow. And to make matters even worse, there were no accurate maps of this entire
region, and no boundaries had been demarcated on the ground between northeastern BC and
northwestern Alberta. 40 As Clark described the situation:
                  . . . The rivers and lakes that are on our maps are nothing like what
                  is actually in the country. You could never travel by any of the
                  maps or you would be sure to be lost. There has been no survey of
                  this country made, the outline of lakes and drainage is more or less
                  heresay. I could have got twenty convictions had there been a
                  boundary line cut . . .The B.C. Government is losing every year
                  about two thousand dollars in revenues, by not having this line [the
                  BC/Alberta boundary] cut out. . . 41
Clark pointed out that there was much more game in northeastern BC than in northwestern
Alberta:
                  The country between N.W.T. line and Kotcho Lake and thence to
                  the Alberta line is one of the very best Fur countrys in Western
                  Canada. While I was in the Shikillie River country I never seen
                  better fur signs and Beaver dams to e found all over the country,
                  and Big Game such as Moose and Caribou can be found all the way
39
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934. . Extracts from this same report are found in: LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
40
   It was not until the early 1950s that the Alberta–British Columbia Boundary Commission arranged for the
northern portion (i.e., north of approximately 57 degrees 30 minutes latitude) of their common boundary to be
surveyed and marked. See: Report of the Commission Appointed to Delimit the Boundary between the Provinces of
Alberta and British Columbia, Part IV, 1950-1953. Published by the Office of the Surveyor General, Ottawa, 1955.
41
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                          10
                   up and down the Shikilie River, and the same on the Black [Petitot]
                  River, and the Hay River. 42
When Clark was in the Hay Lakes area of Alberta in early April 1932 as part of this patrol, he
said that the “Hay Lakes Indians” [Dene Tha’] told him that “there has never been an Alberta
Game Warden at Hay Lakes or any where in that country” and that he (Clark) was “the first
Game Warden or Policeman to see Hay Lakes.” According to Clark, there was at this time at
Hay Lakes, Alberta “an Indian settlement with 29 hunters and 3 Fur-trading posts.” He noted
also that “20 of these Indians [from Hay Lakes] have trap-lines running into B.C.” Some of these
traplines, Clark added, “come within a short distance of Hay River, others West of the Shikilie
River [underlining added]. 43
The situation of the Dene Tha’ people at Hay Lakes, Alberta, as Clark described it in the winter
of 1932, was rather difficult, to say the least. Indeed, this situation moved Clark profoundly, as
indicated in the following observations he made in his report:
                  There was nothing I could do with these Indians even if I had
                  caught them on their lines, because these Indians are absolutely
                  destitute and starving . . .During the war [World War I] I seen lots
                  of poor people in Germany and France but I never seen anything
                  like what we have on the Boundary at Hay Lakes. I never had such
                  a pitiful job in my life when I advised these Indians, that only B.C.
                  Indians are given trapping privileges in B.C. The old people sat
                  there and cried, they told me I could not find enough food in any
                  one of their camps to feed one of my dogs for one night, which I
                  am sure was the truth, they told me that they had trapped towards
                  Hay River and the Shikilie River for generations [underlining
                  added] . . .The agent has never been to Hay Lakes, nor has any
                  Game Warden or Policemen been to see them . . .These Indians
                  informed me that, their agent told the chiefs at the Upper Hay River
                  last summer [1931] at treaty time that, the Indians could trap any
                  where, meaning Alberta, B.C. and N.W.T. as provided by their
                  treaty. [underlining added] 44
Clark was faced with a serious problem. As he put it, “There’s no question in my mind but
something has got to be done for these Hay Lake Indians trapping into B.C. ” He felt there were
3 options for these Aboriginal people: 1) give them special privileges to “trap into B.C. as they
42
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
43
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
44
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                     11
 have been doing”; 2) or, the Indian Department “will have to make them take up residence in
B.C.”; 3) or, “they will have to be kept out of B.C.” 45
Clark recommended the first of these three options. He envisaged a situation that would work
along the same lines as one already in place, in which “The N.W.T. Dept allow[s] the Alberta
and B.C. Indians to trap into the N.W.T. and Royaltys [sic] are taken care of by the Traders [fur-
traders] and paid to an agent the Postmaster at Fort Vermilion.” In recommending this plan,
Clark noted again that these Hay Lakes people [the Dene Tha’] “made their living in the Hay
River and Shikilie country for generations.” [underlining added]. To this he added:
                  I am sure it would be very much to the advantage of our dept to
                  allows these Indians to trap there [in northeast BC] providing they
                  register their trap-lines and royaltys paid on their Furs. I can attend
                  to their applications for registration. The Fur-traders at Hay Lakes
                  informed me that they would be only to[o] glad to pay the Province
                  from which the Furs are trapped in. 46
Divisional Game Supervisor T. Van Dyk forwarded Clark’s 20 April 1932 report to the BC
Game Commissioner, Bryan Williams, with a note that stated:
                  The work of our Game Wardens J.S. Clark and B. Villeneuve is
                  worthy of comment and I respectfully suggest that same be brought
                  to the attention of the Honorable the Attorney-General. 47
It is clear that Clark’s April 1932 report strongly influenced Williams’ previously-stated views
concerning the Dene Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC. In a 28 June 1932 letter to W.E.
Ditchburn, Indian Commissioner for BC, Williams stated the Clark report put this matter “in an
entirely different light.” Because of Clark’s report, Williams now said there was “no cause for
my fears.” Consequently Williams stated that:
                  . . . with the sanction of the Attorney General, I propose giving
                  serious consideration to the question of allowing these Indians to
                  register their trap lines exactly as our own Indians [of BC] do, in
                  accordance with the suggestion made by Game Warden Clark. 48
45
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
46
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
47
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
48
   Williams to Ditchburn, 28 June 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                     12
                     Williams concluded his letter by drawing Ditchburn’s attention to
                    the plight of the Hay Lakes Indians, as set out in the Clark report.
                    As well, Williams said he would be writing to Clark and
                    “sanctioning his action in this matter.” 49
One day later, on 29 June 1932, Williams wrote a similar letter to Van Dyk. He
referred to the Clark report as “extremely interesting” and again noted that this
report “places the matter of the Hay Lake Indians in an entirely different light.” 50
Williams advised Van Dyk by letter of 30 July 1932 that “after consulting the
Attorney-General in regard to this matter, it has been decided that you may
instruct Game Warden Clark to carry out his suggestion with regard to registering
these Indians [Hay Lake, i.e. Dene Tha’], and getting royalty collected by their
agent.” 51
Documents in this same file suggest the system of registration and royalty
collection that Clark suggested in April 1932 was in place by December 1932, and
that Dene Tha’ trappers began registering their trapping areas in northeastern BC
that same month (December). Clark stated in a letter/report of 18 January 1935
that when he was on patrol in this region in December 1932, he “received Ten
applications from the Hay Lake Indian’s [Dene Tha’] for registration of trap-
lines”. 52 This number of registrations is put into context by Clark’s statement that
when he was at Hay Lakes in the winter of 1932, there were 20 Hay Lakes
Aboriginal people [Dene Tha’] who were trapping in British Columbia. 53 By
1938, there were approximately 23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC Game
Department as trapping in the Fort Nelson District. 54
49
   Williams to Ditchburn, 28 June 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
50
   Williams to Van Dyk, 29 June 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
51
   Williams to Van Dyk, 30 July 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
52
   Letter/report of Clark to Williams, 18 January 1935, re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s in British
Columbia.. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934. In another GR 1085 document, Clark
stated that he was again in Hay Lakes, Alberta in December 1932, so presumably it was at this time he made these
initial ten trapline registrations for the Dene Tha’. See Clark to Van Dyk, 21 April 1933. BCA, GR 1085, Box 24,
File 9.
53
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
54
   BCA, GR 1085, Box 39, File 5.
                                                          13
 3.2       The Proposed 1934 Dene Tha’ Transboundary Hunting Reserve
Section 3.1 of the present overview report discusses the documentary record leading up to
December 1932 when the Dene Tha’ began to register their traplines in northeastern BC.
While historical documents from the early 1930s that have been reviewed to date give only a
general indication as to how far westward into BC the Dene Tha’ trapping activities extended at
that time—i.e.“West of the Shikilie River” [underlining added] 55 —a document from the late
1940s suggests that Fort Nelson was within the overall region used by the Dene Tha’ during the
course of their annual round of sustenance activities in former times. This document is a
December 1948 Indian Affairs report by Fort Vermilion Indian Agency Superintendent Neil
Walker in which he mentions that the “Hay Lakes Indians” [the Dene Tha’] “moved around” as
far west as Fort Nelson “in the olden days”:
          These people in the olden days were free to move around from Hay Lake to Fort
          Nelson in northern British Columbia, the Lower Hay River [in the NWT] and
          Great Slave Lake [in the NWT]. [underlining added] They would winter wherever
          winter caught up with them and they lived mainly off the country . . . 56
Another document from the late 1940s stated that “a large block in British Columbia” had been
registered in the name of the Hay Lake [Dene Tha’] people; this “large block,” the boundaries of
which were not provided in this particular document, was said to be “the ancestral trapping
grounds of the people of the Hay Lake area” [underlining added]. 57
This issue of the westward extent of the Dene Tha’ into British Columbia was taken into
consideration in 1934 when a transboundary Hunting Reserve for the Dene Tha’ was proposed,
as will be discussed below.
Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agent Napoleon L’Heureux indicated in a 12 September 1934 letter to
the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs (DSGIA) in Ottawa that he and the DSGIA
had “recently” discussed the establishment of a transboundary Hunting Reserve “exclusively for
the use of Treaty Indians of the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta who were so
unfortunate as to be deprived of their traplines where their registration has been made
compulsory.” In this same letter, L’Heureux proposed that a large tract of land be set aside for
this purpose, whose boundaries he recommended as follows:
55
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
56
   Neil Walker, 3 December 1948. Extract of letter from the Superintendent of the Fort Vermilion Indian Agency,
Neil Walker, to the Superintendent of Welfare. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6734, File 420 – 2 – 2 – 1 1.
57
   Report, Fort Vermilion (From Autumn of 1947 to the last day of March, 1951). Pp. 1 and 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol.
8444, File 775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02426A; Dene Tha’
document No. 2-5613A].
                                                         14
                     The South boundary to be a line running from East to West by 58
                    degrees 30 minutes latitude, the West boundary by 122 degrees
                    longitude, the North boundary to be as far North in the North-West
                    Territories as the Administration may grant and the East boundary
                    by 118 degrees longitude. 58
L’Heureux ended this letter by requesting that Ottawa advise him if the Department found such a
proposal to have practical value. A minute on the letter indicates that it was sent on for comment
to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for Alberta. 59
According to L’Heureux’s figures, this proposed Hunting Reserve would extend approximately
75 miles westward into BC from the BC/Alberta border, and about 105 miles southward into BC
from the BC/North West Territories border.
While L’Heureux, as stated above, had suggested the proposed Hunting Reserve was to be set
aside “exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians of the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta
who were so unfortunate as to be deprived of their traplines where their registration has been
made compulsory,” other more senior officials clearly understood it was for the exclusive use of
the Dene Tha’. For example, the Inspector of Indian Agencies for the Alberta Inspectorate, M.
Christianson, referring to L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter in his own letter of 27
September 1934 to the Secretary of Indian Affairs in Ottawa, referred to this as “a hunting
reserve exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River, which
location is in the Northwest corner of the Province of Alberta.” 60 There is no doubt whatsoever
that this is a reference to the Dene Tha’.
Christianson’s 27 September 1934 response to L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 proposal was not
encouraging. He stated it was “questionable whether the area mentioned in the Agent’s letter
could be set aside, being approximately 140 miles in breadth and 227 miles in length . . .making
it necessary for us to deal with three different governments.” As well, Christianson pointed out
that on the basis of information he had gathered, the Dene Tha’ “hunt mostly along the border of
Alberta and go into British Columbia, and some of them may, at times, go into the North West
Territories.” It was Christianson’s recommendation that the Indian Department take up the
matter individually with the three governments in question, but that it might be first of all
58
   Letter of Indian Agent N.P. L'Heureux to Dr. H.W. McGill, Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 12
September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02233; Dene Tha’ document No. 4024].
59
   L'Heureux to McGill, 12 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 6733, File 420-2X.
60
   Letter of M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta Inspectorate, to the Secretary [A.F. MacKenzie],
Department of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 27 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X. A copy of this
letter also exists in: BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                         15
 prudent for someone to visit the people at Hay Lakes and determine “the exact location as to
where these Indians have hunted in the past and wish to hunt in the future.” 61
It should be noted, however, that the known and available materials reviewed to date do not
indicate whether or not this very sensible suggestion of Christianson’s—to visit the Dene Tha’
and determine from them exactly where they have hunted in the past and wish to hunt in the
future—was ever followed up.
Having received Christianson’s 27 September 1934 letter, the Secretary of Indian Affairs, A.F.
MacKenzie on 6 October 1934 forwarded it to C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian Commissioner for
BC, in Victoria, and requested that Perry give it his attention and prepare a report on this matter.
MacKenzie also referred in his letter to this proposed Hunting Reserve as being set aside
“exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [Dene Tha’]. 62
When Christianson had first met the Dene Tha’ the previous year, 1933, he reported that the 460
Band members “live here and there throughout that part of the country and I understand that
quite a number of them live at Hay Lakes.” 63 The Acting Secretary of Indian Affairs used the
figure of 500 when he advised R.A. Gibson, Acting Deputy Minister of the Department of the
Interior, how many people would be affected by the reservation of the proposed lands. The plan,
in his view, would protect not only the interests of the Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River people
[the Dene Tha’], but would be in the interests of game conservation, as well. 64
The area proposed for the Dene Tha’ Hunting Reserve, almost 32,000 square miles in size, was
marked on a sketch map and blueprint, a copy of which was forwarded to various government
representatives, along with the request that they confer with their respective governments as to
the proposal’s viability. The map, itself, which followed the boundaries set out by Indian Agent
L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter (as discussed above), appears in the present report as
Figure 6. 65 The letter transmitting this map was written on 23 October 1934 by Indian Affairs
Secretary A.F. MacKenzie to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta
61
   Christianson to the Secretary of Indian Affairs, 27 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X.
62
   Letter of the Secretary of Indian Affairs, A.F. MacKenzie to C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian Commissioner for
BC, 6 October 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
63
   Memorandum of M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta, to Dr. H. McGill, Indian Affairs,
Ottawa, 24 July 1933. INAC Headquarters, Ottawa. Copy on file 775/30-3-212, Vol. 1. Surveys and Reserves,
Upper Hay River Reserve No. 212, Fort Vermilion Agency.
64
   Acting Secretary, Indian Affairs, to R.A. Gibson, Acting Deputy Minister of the Department of the Interior, 27
October 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X. [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02238; Dene Tha’ document No. 4029].
65
   The source of this map is: LAC, RG 10, Volume 11947, File 147/30-1, FA 10-105 [entered into Federal Court
Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02237A; Dene Tha’ document No. 4301A].
                                                          16
 Inspectorate, in response to Christianson’s letter to MacKenzie of 27 September 1934.
MacKenzie in this 23 October 1934 letter referred to the area in question as a “hunting reserve
exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [i.e. Dene Tha’]. 66
Responding to MacKenzie’s 23 October 1934 letter, Christianson on 9 November 1934 said that
he expected to meet with Alberta officials within several days concerning the proposed Hunting
Reserve for the “Indians of Upper Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [Dene Tha’]. He also noted
that MacKenzie was himself going to take up this matter with BC Government officials and with
the North West Territories Commission. And Christianson again referred to the position he had
taken, as set out in his 27 September 1934 letter, that is, the territory being requested “was
excessive to the requirements of these bands of Indians.” He ended his letter by stating: “I
believe we should go thoroughly into the matter of what these Indians [the Dene Tha’] actually
need, before this vast territory is set aside . . .”. 67
C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, responding to MacKenzie’s 6 October 1934
request to investigate the matter of this proposed Hunting Reserve with BC officials, reported on
23 November 1934 that he had travelled to Vancouver on 19 November. There Perry met with
Provincial Game Commissioner Cunningham and Inspector Butler of the Game Department to
seek their views. They decided to obtain additional input from the Fort Nelson Game Warden,
J.S. Clark, which would supplement his 1932 report, especially since the Commissioner thought
that there may be irregularities in the trapline records. Hence, Perry decided to wait for a
supplemental report from the Fort Nelson office, acknowledging that this might take some time
due to the remoteness of this area. 68 MacKenzie wrote to Christianson in Alberta on 28
November 1934 to advise him that the BC Game Department in consultation with Mr. Perry was
investigating the situation of the Hay Lake and Upper Hay River Indians’ [Dene Tha’] hunting
and that the results of this “will be communicated to the department at an early date.” 69
On 23 November 1934, Inspector F.R. Butler of the BC Game Department transmitted to the
Commanding Officer of the Game Department in Prince George, a copy of a letter dated 22
66
   Letter from A.F. Mackenzie, Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian
Agencies, Calgary, Alberta, 23 October 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 11947, File 147/30-1, FA 10-105 [entered into
Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02237; Dene Tha’ document No. 4301].
67
   M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for Alberta, to Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 9
November 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02241; Dene Tha’ document No. 4033].
68
   C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, to the Secretary of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 23 November
1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No.
02243; Dene Tha’ document No. 4034].
69
   A. Mackenzie, Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for
Alberta, 28 November 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as
Crown document No. 02244; Dene Tha’ document No. 4035].
                                                        17
 Novermber 1934 that he (Butler) had received from C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian
Commissioner for BC. Butler noted that Perry’s 22 November letter contained Indian Affairs’
correspondence relating to the proposed “exclusive hunting territory” for the “Treaty Indians at
Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River [Dene Tha’], in British Columbia and elsewhere.” As well,
Butler acknowledged Perry’s understanding that he (Butler) was awaiting a report from Game
Warden J.S. Clark of Fort Nelson. 70
Butler also stated in his 23 November 1934 letter to the Commanding Office of the Game
Department in Prince George that he was transmitting “a copy of the Game Regulations on
which I have marked the territory which the Indian Department desires set aside as an exclusive
hunting area for the Indians mentioned [the Dene Tha’].” He ended his letter by stating that he
wanted to have a “full and complete report” from Fort Nelson Game Warden Clark, together
with this Prince George Officer’s recommendations, “as soon as possible.” 71
The hand-drawn sketch map that Butler transmitted to Perry on 23 November 1934 appears in
the present overview report as Figure 7. 72 It differs in several ways from the map which has been
discussed above (and appears here as Figure 6) and which follows the geographical boundaries
set out in Indian Agent L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter. To begin with, Butler delineated
only the proposed boundaries in BC. He did not indicate the proposed boundaries in Alberta or in
the NWT, as L’Heureux had done. While Butler’s western boundary of the proposed Dene Tha’
Hunting Reserve in BC was the same as L’Heureux’s (122 degrees of longitude, which extends
about 75 miles west of the BC/Alberta border), Butler’s southern boundary extended about 32
miles further south to 58 degrees latitude, which is about 137 miles southward into BC from the
BC/North West Territories border.
Inspector T. Van Dyk, the officer in charge of “D” Division of the Game Department in Prince
George, to whom Butler’s 23 November 1934 letter and its enclosures had been sent, transmitted
these materials to the Fort Nelson Detachment of the Game Department [to the attention of
Game Warden Clark] on 27 November 1934. Van Dyk’s instructions and observations, as set out
in this letter, were as follows:
                  In reporting on this matter it would be advisable to show all Indians
                  registerd in the area claimed for the Hay Lake Indians, shown on
70
   The source of Butler’s letter is: F. R. Butler, BC Game Department Inspector, to the Commanding Officer of the
Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-
1934. The source of Perry’s letter is: C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, to F.R. Butler, BC Game
Department Inspector, 22 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
71
   Butler to the Commanding Officer of the Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085,
Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
72
   Map entitled “area claimed for Hay Lake Indians,” accompanying Butler’s letter to the Commanding Officer of
the Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-
1934.
                                                         18
                   the enclosed Map, and in order to cover the subject in its entirety
                  make a copy of the Map of N.B.C. [northern BC] and show all
                  Indian trap-lines entered on your map.
                  I am positive that it will be impossible to give the Hay Lake
                  Indians the area claimed, as it comes very close to Fort Nelson, and
                  the Fort Nelson Indians must be given consideration. The white
                  trappers in the area must also be protected in so far as their
                  registered trap-lines are concerned. 73
Van Dyk ended his letter by requesting that Clark give this matter his very close
attention and report back on this matter “as quickly as possible.” 74
 It was almost two months later that Van Dyk received the report he had requested. This was in
the form of a two-page report by Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, dated 18 January 1935
and entitled “Re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s [sic] in British Columbia.” Clark began
his report by saying that while he had “every respect and sympathy” for these Aboriginal people
[the Dene Tha’] and thoroughly understood “the condition they are living under,” he could see
“no justified reason why a game reserve should be made in the area in question, that is the
British Columbia area . . .”. Clark added the following concerning his views on this situation:
                  The Game Commissioner [of BC] has given permission for these
                  Indian’s of Hay Lakes to be properly registered in British
                  Columbia, which entitles them to the same privileges as other
                  British Columbia trappers. During my patrold to that district in
                  December 1932, I received Ten applications from the Hay Lake
                  Indian’s for registration of trap-lines in British Columbia under
                  most advantageous conditions and I am doing by best to give the
                  protecton from poachers . . . 75
Clark then went on to say that when he took over the Fort Nelson detachment in 1928, “not one
of the Nelson [Fort Nelson] Indian’s had made application for registration of trap-lines, and were
determined not to register.” He said that he managed, however, to explain the meaning of
registration to them and that now [1935] the Fort Nelson Aboriginals were “all well satisfied”
with their registered traplines. Clark also said that he was enclosing a copy of a map of northern
BC “showing the Fort Liard, Franceways, Nelson Forks, Snake River, Fort Nelson, Fontas,
Indian trap-lines running into the territory claimed for the Hay lakes Indian’s.” (This map does
73
   T. Van Dyk, Inspector in Charge of “D” Division Game Department, Prince George, to the Fort Nelson
Detachment of the Game Department [to the attention of J.S. Clark, Game Warden], 27 November 1934. BCA, GR
1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
74
   Van Dyk to the Fort Nelson Detachment of the Game Department, 27 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
75
   “Re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s [sic] in British Columbia.” Report by Game Warden J.S. Clark to the
Officer [T. Van Dyk] Commanding “D” Game Division, Prince George, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                      19
 not accompany this letter in the file and has not been found in the materials reviewed to date). He
continued:
                    If the territory is given to the Hay Lakes, our [Fort Nelson] Indian’s
                    that are trying to conserve their lines will not want Hay Lakes
                    Indian’s taking their territory over. There are also about Twenty
                    white trappers that have registered trap-lines, and some have had
                    them for the last ten years . . .they will have to be taken into
                    consideration. 76
                    Clark ended his report by stating: “I would respectfully ask that
                    instead of a Game reserve being made, that registered trap-lines in
                    British Columbia be given the Hay Lakes Indian’s.” 77
There is one other letter/report concerning this proposed Hunting Reserve for the Dene Tha’ that
exists from this same approximate time period. It is from T. Van Dyk, Inspector in charge of the
“D” Division Game Department Office in Prince George, is dated 19 February 1935 and
addressed to the BC Game Commissioner, and is found in the same file as the 18 January 1935
report by J.S. Clark. But it is incomplete. Only the last page exists, and it is not known how
many pages preceded it. In the first paragraph of the final page of Van Dyk’s report, he states:
                    From the enclosed sketch it is evident that the setting aside of a
                    trapping area for the Hay Lake Indians in British Columbia is out
                    of the question, as it will be impossible to dispossess the trappers,
                    whites and Indians alike, registered in the area. 78
                    Van Dyk then goes on to say that the BC Game Department is
                    accepting applications “from Hay Lakes Indians [Dene Tha’] who
                    can prove that they have trapped in B .C. over a period of years”
                    and points out a number of such applications have already been
                    registered, with others pending. In the last paragraph of his
                    letter/report, Van Dyk states:
                    I recommend that we continue to register the Hay Lake Indians
                    [Dene Tha’] who have proof that they trapped in B.C. over a period
                    of years, but the wholesale registration of all Hay Lake Indians in
                    B.C. will be impossible and not quite fair to our own Indians and
                    white trappers. 79
76
   J.S. Clark to T. Van Dyk, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
77
   J.S. Clark to T. Van Dyk, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
78
   [Incomplete] letter/report to the BC Game Commissioner re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indians in BC by T.
Van Dyk, Inspector in charge of “D” Game Division, Prince George, 19 February 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
79
   [Incomplete] letter/report by T. Van Dyk, 19 February 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians,
1932-1934.
                                                       20
 4.0      CONTINUED DOCUMENTATION OF DENE THA’ TRAPPING
         AND HUNTING IN NORTHEASTERN BC
Situated in the remote northwest of Alberta, the bands of the Fort Vermilion Agency, which had
until 1947 been part of the Lesser Slave Lake Agency that included northeastern British
Columbia, seldom received a visit from an Indian Affairs’ representative, and then it was
generally only at the time the assembled members received their Treaty annuity payment. The
known and available records that have been reviewed to date indicate little knowledge of these
Aboriginal people had been recorded prior to about 1930.
As noted also in Section 3.1 of the present report, the documentary record shows
that by 1938 there were approximately 23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC
Game Department as trapping in the Fort Nelson District, 80 and an August 1943
report stated there were 37 Dene Indians from Hay River [Dene Tha’] who had
registered traplines in northeastern BC. 81
Superintendent S.C. Knapp of the Fort Vermilion Agency compiled a report for the period 1947-
1951 in which he pointed out that the boundaries of the Agency legally stretched to the
Alberta/BC border, although the Aboriginal people in this Agency trapped in Alberta, BC and
the NWT. This report estimated that in the late 1940s, 38 families of the Upper Hay River Band
[Dene Tha’] trapped in BC. 82 This same report stated that “a large block in British Columbia”
had been registered in the name of the Hay Lake [Dene Tha’] people; this “large block,” the
boundaries of which were not provided in this particular document, was said to be “the ancestral
trapping grounds of the people of the Hay Lake area” [underlining added]. 83
On June 18th, 1952, representatives from Alberta and BC, along with representatives from the
Department of Indian Affairs, met at Hay Lakes to discuss with the Upper Hay River band what
measures could be taken to conserve the trapping resources. 84 Present were 78 Upper Hay River
band trappers with traplines in Alberta and BC,along with the Chief and a Councilor. According
to the Minutes of the meeting, a considerable amount of time was spent finding new lines for
80
   BCA, GR 1085, Box 39, File 5.
81
   “Report on Registered Trap Lines in Alberta and General Trapping Conditions” by Fur Supervisor J.L. Grew, 14
August 1943. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6743, File 420-2-2- 3.
82
   Report, Fort Vermilion (From Autumn of 1947 to the last day of March, 1951). P. 1. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File
775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02426A; Dene Tha’ document
No. 2-5613A].
83
   1947-1951 Fort Vermilion report, pp. 1 and 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File 775/23-4, pt. 1.
84
   Fort Vermilion Indian Agency: Quarterly Report Ending 30th June 1952. P. 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File
775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-300-99 as Crown document No. 2025A; Dene Tha’ document
No. 2-5625A].
                                                        21
 young men without licenses, in addition to locating an area where widows and old men without
traplines might trap to the exclusion of all others. The assembled members agreed that those
found trapping in this reserved area, who held traplines, “would be dealt with similarly to the
Alberta Game Act, under the poaching clause.” 85 For the convenience of the BC game officials at
Fort Nelson, it was also agreed that the Upper Hay River Ranger would handle beaver permits
for trappers using the BC block.
Surveyors with the Alberta – British Columbia Boundary Commission in 1951-1952 observed
that trappers using the area north of the Petitot River were “from the Upper Hay River and Hay
Lake, belonging to the Slavey tribe.” 86 Hence, the surveyors recognized the trappers as Dene
Tha’. Several years later, it was discovered that the cleared Alberta – BC boundary transected at
least two traplines, that of Paul Metchooyeah and Alexis Seniantha, both members of the Upper
Hay River Band. The problem was resolved by separating the blocks and restricting them to a
single province, so that Paul Metchooyeah and his sons would be registered in Alberta and use
portions of both traplines that were in Alberta, and Alexis Seniantha and his son would stay in
BC and use portions of both traplines that were in BC. 87 Additional meetings were held in 1955
with BC and Alberta game wardens to clarify the location of traplines with the intention of
reducing overcrowding in certain areas. 88 It was resolved that certain Dene Tha’ trappers would
be registered on a BC block, if the government was successful in purchasing the line from its
current holder. 89
85
   Minutes of Band Meeting, Records of Council Talks and Conference of Game Officials for Hay Lake, of the
Upper Hay River Slave Band, June 15th - 20th, 1952. INAC, HQ CR. File 775/3-6, Volume 1 (7/50 – 3/69), L3-167.
[entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 792].
86
   Report of the Commission Appointed to Delimit the Boundary between the Provinces of Alberta and British
Columbia: Part iv, 1950-1953. Published by the Office of the Surveyor General, Ottawa, 1955. Page 67. Surveyor
C.B.C. Donnelly, in charge of the crew marking the boundary line between Alberta and the NWT in 1951-1952
commented that two trap lines were intersected between Hay River and the BC border. It has not been possible to
determine the location of these two traplines, and Donnelly did not comment on the ethnic identity of the trappers,
but he did note that one of traplines crossed the boundary “near Mon. [survey monument] 375” and “led to a lake 8
miles distant” that was “full of Jumbo White Fish averaging 5 lbs. each.” See C.B.C. Donnelly’s Surveyor’s Reports
for the Alberta/North West Territories Boundary Commission: Phase 2, Winter Season 1951-52. Land Survey
Records, Surveyor General’s Office, Natural Resources Canada, Headquarters, Ottawa. No. 23387, p. 13.
87
   Band Minutes of the Upper Hay River Slave Band Held on the Hay Lake Reserve, June 6th, 1954. INAC, HQ File
775/3-6, Volume 1 (07/50 – 03/69). [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 827B].
88
   Minutes of Council and Band Meeting Held at Hay Lakes Community Hall by Slave Band Members June 15,
1955. INAC, HQ-CR, File 775/3-6, Volume 1 (07/50 – 03/69). [entered into Federal Court Action T-300-99 as
Crown document No. 4325A; Dene Tha’ document No. 6445A].
89
   Minutes of the Upper Hay River Slave Band. Council Meeting Held March 31st , 1955 in Hay Lake Council Hall.
INAC, HQ-CR. File775/3-6, Volume 1, L3-167 (7/50 – 3/69) [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 864A].
                                                         22
 5.0      CONCLUSIONS
This overview report has focused on the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern British Columbia
and has been based on a literature review undertaken over a four-year period between 2005 and
the present date. While this review of known and available ethnohistoric, ethnographic and
linguistic source materials has been wide-ranging and thorough, it has not been exhaustive. A
number of sources remain to be reviewed.
The literature review indicates that northeastern BC was within overall Dene Tha’ traditional
territory, although there is little in the early North West Company and Hudson’s Bay Company
documents to distinguish the Dene Tha’ from other “Slavey-speaking” groups. Moreover,
Government records from northeastern BC are very meagre until approximately 1930.
Beginning in the 1930s, the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC began to be recorded in a
number of documentary sources. Dene Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC caused problems for BC
government officials at this time because these Aboriginals were not registered trapline holders,
and there were calls to evict them from BC. However, a reconnaissance patrol by the Fort Nelson
Game Warden in early 1932 across northeast BC and over to Hay Lakes in northwest Alberta led
to a better understanding of Dene Tha’ patterns of land use. As a result, a decision was taken to
allow those Dene Tha’ who were trapping in northeast BC to register their traplines with the BC
Game Department. The actual registrations began in December 1932. By 1938, there were about
23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC Game Department as trapping in northeast BC, and in
1943, a total of 37 Dene Tha’ were said to have registered traplines in this same region.
A number of source documents identify the Dene Tha’ presence in northeast BC. One 1932
document stated that the “Hay Lakes Indians” (Dene Tha’) had trapped in northeastern BC “for
generations”; a late-1940s report described northeast BC as “the ancestral trapping grounds of
the people of the Hay Lake area” (Dene Tha’).
What has not been determined with certainty, on the basis of the historical documents reviewed
to date, is how far westward into northeast BC these trapping and hunting activities of the Dene
Tha’ extended. A 1948 document said that the Dene Tha’ “in the olden days” roamed as far west
as Fort Nelson. A 1932 document stated they trapped “West of the Shikilie River.”
In 1934, Indian Affairs officials proposed the establishment of a large transboundary “Hunting
Reserve” exclusively for the Dene Tha’, encompassing northwestern Alberta, northeastern BC
and portions of the southern North West Territories. As proposed, this Hunting Reserve extended
about 75 miles westward into BC from the Alberta/BC border, and either 105 or 137 miles
southward into BC from the NWT/BC border. However, this proposed Hunting Reserve was
never established.
                                                  23
 Figure 1 : David A. Ian Harrison 1984. Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of Site and Situation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography,
Unviersity of Alberta, Edmonton. P. 28
 Figure 2 : Diamond Jenness 1932. Tribes of the Mackenzie and Yukon Basins. In, The Indians of Canada (Sixth Edition). National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 65, Anthopological Series
No.15. Reprinted in 1963 by the Queen’s Printer, Ottawa. P. 378
 Figure 3: Michael J. Asch 1981. Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol.6, Subarctic.
Published by the Smithonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 338.
 Figure 4: Patrick Moore and Angela Wheelock 1990 (editors). Wolverine Myths and Visions:
Dene Traditions from Northern Alberta. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press. P. xv.
 Figure 5: David A. Ian Harrison 1984. Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of
Site and Situation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography, University of
Alberta, Edmonton.P.101
 Figure 6: Map of 1934 proposed transboundary “hunting reserve” set aside “exclusively for
the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River [Dene Tha’].”
Library and Archives Canada, Ottawa. RG 10,Vol.11, 947, ﬁle 147/30-1
                                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Interim Report
                                                                                             EnCana Cabin Gas Plant
Figure 7: “Area claimed for Hay Lake Indians [Dene Tha’].” British Columbia Archives, Victoria.
GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934
§ii$$§§§§°§t§ﬁ£g§§m$ : r3: 4': ‘-o--. "8' - ”-"SR- .-"’“"I>.‘. é ; H' -m¢. “5EP""¢ ‘- "W" ‘ ww‘hx- w~: v“ «M "M ”'9'?- '3' .A'i’a. { " ~‘ "e0” "4M" '«g—Vng‘
:::::::::g E: : : Z; :: :6»: g. : : :i : :: :. g: °“:- :
:: : ”:1: ~ :3: :. f : :2“ : : :: : L: W
W:?‘ﬁéwy EEPPngﬁﬁ §: .:1. 3:: V: 3: :3 g: ”:3... P: ..L: 5:3,:31" :3: : w. :3: P: ..::., ‘k: =3 .::...:‘ :5:
“: ”*xﬁé’g": :::- :3 I
mm: ??:W i:
wwwﬁﬁ‘:
Suite 340 E I22 Mainmmi Sires:
Vanceuver, BC V68 5L1
Phone: 604-.68'195é9 Fax: €’:i’.}4.68?.2696
M: w . 1km wen
OCEObSE’ 23 289E} Rosanne. M. §§er
" " Direct Line: 6046816549, ext. I0?
E-mzzﬂ: rhiieefgﬁlijfiqiaw.ca
Delivered. by: MAEL
Natienal Energy BGELI‘C]. . PEEP NP: g {1:83-54}.
444- Seventh Ave. SW
Calgary: AB EZP OX3
x .3- ‘ "1‘ i. A_k'if -:_ i: .' “.1 .
: 1:991:01“ Anna: 3m: ..J:1.:~.::50:: ~
Acﬁnﬁ Secmtarv of {he 802::ch
D J
Dear MS. Eyickscm:
‘ 7 ' w _ v9 - a a
Ra: Westmas: Emmy Ema: mwymg m: hmmem 3:: Spawn: Emrgy ?E‘mmm:ssw::
(“W:stcaasé”): maﬁa: 53 :gpﬁimﬁim: :2: m: NEE: far: ﬁg: Fm: 1“": :Esm: Nwﬁ: Pmmwing
Faciiiﬁy (Eh: “Pmﬁm”:
We are. writmg 0n behaif :31“ the gene E‘ha‘" Firs: Hath»: (“IFI'TPN‘E ::~’§.iE: reapac: 1:) ﬁrm abm’e-vnomd
‘A “ 9 4. Pp «’ " " 'f' _ "S ' I "1 - .' :r .._H_ .' 2: Q 'I 3" !'\ ¢f".'." 4 “L. '
mam: 2:16;, name specmcz—ziiy: :0 pmmde mummms: 0:: 1h: dppizgﬁmn Med {:3- sztwabi 1:: 1823:1013 :0
111:: Projegt {the “Appilcat:o::”),
Eindosed, please find 2: table co:::a:1::::g specﬁm c::.r::.:::c::ts :37: rah:ti:m :1: {he Em::fomnenm] am: Seam:—
Esommm Assessmm: {“ESA”) included 1:: the AppEicai‘icn. We: also wish :0 make adaiiiiana‘:
comments 0:: :11: Appéicaﬁon and the apprmrai process: for this Pi‘cgast, 3:3: 0:1: beiow.

' Er: midfiion :0 0:2: aemnasnm 3:3: 0:1: 33:19:: and: in the. 9110103113: we agres With the cmnmenm made in
the “\‘LB: IIﬁIAEmaiim: R6£§B€Si dated Octaber ii 3, 20:39. EB'E‘FN Eooks f:31*:::'2:rd :9 :‘:::C€:ipi of tin:
additionai infermatisn mquested.

N ‘ v ‘ ' ~ "} ‘1

§;9§§§E§éiﬂléﬁiml§%§%

3:: :s magmas: :0: Wasigzoas: :0 make the- s:z:ieme::: 0:: :2 ye 9 of its A ?)iicatéon that :‘imre am “no

. .. .z‘.‘
:mts:and::1g {30314363‘3’15 by Abomgmai Peopies" m reimmn :0 {:36 Pages: As 1::dicamd :15: our p:~ev::ms
- . . r“1 .3 7 t v ‘ -a 1. ., I... .. 6 . . . . . ‘ . - .. . . .
v.11 . SPi't/tr? xa- 4'. - \u'h. .1 K. v p». . 3. '.&.i} 5,. ‘o.£~f'...\1‘(/- .n. CL 6 w A ‘ . s. h
:“0:°*‘e<;.:03368‘1m 1:33:47“: d0“; Pave C’X’iCPE‘I‘i‘E m ’ciet'cz: :0 ?l: ‘ E)1"‘_“Ci am? W‘t‘; :10: ad: W194); comvhed
. . ‘P I .55 ‘\.. ‘15 '*-/‘ ."a c t. ' ‘7 .w ' r c \‘V- 4' 1 X") n" t ‘1:

gym: :0 ‘WQS‘ECOEESE s: s:u:3::313510:: 0: ms: A.pp.[:c.::::on. 3}": EN 1:: 3:33: emmg a: :mmbe: {A 3:36:15: conwms
abou: {E163 P:?Ojec: in. this letter and ancissure.

_ 5
Baseline lnformatien to inform the DTFN Aboriginal impact Assessment.
Proper baseline information needed to understand potential direct, indirect and cumulative
impacts on DTFN’s Treaty and Aboriginal Rights and interests has not generally been required
in the context of regulatory applications. In our view, he following information is required to
properly assess impacts and to ensure that for any further approvals, there is adequate and
meaningful information to assess impacts. We look forward to discussing these information
requirements, which could form part of the development of a Traditional Resource Use Plan or
some other Plan to protect DTFN’s rights in 8.0.
15. Quantitative Information on DTFN’S Traditional Territory in 8.0.:

(a) Traditional Territory location and size in miles2 and hecatresz.

(b) Fixed Sites of Cabins, Camps, Communities, Historical Trails, Graves, Trap Lines,
Spiritual sites (locations to be kept private unless authorized by the DTFN) within
Traditionai Territory.

(0) Current and past potable water sources and infrastructure.

(d) Amount of land within Traditional Territory taken up for deveIOpment (energy,
forestry, agriculture) and percentage of total Traditional Territory.

(e) Amount of land within Traditional Territory preposed to be taken up for development
and percentage of total Traditional Territory.

(f) Amount of land within Traditional Territory potentially impacted by the proposed
Project.

16. Quantitative and qualitative information on Current and Historical Traditional Uses (hunting,
fishing, plants and medicines, spirituaf use):

(a) Hunting

(5) Main species hunted for food and domestic purposes and the uses made of those
species.

(ii) Locations and access routes currently used for hunting main species,

(iii) Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations and access routes used and
costs associated with hunting main species based on such changes, both qualitative
and quantitative.

(iv) Estimated amount of current consumption and percentage of total meat intake from
hunted animals.

(v) Estimate of change in amount of hunted meat as a percentage of tote! meat
consumed from 40, 20 and 10 years ago

6
(b) Fishing .
(i) Main species fished for food and domestic purposes and uses made of those
species.
(ii) Locations currently used for fishing main species.
(iii) Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations used for fishing main species
and costs associated with such changes, both qualitative and quantitative.
(iv) Estimated amount of current consumption and percentage of total fish intake from
fishing.
(v) Estimate of change in amount of fish as a percentage of total fish consumed from
40, 20 and 10 years ago. '
(C) Gathering Plants and Medicines
(i) Main species gathered and uses made thereof.
' (ii) Locations currently used for gathering main species.
(iii) Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations used for gathering main
species and costs associated with those changes.
(iv) Changes in frequency of gathering activities.
(:1) Spiritual and Cultural Use
(i) Locations currently used for spiritual and culture! practices (locations to remain
undocumented unless disclosure is authorized by DTFN’).
(ii) Changes in location from 40, 20 and 10 years ago and costs associated with those
changes, both quaiitative and quantitative.
(9) Traditional Economic Pursuits
(i) Animais, plants, medicines used for barter or trade.
(ii) Changes in bartering and trading from 40, 20 and 10 years ago and reasons for
change.
(iii) Estimated cost of purchasing goods previously traded or bartered.
(1‘) Traditional Resource Pursuits
(i) Current forest and mineral resources gathered and used.
' (ii) Changes in forest and mineral resources gathered and used from 40, 20 and 10
years ago.

7
17. Socio-Economic l nformation
(a) Community Demographics
(i) Current demographics - age, family units, education, sex, private sector
employment, FN public sector employment, selfaemployment).
(ii) Changes in demographics from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
(iii) Predicted demographics in 10 years based on current trends. -
(b) Income
(i) Amount and sources (trapping, wage employment, etc.) of income.
(ii) Changes in amounts and sources of income from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
(iii) Number and percentage of individuals and families receiving social assistance.
(iv) Changes in number and percent of social assistance recipients from 40, 20 and
10 years ago.
(0) Expenditures '
(i) Expenditures on food, housing, trave! and recreation.
(ii) Changes in expenditures from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
(d) Resource Sector Employment and Income (energy, forestry, agriculture, other)
(i) Current number of DTF N members employed in resource sector.
_ (ii) Changes in number of people employed in resource sector from 40, 20 and 10
years ago.
(iii) Number of DTFN members currently employed by industry operating within DTFN’s
Traditional Territory.
(iv) Number and value of any contracts provided by industry operating within DTFN’s
Traditional Territory.
18. Health Information:
(a) DTF N hearth problems (including cancer and respiratory illnesses) by age and sex.
(b) Changes in health problems from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
(0) Deaths (ages, causes).
(d) Changes in causes of deaths from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.

- 8
((—3) Health problems and causes of death compared to regionat pOpulation.
Cumulative Impacts
19. Cumulative Impacts on Dene Tha’s Traditional Territory and its Uses
(3) Amount (quantity and percentage) of potential forestry and oil and gas deposits within
DTFN’S Traditional Territory.
(b) Amount of land (quantity and percentage) currently leased for forestry and oil and gas
exploration and devebpment within DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
(0) Percentage of tenures developed in DTFN’S Traditional Territory in past 10 years.
(d) Amount of land within DTFN’s Traditional Territory taken up for other developments
(Le. converted from natural vegetation).
(6) Amount of DTFN’S Traditional Territory lost to Traditional Uses because of direct and
indirect impacts of existing, planned and reasonabiy foreseeable development.
20. Current Projects and Activities
(a) Forestry
(i) Forest tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project.
(ii) Size of forest tenures in the vicinity of the Project.
(iii) Size of forest tenures in DTFN’S Traditional Territory.
(iv) Estimated size of area of direct and indirect disturbance to wildlife relied upon by the
DTFN in the vicinity of the Project and within Traditional Territory.
(b) Linear Corridors
(i) identification of alt linear corridors (pipeltnes, transmission lines, roads, seismic
lines) in vicinity of Project and Traditional Territory.
(ii) Estimated size of area of direct and indirect disturbance to wildlife relied upon by the
DTFN in vicinity of Project and in Traditional! Territory.

9
(c) Other tenure holders
(i) identification of all other tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project area inciuding
exploration leases.
(ii) Size of area of held by other tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project and in
DTFN’S Traditional Territory.
21. Reasonably Foreseeable Future Developments
(3) The identification of all projects which have been applied for, or reasonably
foreseeable, or which are likely to be induced by current and planned development,
with DTFN’S Traditional Territory.
(b) The infrastructure required to serve the future developments.
(0) The number of access roads, and size of accessible area, for all future
developments, including exploration, based upon current averages.
22. Traditional Land Use by other First Nations in the area
(a) Assesement of the effects on DTFN of tand use by other First Nations, Metis and
non-aboriginal people in the vicinity of the Project.

H
<9;
“5‘45“;
f3: ‘
E l
w . W
‘3; 1452‘ $8
'——- v: (D -.... g
I 5E: ‘; 8 g) '32 g ‘9
-—— (D
{:3 5 B 5’— 3 s92? a
O 3 O .3“ .
i3 .32 c: o C: '0 :09 F
,ﬁ '44 x M (3.5 2a; +.- )5!
m... u) C: w— L... O """‘ }(D
g :3 "(a f . (U H8 a £223“ 53 .
U“ 8 ‘3 ‘0 8 i6)“ ~Q 0-48
3 ;.O C: 2-3;; .520 73F“ 'E
g :3 IE 5'9 5 tag") ‘E ”3.5-0 '5':
.c: '3. % “5 0(1) ‘9‘ HD“‘% 0g
3 , I—‘I
' .9 O "G '8 38 =9 $13.; 9:
Q U) g: .0 (U V :0 “C(23) “.C
a: +-' "5 i": w E «- 30: ”Um
. (1) C: 5...
5" gi’ *5 8“ "‘ $75 5 CH“) 18%
s k
l-Q o 2 '~ IE me ‘0 5,932 was:
. 9 '9... .11.... Z 3““ $8 % "ng :30-
q...— ‘0_ {3 F" (-Q lﬁ 6) Q C:
0 IO (U LL- w
‘+-~ - i z); “(D c: “*I—-u—— 3.1203
W O )5 O -.__ .(U _>
$03 ,uo—I a :3" E83 -9) i: (D (DU)
'8 i‘: B :> ‘5 '0 ‘6 m.ﬁm Ema: ‘
w ‘ CD 1'5 :5— 0'.) E: 43 W'w'a [”343
0 m ’0 "3 0'3 m 3-— cu: h mm H...“
.m m :03 3'0 “W ——“—- .Oco o CDC)"< ‘30)
° 3 Q :3 '% g 3 ac: 0 Sara“) 5.33.; i
ms... C‘s m m 155, g 22 ': ago) (50)
E! a... :E'g $313;95%g a "539 “'53?
.3“ g JO g: 3 .‘w -§ .524“: s— ‘50“) £0: E
3:: 0 ~62 Io<x 3.2% ‘3 E? g 2938 izg f
U ‘5'“ .8 153m 0 H :2 m ‘6 ‘tﬁog 193*
mm 9 :5 =.OLIJ: “- ...J .0) iv ,3; cc
0 s; ;g 0 w. E42203 IQQE ‘33
'9‘“ 0 g 8.3m g 0 mg g :23: 2% i
‘ﬁw g 'a; <D"-“3 :2: '5: i0"? *u— wmg 3-D“:-
u: L- 5&10 =3 2-8 :52: g} mag *58_
.__'-- m o lhbix 8 I3 1.90 g. 0:.— 0.0,)
mm a: M on: ‘13 >< 0 EC: 0. (DHCL 5:»-
Qﬂm m C: . w a... ‘03 G.) 0-35 :‘3 u..- "'2 E
034; “EEO O X 0;,” ‘2 #«G’O ELL.
(.3 i ”M c: O i c: 5-“ "C3 ,xF—
O 0.1.1.! (1) 3- !m 0;; c ,

0 Q- ...Qq) ghga} E to fhg x gafm 8‘3 i
MM «3 am: 065 CD “5510?; =1 mME —<:'2
a— }...H— o. {E +4 C0 2500‘) 0)

- Q, CDC: 0 ' (D |c‘t5 6: Em i420)-
U (3);: 3,, ...... Q. :95 (p.33 -0 (.3 CD “m1”
S m 1.0"" -Q (1) o E z i Gas— H
"t (D 13(1) CD (I) iO ’ :5 CD qgﬁm 23mm

'6 £203 r.» -— 0— 1::(‘6 9.2:
%O 4—r+—' Q) "C3 , CD QC}. 393 3-— WU
g 0-5213 (D l:- --c: 0250 * a!
m2 m-C-p-HG} Q) .0 (D‘-— C3) erI—nc: CD,§ I?
a: ﬁe‘cg‘“ g [‘0 mu. Ema) “9 5mg
mg .52 %w':838’ - g 1%— Imaaé'ém @329!
O Q 0 35x'g CD 4—4 035:3 "vagrant— Magma
mm a: gc‘v— :3 “a 5, £3 n'aggg “£5 '
w“ ’mm‘mm‘c ‘53 c: CD4"; 9-0032“ "Uwg

Q E :5” (DC; "a J C: “‘"“ > “ CO)
“)2 0303:»9'3 “CS :25 g.gm £m€UQ>O~E ((5 U)
m E cglagg 3 w réa§ gsvém 03-83%
at o 83; cm :3 x(‘b‘iiﬂm 0:20-56 -§(U:5:
0Q 3....“ 0:; “’«aﬁ :00.$w'otv O‘Uﬁgm Emo’
g3“... 'COM'U 8 c: 1:3 :0} “'o-C‘Q'B 3-5-35
a: z E“ 1:0ch ooawgnm &_—.+_-:,, ham
”u ‘6 U) x C: CO CD (.3 ,C' C: M (0 (1‘5 0 .0 U i: 3{D Q C}.
365 LE. ‘3'“ w O_c: w“ 0 ‘4:233 $300395“— ‘ ““0:
m E 3 CU 0“? :3 C H' o C: 0 5: O ‘a = c)" <33 x 4‘5 Z 11'- """ ’
i“ C (DJ 03 :2} c'" “"" *- Q :3) “— :5 5.1L 0 O J”:
9 Egg g-E m‘“‘mg 8853‘ ‘133209. 352
=H=azz 3'5 W“ mSc—J “”9830 539“"
w mu-LL 23130 mg)? +-- ‘Wcu aomF-w
thi-u- 0- Q m‘wv 03-6-00“: CDC}
>= chmmgzhgg mg: 3 cu???
-—': QCDF'HLLH D wungw £03535
4.: L00 02 3‘6;me w mi
3 CgEESCLL'U , SHEBFHGJ mg:
% . £5$$§329E gwg
‘ ' "Jwirwuuﬁog ?wai
‘QGJ‘P-«(Dmai ‘2‘"
! ewgmmh.m.
‘ I i i m'?593
. J I : 5 m8

N
_ . 5 i ,
<53 U54... 1 ‘ g m
m :73“ I I ' '0 g
m a a :2 I a: a . =
i (U
“~*- E? E E e XE .93 ct:
-- """L- g o (D ﬁi- : *5
“5 “<13 i 3’ 3 mm = s5 ‘— =‘”
:2 7-5-35 #9 :‘U o) ' >515? '9
“Q “:9 mm C (D '1: '* C 0 CD
"' m...— o 3‘ ““03 m "— *"
9 Mn “Cg . '8 -52 gag) w-w-I-g 9 '0.)
1‘: 3'8 9325 m 2 $2 8 “7 ‘1 "<5-
0 mg £36 3 u~ %: *- c ~c= Ev
*“ 0m 0... ~26 *- »—o .9259. .2: mo;
2'3. 2:0 [Mg .52: ’0 “53$ ‘g Q. E? “’553
c: 80) '0“? ""' <9 'CD‘“ H (D 8-93
---- ma) C: L: $_- vu-m. 2 C: 0 q...
52:,__ a ,0 0 ob LL OJ C; a;
(D C: CO ..._.. u..- ht: 9., (-5 (UL.
*0 033’: m3 *5 as aw E --- . m
.__ ._.. L- ‘ C2356; -~ 0
O f q; CD 0) .520 “'"
:— ‘u- “C331... , ,g H: 0'0 E "Cc:
C2. CE 15:; '03 5 (U .C: O 03.9.
..... EH (Ow [E “U ngQ. :. 5: (U Q “(6“
0 CC cm 4...: C: 10*: (9-D 5c: Scm
5:: avg 0(1) e; 66 $0 * *5 m .— (DE
1:: 8‘5 1.735 “m £1030 . (D x... (p .228
‘6 ”@100 ‘0 <6 co m “5:0 Na ‘54-:
832:» “’0: £2 .52. c;—~—= ~33 =— c: ' mg
“3 we ’%cv v.@ :23 gag <13 04.9. g 33m
«3 $0 LE5 1'; 18 Lugg . 313' 2 am: Q: mt:
d—i “ ‘ vd-J u...
C: (3305 C03; .9 '9 l®£§ c:E “d E :0 a"(.‘ZJQZ
m l“ H q Jug "" G) ~Cm
...... 5:5. 52.5: “C3 . Hm- ; I L“ 2?. CG
0.. “~53. *“ =31: *- * Or 2 Z :5 E I'M“?
c: 'CDQ E93 “5333 0 80.5.9. 5 ml a) 8 ft: lcf‘g
.g ég cg 3&5?- geff ] E? 58“%*§5
0 gm Ea) . 90% lama) “w 0 ~93 “"0-
<1> - “Sac: ““90. 25535: 3 0 “1C6 0" 0
0:00 CH-“ 0“” c: Q : CD‘-
529ng “>02; 558 E ,Qw‘a .9: 8..., use :39.
(5th CCUH" 0(1) 5.... *0 . a (1) g: Q.) a} :5
.._... «5,223: ,_ _ﬂ '35-‘33 C5) ”C5 (DN w G} E u—g .Q -_
5:me co“ c: 0 CI“ ' O‘ 4—; Q 0 mm
meo. 52$ §m91‘c3. “513‘“ ‘- .53. o C --—s--
E ‘1’“ “31.1.. »— ; '““<D . m— u; ~0—
,E *“ U3 omzﬁ £3.91: 5 (D ‘13 —- 5.9?
cm <1: 59.92: 1:: 0 cu ._. 4: E > ICD :0
Q-Ewﬁ CC} Cwm 15:25:: 4..., G) %> --
._+—» LL. 3 , s... . “c; I On:
05.3 0+» =.Q® “3 ' C) co‘ 1:: lo} ~—
C...a‘“ 235:) “5-3 ":3 O-‘Eo i ‘23 <0 03 0
(1383-313 [SE53 22.3 8 $33 5: 8% $5 $3
~WOM§ iﬁ-"a's ham mga 2 ‘85» g 33:9
O‘E‘Oo <U>GJ 0"“: 5:0“ E ’53 C: M WC;
‘55:“ 5:12:03 ?CC c3) 03‘5‘3" "- o f: “- 63m
09 030 (Doc) '93“ C‘dCtﬁ“ *5: "‘ F35 O
gogg ,gxe lggi‘gg'gbg ; a 95 lg .ge
0.5301: 08?; ’Ohﬂmvv.a ‘35 ‘E'a 1CD 0025
-——>-—-—o @— --- (1) (13¢: 22 :5 :5 ‘0 “-60
magma: > 'U mz'Ch‘OEQ) 0‘ '0'— +-‘ 0.7:}
> > :.Qm 2:» mt®._ 0
mumm Q”: cuU- :mxmu . 0 me: D? cum
umwm #1:) ts}— 3mm-5< .E'“ .9 4:9
~97- ; 030$ C] m m U) c: “-5 g. 4...
®“Q’ CH G) I 3" "n O O m
aggc '2 £9. .c: “508311.! '5 :22." g «"5: 3m
:23:ch age 528030.63 '1'} cc; :2 8
-— g _ w .1: ‘....-—- 03 2.5.5: 0 O 5‘:
cu C373 xikmahw m E o E 00
‘U-O‘CSE 1:} ”CO 'O'm mhmogw c‘ :2: g 1;:(3
(Dd):®5_ CDC). m'cstws-zq; ‘: o “'5 cn “SQ;
unto xco ,xmmomtv 0 ”~*- c 1'44:
:qum :s'ca— -: mayzmc: ‘ 5;: "C3 :3 --- 33....
co 0):: U300. mgao'L—crwm c: _93m 0 mg:
Cmc‘“ ‘CSr-gm n: *®m®_g_ o a—uc: _ :3: co
0 0CD 0:50 ,0 ‘33)“va E; CD 053:6: O
“595% BEE gwggggcc W wmi’lw-wg
5:ch C28 CU“! CUc‘ES-QE g! .gggzgiﬂsgw
mmcoLL -m.go 3mg mmmwgw :5 23%;)“ :sﬁt'mﬂ
(U “F%m‘b‘m 5m“ mgmbﬁtg <13 U‘U‘U lecrm g
ZWZm‘zgsz mzo'zwz ‘0 z zz'C :20
ﬁgﬁ‘c’wﬁgﬁ°&&}&§h§$3 :2 &&8§a&5%
C: ___'."’ I“ -_ 2 a} m ‘ m
Qxiﬂm£Q883Qg*DcQo§-jn a amgogaéﬁﬂw
3 w . ’ qua
. “a = 8 g = I g
l: G. Iq?‘ I“
J ﬁl % eiwxox «?;?;sz 2
-~ 1 . “Iﬁwﬁmiﬁwtw‘ma
.- ‘0 C5)
9; Q mmmm wwgmm'gmm;
w mmmmmmgwawmwr

m
i w
2:?” W (D In... G) 20-4—4 ’ >‘ 4...: 1
E q: G.) .C: .533 s :0: C: 5
- 3 H“ U) ‘ " m
(D ;"“‘ LE“ $5"... 0-5 :3 Q. EC:
C- c: :33: Mg 52 *— c: (D m
as o ‘h-“é'i Q) g u. Q (U m .2
mg 9 w; 3'53 8*— “ Mn 8 m
C u) U) at... £g (11.2.0 I g "" O iat (D
o ‘3: ~92 {:0 COCO .50 ‘“ lo '--- “c3 03
O __ (U (13!: 0) c:
”G“- ,g C: 20) “‘H 'x m 0 C:
5: T6 0 '00 “ ”CH 3 O) .53 (D _Q
:6 c: (Do LLaJ co 3 c: "' m -—- :2:
0 x ‘0 1*- c: '-- m EU
00 0 33m .1: CU c: O 1.9 5:: i 13
<9” 2'5 ““5: 0“ woo === ‘55: -o o S 1
3‘0 C: (-3.... 255‘“ mu 0 O O .._. w—J
(0.5:: _C 91.9... ‘I—' (D --- Q) 3:.“
.9 z .2 5,3 M - 83 w -8 ~— '8 E
.... 4:: .... '
2g 3 g.ggg 5: ~55 g c: g .3 §—
LL- 4-4 a... ‘Q><!) ”£33 (.30 ‘W "a .9 Z O
i- M «H .903 W13 $3 a) :2 ~: tum -«
C} CD '13 U) (D ‘030 M .0 .0 E 4...: i
c 8 Ig7; 49m U2 50 3 iii: C5 5 f 8 '
.952 32 1’38 13¢ 83 ; $ 6 b -n E
‘26 ‘0 3 8*... “’E can 0 9‘; z c» m
s... 03 (2. mac) 3E8 ’05 w *6 LL. EC) 3
cu; iﬁ Dr: gm” 0 X z i“ ‘53 a w
:9 r EOE Q30 >~E ‘3‘) LL. [3 w
(,3 >5 2 s “o co m -‘
'53 U... ‘2'“ 5: (Us.— ..... P“ ‘“ N <
:2 “Hrs ~°°a> u... g Q 00 1r“ .._.
o C 1..“ 1...: nwh aw i ~G—J . (:3 (U
0.9 £3 GM 1“ a) ”*0: r o [4: o 33:; x:
O“ ;. m a C) C: N E: .Q
m ‘_4-I 3 H—CL .Q) I
4—! q: , “O Q) "'""* SCI) 5.... Emu} «5 ‘
c: *— m-m am RD 0 <1) *
Mg m 9.9 ma) c070” . 5; ‘E .9 c: s 3:
3,- LL: 5L— cc: ‘43:» 1 m E O E Q
m m 0:,» :13 :“CD i CD a) “C i 2:;
.59 C: 5“" Q3“ Q0) 1:313 .c: m .93 <2) 1::
4...; O '5 mg Q3.) 53(1) ‘H U} '0. 8 l r: i
O 0 u— £93 <25 “'50) ﬁ- “5 ‘1’ :3 . § 5
:2 <1) 0 .s: (9 03’5- QE‘sc: 0') 13 s
.04: 5: H3 0 U) Q“ 0 c: E ‘0
u.“ ’0 Ca: 4:0) mm 3mm. 5 o ‘3
'0 w ._.. l'w't‘j “CI 30‘“ 09:35 0 (‘5
m g: Q 50......- --.u__ aWE 3.9 CD 0: 3"“ “Q3
8:: Q) :59 '50:; Q: . wk. 9 LL: 2% =3
02 “7 rt?“ ”Lu <13c: m£§> 5"“ {- .12 .a
75m (1’ 3:» "3 CD":- ‘0 >- ‘3 ‘ §<i
cpl“ .0) m: . 2 5mm 1 C “J .c: |m<l U)
G .c; (:65 3 £3) - 0.9.5.5... 'O'JUJ Q’LLI
- .H “a .5:— "0 """ <1) 5-"- r 4:
C: O ‘o m“ ’ma’ *“ 3:: c: ‘0 1'5”: "Sﬂ
0-; :5 063 E o 25>. ago :3 M
2.: * ,gm m0 0:: 1:) -.._ "C ‘03 5:32
(U ('53 'ms... 5.... «w c: m...
0 o :5 203‘" o. 4:43 cumizs ‘3 u... 0
.93.. o o 3:: g cm - c-J—ulo 0 $1., '51::
(1)" 5.. OO .24: :32 U} -a—5m'® (-3 13G) mg
003.? 3‘5 320(de '91)" “a B X 273- +—' QC.)
H... ((133-— Im; .013 Q) Q) ‘ (DO (Dc)
m 0 I’d) O_‘gwmw “Q ' .95: *- am 05¢: CD“
“- —~ * gov)“ 103““ w 0 c: . mu; *~—
- o 'c 52030:: 22303 (.3 s— -- 05;: '30 Cir:
"" 5 Lgx 0 com ---~ 03"“ ”(0'3“ :35: c)=
3'13. :0 QFN‘on: co E “‘5 GNU a: o '“w
UlgE ‘2 uﬂam‘zaLm cm: 0 gngzw-E 83$: 3E
'0“{1) ...... ’ :3 0““ -" 0.3.5: ":3 s: '0
3-3-5 cu $63,920 :mm x 0:0,nﬂgm,@ot mg
——~ CL: ”£6 “‘55“: «"0315 o 3.2:“Cwﬁéé'ﬁ aw
:3 00: 1:3 0* 3“...»ng Q “‘0 ‘3'" CSGJ‘ (U “N:
w 0'0 5 x‘“ ‘5: "“050 Hmm'o-mw CIN :=
o 00, :G’ ’mEH—wEBEU—‘uw : 5.... Q,“ (D9133 ":5
h. m 03:3_co o-csu— u 0:13 ~23“ (DCD
. mﬁcu-w _'c3 :3— o M.
3:39.. “*5 gmmggglmcﬁ ‘5 QQEEEi-Ezcac gm
ml 2‘! : .mﬁﬁmogouow m®:.mwnu“"g-CQ— 0;
“5‘20 $<$mopmhcgc ngowcggb .5;
BILLS CDOo-o-ummwm x'o £35291" OOIOC: H13;
1H“, 51ow mﬁum§- z: 0:2 on CW c:co C352:E
2 “$2 .méﬁowmgmmm Oh ”'"W‘5 ‘3‘“!
LLQQOLLCDmeom" 0g mummwﬂ$® ma:
r— mEmEF-ﬁu._ﬂ.o.gdazamg "*‘U 3.93:5 g3. mm
3(a) Nimckgemw>m =55 q, 2.9276 :5 03' BO
, :3 momgh El F-(kazU—MCEAg 2—;
E “ ax: mhwho LL i
N": v- a O SQQQEE: H52,
.*!m V... . Q
mm .' 0‘3 ,l «c— ‘ s... x
mm ”q, :3. Qx—i w... n —-
0.0) W139” <15“? wé- 0‘ >“- 05 “mg C 5:5
mmoma -(D -(D ﬂ‘ ﬁﬁ- $1.0 42‘5"“1VT-OV"O
(DE)? (Dru - 8 Q ‘6’ -wmwh33§mﬁ’mﬁ ’m‘TOﬁ
coca. mm ﬁg mmqgﬁgmﬁg—Qwﬂzﬁwhgﬁ
manage; Maaggﬁﬁﬁﬁ
H>P>th>w§uw’
I F" Ex;
#_I

w .
_ j . WWW
:1; m "'3 "U E
Law} 2% (D (D (DB 3
{“3 (D C U +" “3‘
> O s— Ox’. ' C
m.“ =— N 0 (Do 07
2:: 3 a: wcu ‘53 «5'9
(D (D a) . £1.53 ‘66 ‘95"
:2: 3 mm .5: i x—- ‘1’
E E co: 9“” ‘19 cn-c;
.ﬁ 8') (0.9 (000 Q .555
3 . m ‘0‘}3 03-93 m '53::
L... C: ch- (:0 C $0
(3.7 m = 3% E"- ’ 8 <03
E E *r'a $3 “5 “0
Lu
(.0. s. <90 mo *- 3““
< :3 mu»— (‘5 (6 SE
.5: m C'- c: ' :E
:LU c1) ‘ ‘ :3 .Eg E (6:;
om :1: am :50 3‘ 5‘”
.c: ‘ '55 311:3 0') 03:
g: 8 ﬁg :8: ﬂ “3
ca"— ?6 m ”3"“ '5 g5“
(‘41:) "" ”‘5'; “50 w “E
“(D o :2) ﬁ 22 E: “Ow
NW 0 $03 CB» (Dan:
*8 a VB 2w ” w“
>53: a3 .t-z“ cu“ * ‘5: c’“
R39 or) CE 03$ E “a ch
9“ H . Emé *5 w 0%
£0 .0 ' 1:; “.9 (1') 8CD
(Dc. (1:: (D E“ 0); (D'c
my “5 5‘5: "5-“: a @331
(Dz: CL. 053 "5;“ c: =0
ﬁt“ an» I ‘24-»; 'N-: of $27.:
03.9.4 C m“. 309 '3‘ 0::
Mia ‘9 I go] mﬁ C: ma)
0% c: m—m- :13 (”C
5—2:} co UH: "* 0
£21.13. sz' “’09 '9”) C: gm
=I “a [r “C: * m0.)
CD; 5. E 0 w; m“
g 20:: 0.39 80 '9‘ “€30:
“5g 8-4 8:2; 3‘8 8‘ §§E
%w 3g $$ QC 2 2”
3:6) (0%; (DO -....<D Em” EC)
L-"l':5 (130 5-3:: {30 E
:50: q... 'o C}. Q) ‘1
(0", Dig mz’ E ' ‘“ £12312:
“:3; CE C: 0:) L. G)”
(U £3 I-- ...a 1:)...»
3.3: (2.. :5 mo ....
Mm. U0, . c o “3773
3:6: 5‘5 ”’33 --' i "w 5‘: '
s...Q 03> 5*“! "CC 5 35 mo
mo: “3a) mm £2 C3): Cu
“O “‘Q L...“ 'c" 0
_g___ cm. 59 1:33 ' '55::
38; 8a)? :35" 5:33 - t3| «(?'Q:
._m -5 9w $24 —9 v”
,9... <0 H9 :33 0'3 0 mm
hm 2: -—' cgm “’1 0’:
(1):: .._..,__ 031:5 2...“: *5; 5....63
CU.Q ES; 2.9.303 :CQ} L" C30;
(1):: LL11 i=8 Egg Q E (D:
ﬁn :33) «5:13 7-H .CZLZ'
(U (3)13 4:4“ n——-(U.§ : 0‘)“
5:: ~s$ 08* 0%“ ' g “a
”(:52 ”5:! HQ 3205 O “9'13
mm; 0’ 8.2-3? #9 E 3 0":
‘UF— (”8 0‘5 cm“) 3 5,3
52:2 ”:30 cc? 05w 3 CD“
0'“ w ”00' ohm (0 ﬁg)
Em mo (5‘4: @6303 c B"?
“CD 3:: 4.4:: .1273"), 0 ”hi
QC); 3:» 0-5 “C“! o ‘53l
cm «563, cm 493$ CU Cm
<00: m3 8g 0‘9: mg mg
“w “Z 001 'R£_ E m
B 9 @0301 0 0-D
__ L1.l 73.: LN: . .2: 1:30)
Z: zr—m 203 2:3?“ 8
LL‘“) LLC) mi? 1.1.“?!5 2 2‘”
SCI i—m +- 9—89 & $5
0 mm :33 czar.“— 0 ca“
1 I
i >s >~ WM—
1 0 >5 :3». I >5 1
FOG V" CD .r— O Q
I ‘ c: I G <3) '1‘“ a) «- ‘-" a; 0 ’
LO (U Q a Q t C: i i: H (D
mggﬁmgm ‘5 mtg a mag 8 “561‘“ 8 “5c?“ “‘3
mwutﬁé :5 o 03‘“: o 0‘32: :3 0‘59‘ :5 “’0' 5
aggnmEommeEo-cwm‘ﬁﬁo 8 “5:5 o '93" :5 O
gagggfacgmimnocmmmsogmggzggggﬁg813$
G3 DEHIOmmDF—IOmmaf—IONKDHIO$06,
5
J

m
:3": I 0"; 1 ' E
$25; ‘3 .
w I ~ .9 v— z a ”9;
g 2 ' 3 '3
. 1::
%ﬁ E 53 g %
mac? 0 >~ C _
“30% c: 3 (U E 2.", t 8
pm“ 52 E r: g 8
9:32: c: u»; 0 % Q
“kg 11. a 92 I3:-
3313 1-“- ? “U (U 2
83; Q ‘3 ‘5’ Z ‘ LL
w +4 . :3 ~ ”" I‘—
39 >- a: i“ Q
2 s... 0 "EE
Eva. 0 “'0 c: . Q 3-
daczlw- E i G) 03’ m D:
c: i Q m g): 0 Lu
meg .._ .3? '13 ~39 3"
m ‘5 0H . co 0
.MQB '0 (13:: m (U
58% '0 m0 't" (D i c»
$3. a)! u. :2 O 3 E m
as... +— 30 'r— i w ‘ Z
>"““5cv >~ ' 83' *" w H‘ 0"
C: 5 .53 l “03 m m 0;

, gm“ '0 :5: C a ’ w t
(,me c) '00.: O 3 “C; x O
“h.g- (.22.. cc: ‘35 c: 0 Z
£2:ch D. 0"" % co _t§

; 33mm .59 02 w < a
$3375 0) 5 CF— ..., Q, co. :2

c: > a: Z 6 ”J5 (D
752135 to mm, 1-— “c: E! +~
5, '““ m-M'E qu c: 5 OJ‘ ““

1 Cam: :2: m0? “CF; 0 f O M

: 8§ci >2 359' 93‘2“: 0 g u“ 5
... . w
0mg gm «g $0 % $ * E
pmm ":35: u) C: B “’5 w

: Hm-— cg Hg; 3% i w’ “+4 W ‘

i (.3 SE 33% ?.?m— Ozag 3"] (U 8:: m
.9320 05., am 813:3 ”‘5 “‘0’ “’
O 3...? ﬁg) :1 E (OE

Q)...” ; Em (D q—a m
“.30 “Qt 3:." CD (I) ‘9 (Dam
0%.... -@-..c:| wm- (DZ 5’ <0 ""<
4:00: OO 0‘” "'“ m MG)

3 wwr a); 5.. o] $.52? 9 c: 3 O 3 '93

* ﬁNZ—B' ﬁg 520 m5; ‘0 g ‘g: E“? 0
£41“: .c: 08 mg: g :3; 03m 63
max #3 (De) £_ "J '5 8x3:

i (DOLL -53“; grui «~13 -— E 8E“!

= “2:33—— 38 0-5- mm m (D "'0
£900 38. 3—0 422-9, Ci ‘0 9...,”
a0)“ “(n 03(1) E230 33' "om
mcE‘ om 5:4: 2:; “c: '5 O
““9 C" “4-“ :20 E 8 0'15 I:
EH3.” CD53, :2». m‘“ i-- a_- o

: E>E (:55: cu E z "" Ex 0

K 23mm .... w: a) “5 -~—<vu.i
WE“ (DU) ('00 ‘53 1.1.... E .0 '
(DON (33:1) 0.2:: mi 1"" <1: (19% O
gxg gg-sg ﬁg 0? a 338 ‘
...... m ‘

1 a%% 8% aw $9 §‘ § 63°

‘ ~c= “8: mm Q“- 21: U 93? Em”
wwﬁl 276 DE 09‘“ D" 0 0'9?”
g-u‘N 1.x...c: CG) (D .291: C Cg I:
°§na HQ 3.x ‘50 0°: "'5 ”’c w

_ c: u: Cir: ﬂy“; 5% 3% g g“?

E 25E {DU Z“ 0— O 175'“

‘3 El“: 11—0 ma Q» 9 ‘7'

- o N 00‘ 2.52 C3 C35 E

. C
>~ E i O

5v" 0 cu ‘ mg mg “- m .. h

k C: 2- m‘w GJv-m'oﬂ) v-w (D ' (U '—

mgg g I6$§J>g§§r~égg8 «agge 33833 E g

.93 2:: o z<D<Uomm 093 33 2;: 23 " '"m3 . ‘24: I

8 ﬂggwmmingmgﬁfégﬁbggwgﬁvg 3.2%130 $3)“ng
D ﬁxogggsg§mwww$w®Ww$%®$%S%$%%3$w
PICCHF-WJOCDP—F-“JOCDIMHJQCDEF-xmcﬂr

2
As also misc? in our earlier coz‘respendence, BTFN was not aciaquateiy consulted by Wastmast prim" t0
the filing inhe: Agjpiicaﬁigﬁ. We note that the N338 E‘iéigg Manual prsvides the feiiowéng guidama £11
i'e'iatizm t0 censultaiian requiremmts:
Whey: eStablishiﬁg principkrs and goals fer a consaitatien program consider £11m the Beard
expecis a cmaguitaﬁan program wil’é, at a. minimum:
a be initiated 3.3 30031 as possibie in the- pianniﬁg and ciesigm phaSsa Of a preject;
a prwide ciean :"alevan: 21nd timeiy ingibrmm;i{m to potentially affected persons 0? gmaps;
9% be accessible :0 and inclusive afall 'patmtialiy afﬂiateé perseizs 0:” groups;
at be: respmsive :0 E126: news: inpu‘é; and commas 0:ff'pamsf1iiaﬂy affected parsons 0:: groupss;
and;
e~ centimw {111012 gheut the: regulatory precess, as wail. as the i30£3$f3f£i€ti©ﬂ and Operatiom
phases 0fa prqject. ..
Because Wasiwast did mi adequateéy «302.23%: With DTIFN prim to submitting its Appiica‘éémz, many 03’?
these expectatims was 3.16:: 22723:. Ejggggggiggigmgggggmggggggliaii01f: Wiih DTFN is a major deﬁciency of
gig; Apgliwtion which. must be addrassggﬁggggﬁgﬁ NEngheuld consider the AQPEiCﬂﬁOEXx
With z‘espact 1'0 Westcaasf’s “Cﬁnmit‘aﬁm‘: Fiﬁng Requiremﬁmgj D’i‘FN disagmczs that {3.138 dominant" self;
out 2323 adequate camsuitation pmaess With DTFN. Era dees 21m. compiy with NEB’S Filiag Manual’s
requiremem that a projact—speciﬁc ceﬂsultmien program. be set. 011:, anti the cemuitaﬁan program was
not éesigned to address D'I‘FN’S rights and interests £11th area 0f the Preject.
It is aiso unclear to us haw the P‘edami Crew}: pitapeses i0 conduct mmui‘iaiien with {3337?}? in .reiatien
to {he ?mject. This qmsﬁon was pOSecE in Our Eerie; 0f August. 26,, 2009? {mi remains; mmswered. We
continue to 100k forward :0 NEB’S response 0:} {his issue. As; 36:91:: expz'essiy in the Supreme Court Of
(Tanadzz’s decisioﬁ in Haida Nam? 12. _£~3;-'z‘2‘zls'!2 Cwizaméia (.E‘Vfinisfer' {?f‘.3‘7ﬁ€?4"€a3‘53?}2 ii 353 gm’emment that has
the camsiitu‘iiaml duty to mnsuk, mi pmjea‘a psfsjgmnems.
We 21180 pose the folkywing qmﬁtions in ?SEmia‘m “£70. corisuiiation:

1%: Cmsuita‘iim am zasssessman‘: Should imiuﬁe the past impacts 0%? 2:113; sxigting inﬁastz'ucmre, and
must: consider wheiher 01‘ 230% First N'at'imzs were aoasuiiéd ii? relatian ﬂzereio w What assurances
can be givm ts B?PN {hm their cememg abom past impacts 0f developmem Within the Vicinity
0f the ijes: will 33.0% E36 igmmd‘?

a Haw Wiii Tradiii<mai USﬁifTi‘éﬂiﬁOmﬂ Eaglesgical Kncwladgiz 9i?" D'EFN be factomd into
cmmi‘iaﬁm’} and into» {316 E33: and review pETOCEiSS?

@ What ﬁi‘ndiﬂg will he grmriémii i0 .‘i‘E’i‘FN t0 C&H‘}’ {mt caitssukaiian With the F a {£6173}: men‘?

312mg_iggggfgggigigaiaggiigmm

As mmd E23. the enclsseé. iabia {he ﬁppiication C1083 not include any cezasidcmtion of petenﬁal impacts
:10 EE'E’FNE censtimtimmliy premixed aboriginai, and treaty rights. Ihis: is a mm} 01* deﬁciency in {he
Aggiécatioza, given that thc: E.Ssué: will 313503111 other aspects 0f slim Applicatiom such as what studies

£9
2:2,; ,
m. ”C: i
“:5 vl-v-J' '
54:3“ 3 CD 1
(D 5- E
m (n :3 a
% <0 2 i a 176$
Q 5}? <1) ...... EC: (1) ‘
Q r O (/3 cu :_O f,
.93 m :1; $6 a -g a $3 stag? x 3
.E 8 sh. 0.: g “EOE? w>~0m if; Q o E
:1: .9 c: o H: ._ G3 c:cznm m.gg co -
3 CU -...... OD lmwi‘o (33mm: [-080 ........
c: g , o ('6 *0 ég‘BB wa—m CCL—o #5
Q) '9 . hm .53 Ea "a (“£285 (680') C:‘-l—-
_. c: m :3 0} ca... EC Noam WU)
<13 c: gr— 0 .520; E O- c; (D - m
O O ‘-"" Q 5__ 0C1, H.9'w 0‘50 EU
.... iv .9 E :5 m -C “5:: mh-Q’ £099
1 0 CM 0) Q) E ’0 92(1) 2 '00) LQ‘H‘
C: 0 < >50 in: Emc-E 8,905.59 “mm '0333
O o c:_<1) ‘ ‘50?! :mOC}. 07303 ’35:.) I
O U) ”3 CU 5‘ “*- C... CD m-H-H Ns—N‘O .03: t
03-0—3 9 s... (5 O hmuc 25"" V '
31-5-6 u... CD 0 ma" E L. 50—; ‘MW 3
~90.“ :5 530* ’5 9— mﬁm 00m cum
{5 x Q) 0 O G.) s.— L-c:
“’24.. 0+“ “"- icot “”953 “’9 mm
“Om. £2 2 O E I ng-Q ”'150-g maid.)
:2}... <23 u. H C) u ”03-0 Owwm .E§> 228:
“Q E kw 3nd: ~52 'an: 335E” ‘33—:"0 w ‘
"ﬁx 5—”: Cl] *4: m “:3 038 0:: $010“) DECO 3-9
00 0 ﬁ :24... Q} m a.) £32352“) L-GJ “a
._. .= m :5 o O ;——- ‘ -——0:3 512034:
was r: (U “3 #135203“ 0 .... “>35
>5...1> Q3 :5 CZ_L.,QEQ}U° ”—9“ (5(1)
ﬁtnsc 3 05C}.- ﬂm w'go ‘92 0%“ L_-
Quits.) 3 C148 ,0 Q—u— nvghjﬁwmw ECE 993
C: CD .23: ~ Ql'" im 63(1) (D :Q-"(Emm 05*“ ““G)
ﬁe-E‘i «a q; m 'g $055 ng-Qgc O:=-~.c: mars
$9.5 a: 5,3 m ’ﬁem’é'ﬁEﬁg ““98 sag
“$635 g, £351"; .3 ’333 as weft: 5%“ 'iC—‘w I
5.52 E 0? <1) Ct: :73 79E? wmwowe 1351855335 E
EEfo a ‘ 3w» 3—? g.“ 8'5““833'S .3333 $9
0.0“ 2‘5. 0 8 :“2'50355‘: $33“ ~?‘Es'
m“: 3 ‘3‘: “'5‘: ’” 3<D*-*é"!"'3'1‘13‘3’w‘D 0.8ng30
O 3.. 00 5.9 “ 3mm wtﬁhwg a) .9.
£631 “0 Q) (13 0 5(1):; mﬁqu'“ mmwﬁ'ﬁm
31m 1.... s.» 1:: >4... mg.“ g m aim: i
301cm 053 com 03 onhw-Qm ‘Cm-CcnfmcD‘
>56 (D 9"”! 3‘73 Q 05:5 035:5“) cmtmdahi
£0 E 103‘” 5'" m 3.11:: 4:05“? Em ; , cu
mm ”c w -— mmoma w m an
8'2»; m3 we 'a aaﬁgg‘ma 8mm“:
9...“? +9“: 03 «Q “m 00)me chog‘“
Q‘U‘r: 0‘” h“ Hmmolz @5900 '0
O 3 ‘9‘: (U CE é“ 4nd.-'~UQ}C:
c'" E (D'UE o (1) --—- ;,O;... {zC'a-gcczu, mw'oﬂ‘cﬁm
0c» ,Qm' L. E *— ﬁe) cur: C30!"— 03 com
.___C_> c: was Q .3 ac; 0065C: .QgZ £2
£9.91 mm c: c0538 Ewimo 4...“: - Fmpghc
"2.3.5:: '53 33g 0 (1)32 :mrmcmmgw §§< moo;
COG)“: :5 (U was $09 mom“ 0 I q“ ‘ Q
5:4: (sg_c- _..___.a (g i... {3: 0°C; 3-; moﬁmi‘tﬁa 5
Mg—a (DID; (D -...... CDC.) 'm U)(DQ I
O "L: z :5 "C3 0) go “Oh """ 5'“ CM? '
030 $2 530‘ ‘3 «:33 ”W'FW‘c-Egg 35:00:02.5 E
55:13 on. 8-0 0 $10 “38 “00‘5"“500 “m awe“
' 0H.$-C 0 m0‘“ 0‘ QUELU) 0 HQ} th'"
W" C: CO) CD 3 > 'HL- 00 4;; “4-430 CU
Q.“ m+- 3—mq, c011 «a_ccue E ~-—q..+-«.£:c:.c:
wagslmsé Sitag gngegmgg «aogag
5303 :3 NEW 1:: 0““ .52“ ﬁwﬁwo 3"“cwm"‘
{2" 0(1) ('0 CD c‘“*®t’"mw 03wa 302.35%“:
oowg Gm T5 Og‘amrgﬁ wg’é‘SOBH 592.83%38
C3 06) mg; 5: 'D'*"E':c.> g-<t5 mmmmm‘: $4: '-' o
“8%E’HQ ”'68? gsmg’iwge’gg wcaagg
. q; c ; chm H’" >< __ . "" >“- US
302.29% wﬁwsgogismwgﬁweﬂgsmmzw
2‘": “$1-5' (550* C“. c>~gﬂ®ﬂcaﬂm *‘hﬁ'oh
HmEu-n.._‘tﬁz 3 &.Q:Q'U5®w wgmg-hvcwmoéﬁmmm
Qgrhm (ULL. Z<ng 0.9 8mmhgwm§mmg 522(1)
““538 22*“ u. bzmmEUC-QEQCQimwﬂ-g-meﬁ
«Q |- <DcuLL1JZof ‘Qvummﬁzigacca’h—
N QawhcmC=ZWiz®®$nwmwmm ‘1’
, 1 P1: (Upcymcm “zﬂ-wms—wmgﬂaz
???*Vw ? Q—JQQEE—Efﬁﬁﬁgwcmmmsvdﬁi
(dwzggb ‘41:??? m a:am.ag$‘:m§gh32®_g
0"”! ~w‘d‘9‘dmﬁ'giwmw i "“§§2$§£%”’9§
$03 gmdwﬂ'ﬁihgiﬁqﬁ) “1‘01:th “:EEEQW
mmﬂOS‘ES 0“” .mcoto .cg, 0% gwmm-
£00. <5 c9" (.5. com NC” “7.0
mm (U -* v...
mag“? 0:6) <o<D| W1
{DC}. 03% o‘q’
(/30. (1’05
“Wig"!

h I
q...)
--——- UJ $031: 023
m “5 ”3'0 3-2;) -£:§)E £7938 +56 :2»
2% r: ‘8 as 2 t 232mm 2m: 5 a: 23=
13} {D (1305 LL. i! L...“ -- O-o—ow“ .C Qm 3
m E E L—s_.. f1»— 33:: :3 .96 5m§8§§ a» .Q [
m ,‘55 393“"4’13 Q g fwglow zww>8~ “" 9 m8
3 ‘= éQwEESc: 100 b goggagﬁgﬁggw a 33'
a 8 ‘gwgeaﬁ iz[ﬁe-’é£r—~g~aow£ a ggl
GS 1;; £75026) 2.92 14. away -=E‘5~$w g'cs <63
0': <1) 2 gw-Q w 5—— i-ﬁamwwsm but: H m;
H L. (593 ,2...“ c Q ghEﬁc’Q- '5;ng c: 23::
c 31:: 0’05”") CD “3 ‘3 “Esmhm ‘9 :30
g c géoga E 8 gwegﬁﬁhwﬁbo E c”
(a u... 3 .._. U) IQ) .. "*m'c mﬁ— U) :3‘0
92 J; Eeaég 81% $E§%8¥g35§% =8 £8
CG 0 030mm,“) 0) ‘ﬁG-"Lﬂmcsﬁo a: 0>~
._ .._. '0 +-*
*- '5 lga—zgwe a 9 ~aigaageogEc g :8
g >~ >meQ- ”EB“ 3:83000‘: 5‘5 lo“
lr-- .c: .503 “C ’-‘-’-~’ ‘4‘: ‘-‘-"*“ 'ﬁmHzOEEWw ‘1’ ”00
.Ja 391380 ﬁ g gwswwow 53 3%
G3 3 0.1:“ cm Ha)“- OWE suh-
x [:3 bggoﬁ <t- *6 Ozwggmggcg—Qs Em sag.
H—1 #03 U) :00 (D .UQBCCZO (DQJUW— :3 Om
o :0 m.t-gg-csw LLI a mcmﬁozﬂw 533‘ o 03
" 92 aghc} w a)" £135 0""E'WCD u) w
9 :5 oio‘““~ Q’ wowmemﬁwC q; 09...“),
o m m .0350 :5 g @cwm‘a‘ggwﬂmo i(3.”. 30
‘33 ('6 “3001335” “- CU gwfemmmmwuﬁw E CD
"'5 E 035:on- H“ :.W 5.5273(1) cwi—mw C :0);
wa-c-u >5 M ‘ £2.“ 0) :3 G) {U :
O" c: meH“ C: ‘33 (D (UCCUCUUJ .c:“"" CUT.)
i <13 w (3) L2 1...... .___a3..c: 3‘ c:
8 9 lé’bhwg E 5 ”mmm“m§8£gg 0 g:::
-o—' ""ns... 1 U} 'ﬂxmwm‘: “‘“‘ um C: ""‘
~23 :32 sane“; m #8 ggwgggmgagmg 238;
c 5% gears“ la a -o‘3’c=‘<%‘==?58£nc i: 13%
‘9 B- Um‘ﬁog '93 3.9. Ewwﬁﬁxmshoog 8 543::
‘66 am mﬁmom m- Immor—z’ Oom-Q-Qm ’3'“
4—1 3:: w “a Q) G) C0353... u‘ﬁ‘o O i O
4-» CU LaGJCU... :93; {'0 (59:3... 5... C: C:
“ml: mghgm -- 0.921(1)“),20’003103 “3Q
"2103 L. mow '0 :52 .99. i‘dﬁwwo‘ao mqﬁg 3E? 8'35
m... o “Exch— .... = ima—mo‘mm ”UGO q;
mg“ as aw: B a mascaw ﬁgﬁwe == 3:8
£2ng %§.m%.§ g '§ §Q'%9§§¢gc88 ﬁ 5°22;
co -m m 2H me0 ‘5 Ema) ‘Ttﬁ'u
(DU) GJCD Em (D i”... O (U... meCH-us... u.— 353
... 03—0.) Q3130) “‘H CD 003C: “‘1: ““35
ﬁnzo=mwﬁscs 0+»- oo 28803“g‘°*ﬁ3*&v€5 o E”
cﬁ-mwwo mas C538: “wwwxmm m5: ‘73 cow-
'"m wgmwmho 9.9.2 as 22mmmawa‘gnggmﬂzg <22 :
gcchwﬁ“~m ““503: xmmeExmﬁmmg‘mgmzf
“08 Xcdgg 89536 ,ggvgwégﬂgsg’nggmo
£22.: <13me (13 ._.. Ct (00 :3 "mm “ha
®m,mb.mx8mm Xv g 4—» gm Q) Wwaz'o X'Cgmq}
g.ggtég339038: .cm|~— -abm£~‘govmgwm g¢.Q_Q a
- so ‘CJ... H
896mgg53*9 $512.8.0’mac 895*”‘598‘353
wg EEMOOQE agxamggp-wQEg—Eg‘gﬁ QﬁE-«gg
C: (UM— $30033 1063 C :q... (0wa G)--- 0C6 ........ '
"C5 8—- “CU ......... C:- CD-cumu) Ohﬂwm—hﬂ.“
"3% acﬁgggg géggigsﬁggvgéﬁoaﬁaggwga
-— o --- :33 -~--* ..... 2
9ww8§83§g ggeE-Egﬁzgr‘éo.§w3%>~z%¢8%
Sr: £§8ggm° w'aiéﬁSgﬂkﬁa‘éégcgg‘é‘g-gmag
03.9.3.ng0 .gﬂ) :ﬁm (50):.503‘230) 73'3ch QcD H13§3m
£§.o_ag “0753‘" cngvomn tEw—aB-‘Uaiczvc: i (130
w . (D ....,. ,_ - "wt: (1) -——a;---.h:® 1-9;:
0 ‘53 rgmccf- ”c: Evhwa’n 0 <5 hm“...
C: E'J‘: '5: C (D :MH‘“ CD
._.§ 8- 3mm: 2:88 mQMmEP—eaﬁ'éeﬂugagww
U (5'3 mmwu s: 00.“; —mqu3- “WHO
ans QQmBEgg ?_gmgﬁ'c‘59555r8,ggcﬁﬁiggﬁg_%i
gagsg‘dwfg %ge%29%£%g~zgm§8§: Egg'éﬁ
)3 > '_ s ..... - 22 ....-—~ CL
......-—-- (UQJHCU (Uw- (IJOJIO mmOo“ BO gm
5-0 O_chwmg 0.? <1)" '00: w~me$H 4.. <9
-—- .0 (D 4-“ a) c: 033 0 CD“)
2-59 aggaﬁac .wo 2-5.; egﬁgﬁmgmcﬁwg ”>355
:2 m—Cw (330) car: <1) :Iczigums-E 0~- wa- -— .23
Z 2303’ c1) 4:2“: - “m:n-io‘omuW" Um‘écﬁw-‘U‘Umwo'
3% gmgngF—gﬂ-Qggmlw'zgﬁmogg%>§8wgtﬂmﬂ
3 L—g'on'o 'mOUo E g“ 10 02c$ a‘EBZOZZ‘E
m222§®BEWZmZ Zgzﬁg o-*m§’£‘ggmu_-°’Lz,.38
20) (1; Lo‘i ~"iu__C:LL. Lmenmc'UC 8- C) “5....
mxgmmmm ZSOQJLLTJI (6 CF- (3 coomOHhF—oz
webk—aF-“QEWOWQP *0 twOOmQE‘EﬁmQQQCU“
QWDQQEmm-SQQb’QSQonU o -.....
(\waO 000’);
“2520: Qﬁ‘qu‘ﬁvrwﬁ w‘ng, my
N: Nu: N(ééNcc', ~20 -@ (9‘10“) CDC!)
©©§©LO= (.0 (D (00003! '0) ‘6)? (51:33
(1.)“ .GJI -°*’ "D ' dmi 0 00} mm
dmlom 8%8m 803 cum 8:? $61.0 U30.
(933‘3531 mmmmmm. coal. -. g

as
Q;- J
{‘11} (D i Z , .
“3 *"‘ E .L" Q 9 a) . i m."
:22”... g H:— *5 - m L: s g M.
E "é '5 c ""’ (D
o ~wB-C o a 5.9, 9 g o E
3 E 00mg “3 '§ 1:: c» E "" i g
M 3 i .
333 45 sgcg (D g C: i .E *5 g) E
5: LE (1) w g (u ~— ; o i Q. o
(U 5.... O (1).! ._.... ' g" Q) 3 It: I C: +4 K
0) (Dow a .C: U) L. c: ._ ......... I
O Ut—bt 3 4—! (U (u I c: |
.C: _ 53-539 E c: 3/) 0 Z o
+- 8 £601; --— 6 i 2 E ‘4- E
C33 5“(D '0 i in Q c»
U) o 3 n3 *— C 5
gm 0’ m (U 0 Q .5 uo—I n...
LL! ‘0 94:73 a E “- . i o o
g (U 0095; Q) a (U a! C i m c: ‘i
4—» .C “H 3;...” Q J: 4-" i O G)! O ‘5
9‘5 $833 8 g g 2 g a a 3
"£35 "2:: >_g_gww SE 0:5 ‘5: W C)” CI 8. g
{D _<D gmgm £2". .0 CD {~- q; a) (D 1....
~35 auwmﬁ co * cu m H '5 8 *0 a:
3 cu 013%‘D s ‘0 ‘“ 8 ‘5: c: .c:
q; 13 *‘Umo s c: cu ‘1 .——= ('3 <:: to g
m ._.__ cmhm m J: .9 w a) (.0
C: Omwﬁ 4—: 4...: 3 8 G.) l U) C:
U) 3:: ..... O m u.— 0 LL! c: (U
03 Emma} w O G.) ME _9 .z o w
a) §>. mmumm o m o' :52 a: .5 Q
o "as ﬁnes- g g i w a 6,9 a on. w
s :3 ?QQEu i (D :5 . E m 03...... y... Co] C:
.9 oghc: : __ +_. as g o “:3... a)
8 gﬁamg‘“ “5 cu m .8 “gas (:1 7-652 g
5__a L... :
CD ‘hng: 3;? m -g 0 q: “58% *9: Ed} 0
Q) hommwﬂ? O C 9 g (f) h . (D .00) c:
co cofgocz—u- '5 O G) * Lu :31); m 5:; m
m (’0 ~*"“‘5 :3' “Q 5 .c: 2 ' «35¢; w .0
......... M90)“ 0 ' o 2 I .C: n ma: CU:
5 <03.__(g,Q._;3 E C: i k: “C5 l 1—[ hﬂf x: 5303 “C5
$.30ch ' o I 03 9: .l “3:: i“ CD :2:[
I @255.“an 0~ .5 “3 *5 $3 «s 3%! a5
03 =s—O ‘zmw <1> <2: G) ‘8'“ ‘21 0%
J: 35:0300‘“ .c: .9 (/3 .—§ 6—3 ow-
“ w J: 0.0 .4.» “E w E; m'“ .9:
O C:_g‘= (‘5': 2:».1 :3) | to $0 an sh“; C:
mm“ 03 ‘ U 1 1:: {D E (Di :1: U) 00 “Q
C: O 0:353» :3 1 (U .5: i ms “1:: a) ”“0: m
‘0 H.CQJCB-I—i *'" 5 a H 1 (0% mm 0') "oh (0
axomgO-u‘g <13 0 g 3 m 233 m E“ E
xc°$wegﬂ w as 5 2 0% 3 ma 8:
88328w2§ c w' a 2 8a w 38 ml
o-——- mmB‘EEoo .59 g m <D Hm g c» '5"
wggmhmﬁz‘: .— 0 8 0" am‘ 3 ‘53 C5?
$35 QHOEm‘O * g ““ i m '8 ton 3%, mm was
8.5 mhmmcg O ('6 g m (‘6 03(1) z 0613 E
romﬁ‘ﬁ‘$# 2?: E U) i “5 EC” 8! '00, *gl
, 'CQ-i (13.002 "" “5 .c: ‘39 ‘6 '0‘ E (D
0‘13 :30..." - '0 w H a s... cc:
"56!: L~-o:5"3;:::*".¢: “5 c3. -- . 3 on: c: (:03 E
G’ “@503 c “0 ‘3’ 0' CUE u) *wCU’ o
‘33 Cs— mh-Q 9 0-5:: 5‘ I 3! 0):». +—« “635‘ -—
vmuﬂ. {BU D“ Lh— 4-4? ___MJ ‘2 I G.)
03.0 HWECZE CO ‘6 QJCU C: mi 3.1“" Q} .933“! >
509‘: $ugg ‘3’ 5‘3 m 9' 88] '0 ﬁt? a)
~*'E~Q'°) 8.2:” Q. -~- 5 ‘4“ o "‘ EC” '5
cg OW.EGJ::::::Q‘ U) a QC: :3 c: CD“ (-3 Q i
-._o OmEH—BQ 3 .1: '“ 413:2. o 090 “’1
mi: 823me M Z 5-5 a, w w ”Ch 5
4-434 mb U)“"OU(D LL ,9 (5*; a 09 (D “O.- 4...:
.9“--C=LU‘-Om~ c3 9%: ‘—.<Ds .9 ~— .... “E&— w
98°02 “€3.03 0.) i '05? “w E “-05 C:
Em 03" 3‘0“ CU aw' 625 “O 5‘” Hm a:
mi: CUJ‘DOQQQ? U} 0‘6 "C30. 0)} O_g ‘0‘ :3“ E
“U Ociﬁﬁwwoi 5:: CD :5 3 5 (Di QC:
0““ mt! '= "-~'“i ..., ‘1’ “E5 ‘1’ oi 8 a s: 03 CD
Hg 33h.gom “'5 4:3: 4:: 2’. {Do 0: "~15 __>__
Ow=gu ”Qi-Q :3 “‘1’ $3: 1::E 3’: :5; “3'6 0
LL 3-0 lﬂmm f ‘00! O H cm ._E ‘6'": c
13‘” (3):. $223 0 06‘” w c: 4:! ' 0’
z >“O‘zm 2 w*‘ 0’0: m5 m ‘1‘” 5‘ 0+“ ‘9
LLmZOQE-Qt—“Qz 25‘: 9.5. 3,9 53 ‘02: a) Ca 3:.
EwﬁLL¢_-,i_ﬂ-u‘+.:c:z.‘_ﬁz 0.9 2:: 3:» a 6“} co 1-34.: 3;
F'.m “Umo 3'9 ‘23 Z 0' ; '"q—u
QQQUch‘Um-C ....""“...H— ”“c: LL03 2 Z»- 13 93]
“~*QO g0» F-o H5; 1:— 11,3 Z 29 =
13 C30 0:: 1“" i——‘” 14—- LL: 2%
mmi “-l C) QC: 1* 9—03 u»;
.mer (1) Q QC |~—
NNN“ V v - <9 C),
' ' V“ w:- 1
(9CD '(D i V“: V t m...
(9 CC I v- ? mi L!)
(.56) "(D 0 0(5) (£5 ' r; v— (C (.0
03%0 0"""0’ -x--<D "" v—‘Q «'3': I "" V— P“-
CDCU; M." . , -x--Q}!‘ N g (.0 1 ' 1-—
COilmgL; (D -<Ucu<\1'0 '6): WC!) ”v.03 N (0 “<1“.
‘ (Dang -‘°CDN =0 'C'Do « lw-wa) ‘3' 1 war“) "0::
EwCQQ-ow -(U‘GJN(UG)NU)O I 'ww].wm©
| maimma .wlom 0 ‘wo. .aa
. _ immawwggmwimNQOm
maimcdagg‘f

m
{3’} I (U l g
m . a Z w ‘ §>~§ —
«2; 8’ i <9 “u a2! [<6 L3
.. U) P" -1": E c:
5;.” c: 3 Q :3 0° - <15 a:
‘1’ 9 "ca 1- O“ “ “€52 cw Q
5 w c: a ,9 w 202.98. ==
L... .Q 1 .O a 03 CL'CLL.""'I CO
0 E 2 ‘E 0 Z :5: Co Ep—Lﬁim CU;
“- 13 to LL. 5 ma) .QmQDE 30"
“5 E (U: ”" P- I“; ﬁt: 5.: c2.> EEI
G) O s...- Q) Q- :03 IHU’J -oq5:
L. Q 4-4 0 .......¢ (8:: 'O
m a, ,0, I£ b; mmmo gcgﬁ-f— 3
-9 U “£3 ‘8 .35 8913-3 50-35% $ C:
1% (U U): “i121 c; .5 £3me 3% SW13 CD
1.. (1, £22.; 0 cc ,be,§:3 ..._. Q. Q, E
C O s... O; u... u— “1-3 “-35 0-m- — (n
23 0:: mam W
CD 0 (U Q- 33 £5 30320 Uggglg m:
g 2:: (D (U Q q... WE‘QQ .95? m 13 O)
:3 (U E] IQ) ' O O ESE 03.2-51.2.” _CU
‘0 " m (D E(:3 “"--*“9. Qua) “(a w
a) o 2.» w c: a____ comm.” 005.13 :3 o
L... “— '43 C'- ICU H 0(1):):3 (3me (D
0, ”a as (Di 0;; S "5th wahwg =1:
.5: 3:3 3 .9 1(1:) I 0 031.8ng "wean; a (D
M .....J r :2: I“ E“ a. iraﬁg ‘3"— 0‘3’ 1- Q’ '
w w— '0; CD m'b-C "ooi g... ((03) a3>4.93 03
:3 O c: *- Owwm c: '13 (33.2.51: “:3!
LL '4: “$23) ”(1) Oow'On-i $633213 AmIomw I:
a 3 ms Egg wgggagwgéﬁ «9-3 *Ecﬁ “5
m '0 % Clam 0’ “+4.: smm.+_ .93 O‘Q <0 0'3
I c: m 6013*- 513130) wage, .L-zi
8’ 8} “g gé Qoggoﬁgﬁg'gémgohg g!
._ o m o; o gum... u...“ :3 £2on
Q- s—mic; CI.Q “MCDHO Eva) ~-- Q)
q; E : .... O3 cc“ Q.‘ H.953: 8-- .
g 4:: O QI‘UE www.gg (Dagn— vaﬁw'c‘g "mm
335 4-“ 0 (0(1) I aﬂhho.Qon (D “8"" 35C:
”0 H...“ ' man s» $530750 0 wcmmm Eﬁzm
c m. = :3 o. “mg ErWn.ﬁ*-*w“}, am:
(6 <6 --- “£0 :2 0:506 U) Q s..."
<13 H, a_ﬁ {c-gfzmoow wwmkmg ::3
U) Q o *0 m Oogmﬂoghﬁg 0:216 .mcz.
.9 o H '3 c2; ‘a‘jom,c+" $3.92 mm chs E0
“’65 C c: mo; 03335:: mmww>4wg ma)..." .._
3 .... 0% EU I u“: <12.“'*O xEQmugg-a .903 E __cg*a
4:: “D! E- GIG) metmwmm—cﬁwnwwwmo "6C5
.53 IE; 0 ”3% mgmggowmgfgmgg* 9"“
“o '5 a) co a.) .c: mmmmaﬁgIﬁm‘ugggmh 3"ng
£3 E 3 3-0 gsﬁgBG’ﬁnggwmﬁa-awmg
$2 - o “c: 03:0 , m.ﬁ-HE‘D (Du: vgmmﬂmggmw
““0 CD s,__r -—-<D;---a)..—<.)Q>m€b i—ﬁ CU h;
mg (1; J: o (13‘ c: 66*“le wmmuh c3“ :E.§o>s‘ag-C
0w w W > 033323“ :su-Eﬁcv E723 -—c: ._,
an“: r: go gg$gmyﬁg$nlgoﬁv~9£ﬂ€8
>““‘ M O ”3090’“ch Qw‘m‘“®“ MI'E:
’S‘Es'cnai '0 5m EEEQ39.29wC-93“530®m1
G) W (D """'.‘> """. (t3 Hmooﬂw Q) mum!
®“~J“c'i 5:? 5.59 2*" 95.9233w8't‘5 "?Em‘I-Emmﬁ
m‘UHE 03 (D 23 55 mggnmEC'Eng-um
mm0 .5550: :3 H 3B1? xm W 5573
(1) .mo 3—— [ me‘wM—JQJQ 03m Qm-Dwmowa
37680,, O 'g.> DEwIECS-‘Emmwo: mg‘gw 831-313
3.5 {1.0 C 099’ 5: 53.933303 mmwggw—"ng ml“...
003000 O (0% “WSOIJESQELQ‘, mo «~13 (DCDICDCU
w'mwwi 1-; —“meMEmQ5£Q#®£®I-‘zc
“Dwg m £52 ngwﬁgtg—cmgﬁmowﬁwI-ﬁ'“
§<"§‘5- 3% 3is= ”EB?Bgéggg8§ggﬁﬁmgé%“§9
.':_...- "“ m. " > ‘
£0 0-3.: g QQI §BEIBmBZEEQ$BEU$EU¢EQI
msz +- wwg: wmgmmahaﬁ agéh=hwncé
33>“ch g 990 9030.3: 9033035303,;8E8980i
«vs 58‘ ms 3'58 'aéogc’gwwazz ﬁncacacml
0'3 55's: (55 GET” ‘QCU Q0) OOGJECD 8WD CHOU
Lawsgm g cow‘s (Man .2 ‘5: {D ”"othow
Zméza *- “c; ~-_g.£g.-wg.egg,g% mg w8m%
0| (6 n..- "a ...- ....... ,_
LLELL‘U E EIEE‘ 55.352232282825220,
8X81?“ ”PIE Hr- wéﬁmﬁ‘ﬁswéﬁ“%3&w&8
<1) 0:: Q 000.. mmﬁsaoaﬁmmaogoamgaﬁl
oo oo 03 c.) . I I 3 E
“.1 CD CD (:3 C) c) = :
*YIV¢$“N‘TNWN°¥NWNW‘YNI waaimaINQINQ:
(Qcow-(o <E_C0r.o COCO <9“) (9:0 (-010 web COLE) (DcéiCdcéu‘C-dcé‘id'i
.0) .meﬂzmamm (DQ133030) 03030) (D g, 5a,: ECO
(.3030 .001?nt Bmiﬁmﬁo-“m __<1>_Q2__<1);_°_3.a2;.92a>
$$$$;§§wmmamwmmmm%g gggggggwgm
I HCLF-Qk-QHQF—a,k—CL H&FQHmE—mﬁP—wa

a
9.;
k, m _
5;; L-
”, :3 0:
L3“; U) : _a i
{’23 (U (D .*-' F >5 Q) i E “W...“
E m U) :3 [0,3 “'33 :— wo m 5 5 E
5.. LL! E E m 0 O 4...: =
O :3 lw 63 C E“: 4" ‘
3 m 6) SI 1:213 ,__ E (07559 g
. ‘ .5: EO ""' mm M ”(3....

C C “gm *“C CD 0 ia—i 3‘5 C".

m <0 c' ' $.92 53 e '55’0'0 mc:

E «9 m" 8 76% L— “3 >358 c-95 Q,

$ m ' 8-: 0"30 8 50"”8 “9%; ‘3
q a) C: w :3 mm (D m '60)“; fauna.) ‘4‘:
4.: U) c) O 0' 112:4: "0 U) meE 00:: g“:
4:“ a ...... Ctr: g h 3c" ”“8”“ '80-‘42: ‘0

0 . o €003 3a.) 0 U)%=% 4:25“ _:_:_3
CD (D O : __ .__..tt:.’ “ c (2.2% o (3.... .

3:3: mg; C E23 .903 § "' two‘- Chm” 8
"la: (3,03 (Dha- .520: U) '5 wmgw C'DGJ “~-—
Q .c: a- CD0 cn'— -~- ‘3’ Q): Q “"52"” +-'
M. <1; 8;; (6‘70. >5. E 2 *m'EE Eat“ 0
£2 h: M m1; 0 o 0033 ":3 ~59 5
U'Eﬁ 4:0) (-9 Cs... “3 C :2» 0&5: 00

c2"- “z... .‘D 05 o o c: H:___s:: mc_n %
m =3 32-65 0"" “’4: m i‘" mEmcc 5.12:0? g

E -- ’ 8- mm 3a) 4—! ~15 :32;- .4:

32 m m9 0-5:: ‘0»- sg c: voog .22“ 'v
x 0 .9m (1) O U325 '5}. immoz wU-‘D C:
7;: m 0-... _,__,.-—-.... “03 E w (”w 0 “Q0
Bu; t? 538, (59(1) 1: 2 $903.; 0).: g;
L. 93 mm n;_g.o «3:363 cc '2; m'sﬁm 5053-3 :3
4:3...- .Q.r.: 255* “2:0 '33 ‘> c.) 'Q03 N
=5 ":3“ <1) "56*: C?- ”- =~=UECEQ58 '
C U c:cni “- 03: 3"“ ‘0.) 1"“ 0‘39 :3 m ..
.9 h m: C“ c: C! ..._. mEhD-wmmw
w """ Q 0 :[0w 0 “"203 .____ "U qua
{6'0 Cg 09% (1)85 ‘12“) GJLL..EE.C‘U253'SES‘
._ S: '90.) QEQ) 1 mm“) >5 ?CU “W'Uﬁglcmm'a :3 E
m (U zgﬁ {013 gwm r: H 593:0 Immense)“; :
Em :3“: 33m: “:0; “3 C '- Wmmmmw‘“

0') mo 0‘5.“ 523w 0’ '8 Eﬁqjmgachif—D‘
3.9 5%: 30393381 ogg 8 :4: £95HQ€Q§.§Q
“a O... “J'Uc‘a 25cm 6 3% mmm-wm%°&

.9 > 081 q..- >~ »—'"-+~ 1-, Oumnghﬁmm;
C: O “(U3 cﬁ £3030 =m ‘13 :szoﬂwom x... 2‘3
-_.. :3 I ":3 25mm 5 .Q as... c: 39“":
ti Q 033': 03%;: 0mm“: = ?MOGJEJWﬁ-C'U
@173 4:3! E23; 0mm 'g B or§3agg¢gc E
3'5 93 m“ 3,72,"; 8'00) c» ‘Dm‘qw—O' zaz“*m“3 8.
,_ o 33) 6:303. .9-2 g E wogoenﬁw -~c
Ow— ~ g...“ w'fﬁ‘: $.12 ‘53 3"" o. 0.9; £O~E®C$55
‘0‘ O ws... wiﬁm '0‘“: a (B UmmnmE‘QB-GCHOE
0.... mm E Q} "ms”...E 1.... mcpgﬁ‘v 'nﬂﬂu‘“

0 Mg! Q3495... go 5:- "“‘ “‘03 m I .mH-‘J: CLO)

Egg ﬁg; .9 om mwg .59 ."U 2330 3.258s... 53
O CD 0 '1: “C: "“"' =
8 ‘39 :50 {23:45 ummcu 32" (U 63.9582mwgf83
CW8 I-Q'Z.t (1.3ng 3%“) O C) mmgﬁwoaﬁgv 03%
gg 533-; arggi 5-3.3 “*3 g 3%%<g8£$9%g£
3‘55 9: 53-53%- :35 .0; c: “-53.4:thqu m
.H Q, (pg .538 Eng m =5 gwwtcToE-Qaaﬁw
a“ 2593 *5 ea“: 05:»- E ="3‘5Umgommo‘5ﬁ 3%
Ct: .WQ ”'0 MG.) 150.313 {13 gw-aﬁmzbvw: “H
--——-'.Q2CU On: "Gay >LC.‘ 1~-~-{1)"""‘ m‘awhmﬂ"?
MH» mm mm”) mm c: 00> WU os—CDC: ~<w
g cwgm um“) “me: ~- mmébnawm 500: -~
w ®>""LE 3 mﬁ 0.33:“: ,0- QGJZQI'zmm-ab CE 031.9
13;;9'080 00 93:0 act” :2 agtammw‘ggmﬁg
r.- 3*»— Cvs— “03‘“"1’~m *5 wCaw-m “53%”

03*“ Co. 0"“:53 3:130 [>13m-CD ”Ema“ ~§+~ 09
“£0” 0 0 cum: '-.‘-‘.QA mmU>m90FX 15$“: :2
'51:?3 EB 5-5“ “5‘22 "C393 Bﬁgﬁ'azgmmggégms
Ema: ma) 2 0’ (Dado, cww mgwov‘“mhm O_m
*— “ 'G‘ge ’WC _ ‘5 Lu- aJ—H Im a)
:3 39.53;: 0:: Egg)‘ G.) C43H>s 39633030 CD
‘0 5(1) Bog mtg cuo‘" mmhmmeL—QE
(:va '0 4.»; g.gﬁ OmE-ME-CZ—xzcoc u-UQ.
o-mhimE 2‘0“ -- ..... '5 ‘66 ﬁtswo ﬁwo 130’
o C: cﬂ 0 (DC:- O‘cm :03 mGngg EEG.) Q) m_a

“‘0’ OE : :20) >63 __.o,__m “oﬁzBm-a-Czw“
*5 055 co mm». cat 0;»,rrxm'vmﬁmwi )cw-gw

0 (DE: wiwe “‘3‘: CG} End) (35.... {-01.2305 03-51
c:cc ha) 0 Q") comm -_~c§ “cémogwmmﬁ CE
mgooi‘"o s: 5:03 G30 “?*HCD‘H’" 35m Cmm
cu Q4... 3 q; guano ‘0; s_cOmco .thgh oE

-9<D$O {1309) 0'30“ 3:503:35:va00 3““0
Z i: 1...”: 33,096 (1) O UQUQOmSWf‘ECL-SOM 0...:

”-03le 22.... Z 00 www.whmﬂiwgowanmm
E’"*-¥—}E u—mg. ng-zﬁzo‘"mh-Sm'wwa°m8
5:35.35 Shh; H&Qmwﬂmmzmaﬁsg'"wm§ 34:2.

00’ oégg§5$épgg883UE§E§ze
N c2531, 0 SCHU.Q ILL‘D
WNNQNN N QQEOQDQ-ﬂa’lha
QO‘ 'r‘ 'NNNNN N “Ra‘s
COCDCDEQQde' .NNN mm N
32a) 0) coco'co'. .NNN NN —-
“D iwm ma) G) (O (o (OI ' N N
.Q m “.03 (D - (Déco'i —, N 1 0")
mm .9. Q “cu cum . colcow .04 N or);
5-—-Q__ COCO (UN 033-0033 Q0) (1) ! (Dcﬁﬂ 'C‘PHNN:
MQHQ‘IF‘EN mm (U533 .9033QO a; wmw‘t
- QRHQHCL cum mgnm mm a) “3|
twa_F mm .003 #020;
Q—Pﬂ. (Um 30350-3
3 P0,:

H

M.

—' E
I i '

iii; ' E

m i .

.13 . § i I I

w .c: “r: '

m” : a i 4—! '22 Q.)-
0 I 9'33 >- 'm 6 i g 3 {E 058%
5] ga‘gﬁiaﬁ m'm ﬂ 8%"5‘8
'--- ._.._ 4...: - {n 8.... c x
3 '03:: 1‘23“— gf‘g g 9 $3 ,9 E3. 8 Br:
8—— GJ'D ADC: ”mm '5 en 4“ co ma)
U) 1"" C) 5030) '_ 2 3CD ECU -....... d) g:
:3 2.... (:2: 5C5C3Q i Z I O l: - Co)
UI LL. m0 CDM-‘m E LL. 1;) 4....- “C: 9E
9 [~— 9 :2:- ccncts ‘ I...“ 2 CI 0) 5:

Q (D (DC: 'Sc“ LL- (6 +—- (3 8):!)
‘8 two EC.“ 3'5”: 0 l-‘-~ : ‘0 m 3'8
CU "‘ E .02 -—~ <1) ‘ ‘ ‘0 O (D to mg;
8 (D ELL- mm'ﬁ C0 3 *-' $2.": % '9 £3:
% a) E “OF" 83‘“: :3 (D 8 Q __ jg Wm;
”On. 52 4:13 grab ¥- 3 w h :3 Q cum
9 >~.i anL- (Dc: % CD .913 >5 g :9 0 mg
“658 1 $5 5‘“ 5'3 g E % 265 o g; 3 .g‘a
> cu E :33 93E <13“ E 0 2t— '0 09
.g o) .3 -——.:_—. SHE; am 4.; c» f: .9 z
- g wig 00,9: ﬁg: (:5 g m E oz: .g --— x m g
8‘55 :3'36 :52“- 3.5:: 3:8 5 g 8 E “mo
0 us we: am <6 '- m 13 w [cu '53s:
”'0 0:53 mm Wm r: “”5 w w o rt: 33*“
«5 2.232 am iv o o C c c: i'" 0‘5
5 E 5 "13M 8.921;?) ‘Eﬁ 2‘: -E z""" (1)3
2: ;., g o w gm m «a w > ‘8. w m «a m:
+.- Z (Dd) (Day Esum E CD CD
0 .- 5: “'4: w 0 (ma: ‘05 (‘5 (DE
-... 01:; 0»... m2: ‘0 Em 0 Eco ‘0 503 (u
“gm ‘9 m ‘00 8' o g ‘5 2:" 'E 8 %— 422$
m0 3.; m: ~33 mag: r, :g gm
4 8 3% ”.9. Q‘é‘w, m c033“, *9 9 bkcgg
“-3 03.6: 7033' grid): 04:20:59: _<n s03 5'30)“;
“<50 HDL- g. :22: ' “3*“... O ‘5 ‘Q. cum-Hﬂ
w 5'0 “~03 :sbw ’ 3 Oct!“ ‘3 ’Cr: “‘53-‘30
£01 -§;m $5 wmg | gigo CD ”('6 C” mQ.Q‘-.‘l:
mm f 4—9 (D C: Q3}: U) I 8" Om“ E «C: .5 hotﬂ)
a: CD “3"" 050 E “H 3‘30) “"’ ‘- 03 C: 5
“mica ‘33 :3 3:130 Z 0 i 0 0.1... E (D 3 >£CDQJE
S-w “'0 :.... CLL-CD 1 m 3 O ‘- 13 s‘otr'ﬁ-a‘
35-; . .93 (D :35 ohm- ; OJ 3.0-) o :3 la) (60 «ng
'0 a: 1 c-CI o 2.: <1) “.0343: <0 ‘ lv— (Du—
.._.. (J 5.5;: C) 1;; ""“"’ O c: 5“) 'Ozt-z
(D ‘H 03cc .90 Ewo 2": .9)... CC E
4:: <1) ...... c: 2,»... ,y—o 3 ‘5 O :22: go (1} 00.29::
‘54"; B.9 ,{Um *ECQ ‘GH‘CS c: "H 1..., $290
“r... w -- 1 0:03 C; o :3 a) .... come; 2
.90 93-3 ”'15 <12": 2 wﬁgt P: 0 .Eztg‘
‘G-H ‘ o s— 050 42‘3- ’ 2"“6.) 0 w . 363166....0’60
Q) <1.) <0 ..... (D‘— c; “3-09:5; O49 o—‘momm
s... m g: 41:6) h_ﬂ CI (“BE 0 mg: ME 14me
wig ('5 o .9233 :31: CD .9 25.... '2‘5‘33 9-”“02 ‘UC:
§.Q_ C: o umCJ m -0 :m’b 03 .ls_ mgom'“w
*0 '-- ~ :93!“ *0‘“<D£Z:>.-CLE sz0
<3) G) “c CD cc: *" 3' s. “’34:" wﬁ—OCOH—“W
0') <1) 4:220 G)" “H 3-” m'UCU‘“U*-“E (D --- w
0 (D c: a... mm ......__,.s:.._: “.133 4-“ ﬁw'-:.=>q; '
“C“ (6 CD Qﬁﬁm Oggﬁm.m.gaw*o:ﬁimk—m£
EE_E . (n g m‘E‘C} ?m- (p (U E 0); 13+" 0 8-— w' 3U?» <13 u...
U) [ 034-4 (62: .Cmg C:-_C: (1)5... gmlogsmnmo
~13 ~a~—$—-<° omscg ‘gmmésD-Eozgwo-Sc
‘59 m‘Ome.Em (1,) 5.8.4.0)! Emwonwo
4:... 4.. “Wm“ 0-903 Ewan now BQO'"
“z: ﬁgoOg-scrgjmwm? hﬁmowgmcgw‘Uh-ﬁ‘a
U? “£23 1 ‘73 $.09 M C.§ -.... ""' 3 CO? CO :2: GD} 3 a: C1); .9 O q; G) :3
03-, C'WQQSQO>~QI 530710.)“ “mgcnm
CEO OHL—fﬁnm 0'): cm Q) w”"*UJ.EO “3-“ O 03’
“£0 0 On.“ a; cmgoc mumiﬁ'w oHp-cﬂmgg-
g 0 01750330 93? m oic-w 9c: #M'gar—ta’;
C , .ﬁa—a .2.) mo (DC: .H‘L—Q mL- 0.5 00% 4—; ;_
O c: C“ 51‘ (D .52“: fwd) a... 1:; C20.) mm
m (DEG: 1: ”CL 1'5 w“ ma) 0 to a; a:
.Qg mm gomvm 60113, OC®_:£,$inmm8£m
2 E g ?%ch <1) “-21% .ng SHE'SOE“: 353%“93
i2 -f 22:5 “’03 “-3 (.2201 D ,2 Umamgammomm
m‘m‘: LL'LL'SZm‘DsZ'm 3"" 0-9“ 9E occ’Em ‘65”
QQQ i—Qg.“ o); (DLLU'J 23520255 a) CH—hi
. C3~Q Smhark-c ”~n- u.»- “ZU’ZOJ '
i mm~,ma ; O f...— E LLC- (u 22:
CD‘DQ 3""me ”u—QJU-Eu.‘
(9'1‘: -NC\!N¥ N on
co.<o (9' No.1 0") 0')
q; z ‘9 (0(0' -. .NNNN or) w.
“(1} (1) (D (Q (OCDQD: “ “NNNNW xd-
.c:z ~ mmmm a: comma). . _c\:m to co
mﬂgmﬂmﬁ £'QO (D E wmécocém'cwqcﬁé‘ﬂjm E?)
i “"0- Hmﬁgmwmmwﬂ'ﬂmﬁm—Qmﬂm
‘ *Miﬂ—i

N
H
‘3} l
Iv“ 3U
’““ O «‘52 H g .53 m
'C mg g 04% E
“H ”3 3‘0) "c3 ‘“‘ s :5
(1) "_ I Q} E "C3 3900
I .c: c: . a: 0 mm 1 L:
g m *5 e 'g 25 8‘” i s E3 1
s... , {5 “'3 £35 ‘2: _§E ' 03": E
*9 E 6 O 8 13% - 83
(D .. ci .___ C3"
0 (D "59> 003 0:: "8% 2a). i 9""
.... "3 an: ac... 3%ng gi * OE
3 1'53 .93 w aggﬁ “k 3*“
0’ '-- .1218 ('5 “BE U) i C ' OD
w (15 ':; o {13 (13003.: I a O .:
Hg . :5 ,gago- i w mag
c: .c: m...” a ”C5 g cu B E o, 4:03“,
,__ :2: (9 c: 73?.” macs» Q Q “*0,
0’ ’B “*9 g $832 *2 0 Emw
3 l“4::3 'c: O . o mmHE-L i U? a ﬁg?
,9 [9 $3; $333 8-8525 E’ 4' mi 06>.
4:: ‘93 ._.__ (U 2:: e 33.112: U) L“ 03(1):!
3., ‘E .51 <9; LL-~ w 1;, <1: man
4-“ i 1-... [CU "Hm - (,0 twg
8 ° : ‘ga $3 mgawﬁ ‘9‘ 5‘ in mom
a: z " . _ «1—!t c
s: .o m cm a w mm. 8: ~23 m 9.925
'0 “‘3 4“ wg '0 m 5.3 mg”; 3: £2 £ "ﬁﬁm
c a» 2&3993 wig 99-59; m .9 .g 3mg
‘5 :00 6903‘ m 0 lmmm'am[ ”(a 8 ‘ CO)
'23 3*“ <9 ago. 039—3 .ﬁmmm._ :5 a.) "U: Emmi
EC ":3 ho DJ vwwL-ﬁ (DI :5“jS
£1 i0} :3 :5 age) "cw: :0 W ”I 00
”E3: . -- w‘w ._, 3:3ch a3 :5 o 0:5“—
M ‘0' C: CD%‘ '3 xﬁzﬂﬁ s... 0'} O ”9‘52:
0 ,O ‘ ._.. 5:; 0).... @0506)“- : L- 3E
D g'a-Jc: 495cc; Qﬁgmghxc £235 .93 0— 130:0
<1: ‘3».9 (1) 21:30 “ESQ: H5 0 co {3303(1)
O 03"" U 3-53 W'E‘ES E: “3%: i Q) Q) 0-1:“
”H Clo 03.9 mlgmxﬁgg 8| 3: s.- Qmmi
u: g '0 0:5w Cl) ow—ENMQ H9 3 <1) 31 m.g-ﬁg
"H '3’ C: 000 S cs: 0 1:36: cc 3" “"
O :20) (32.1.3: "‘ .9 .9 (D 03 (13-933
59 §‘""'Ei Q'”wg~3 (338% 1303-920) 0 .2 CD Uma—
-- g0.“ >< EU)! 3,. cuﬂp—H “3 “a E x3
(n :c» Q). :3! .— nm- (3)03 £10 D 65: C)“: m
5'5: ' ""“‘" +4 $0.0} ‘ m” :3
w =c~-~ “’0‘ (‘3 OE'nm'c: -— cz‘ 23' C: .5095:
(U ' 050 COL... E mu—H Oi 0 ma)
Oi: .Q-w ._ 3503‘me (p ,_ E ,_ 03....
”0-3;; 0 C) EECDCD mUE-uowi (‘5 Q 03 mm
.52 5:03 ”H “.9, -c:'U--~.a><DC‘-‘-_~,' .... Cm-C;
"6E3 Ema... c0 >~.'6m.c: 43013 3E” (D "t": '95“)
:3 ~82 «9 (135:5 5: Q m .92 (z m“‘2‘i5 E 55 E "(6' c0 *5;
“a 53m 0-S- 5 “3 mmmmOmm ___. :2: w mwmz
b 9...... Q52. ‘3)...“ ; nah CU ..___ 0:5. '50)
ha.) {'0 0C: “25-09 ﬁgmﬁw, C: H £5 “‘EE
(D c +~' m was 5: “.055! _Q G) M.
o 006 'c:>:3 clhoaiogﬁmwe ,2: 9 h:;:_
:2 (Du: ‘2 (Du CD OE": E 92 "GE E 3 ﬁ-QE
8 £93; ““38 0 83:85252 '3‘ 9.2 2 gm!
.....‘ ---""c:cn -—- C5)
E £3. -235 “$$$$8-95 "5 E2 ‘3’ ”92%
g) “32¢ E i: .9 9:30-66 c: 9; he
w... ﬁ (DL— :5 EgmﬁE “huw‘“cm9 8 I cg] (6138
m ”EEZ St? 2% %QI-C®.Q:E'O 'E “5 CS: “6030-
5” El 0U... H— :23 c: --- ‘U "" “gr: E G) :3 -§ 'ﬁ' C": .9.
”US 0;... Oman; 0;“)... 0309-0 w? -- m 0 09-0)
“3 gwmi E'v‘fﬁ E $929335; §' '33 rg Egg.
C305 0 5 "" 03 - E‘“ 9-13 ‘ 0) 7:3 a;
dud ‘ """ 0‘) ..... O o
303*“ 3““: gm'ggzo-CGEJ cu 2 E 32p”.
<D~+~< .933 a: £23: 02.0 ®£cNQ “"‘ O ‘3’ 00.0;
€03 Q36.) .3: Om ccngm-g: .E J: .E ‘2“C3E
56- m £0) *H' 0 0%..“ “mgm'" 2": "g 0 £>Hf
003 {.3 033’ 9 OE 3 mm Cmmﬁg w "“ C 30.9
_g.;o G3 03 {D '5 C: O ,i— w ”“3 93: (1) 03 (D 033 O u) (D :3
<1)“: “E imcz “Ookwmx—wvi <2) 4:; w m
zgmco ego! gausgggwoﬁ g): g; :g gbm
LL}? @5535 22°32 "‘ Om vﬁ%8% Q} “‘5 3-: “(E
H.?.R l—g £1.13“.Q 221:3 Zﬂzﬁp. ‘U. c; (1::E .QXCL
QWHQQ ““1"“8 tlgmz’u‘wm z “E 73:35.9
~59 QrQw algg,+—§;_$"O u— E Z 2522;
WC) cu s~ u. -
(D‘cb O? ‘OOCQCOLO Em Q Q<£-§
58'} (Do NCDNNNNVQW I «e403 whit x“- . I m
{Um ma do); ‘0’ .03” .NNMS W-iwﬁdmsfhiw
i—{LOm - mm 00 .0); .0: mhigm ,1 Naicxjf‘“ oo
wﬂ-Ewggmwmgg omlo‘m .0 m'“ FM
0—0)Q_ com 0530' .0: Q}
* 0-030. C00. 09(6ch 025
mmgﬂ

m
"" . 1
m (D ' 'UC: m
M 9 3 8:8 .2 I
2,213 O '3 ’ 0‘5 3 5CD
{‘6 H C“ 829 8" {-5
5:” g E 39 21% g“ c:
-2 5 302 i 02 O
U ’ Egm Ema) _c:LL. _ 1:;
(D -‘c:i—- ‘89 “E“ l 33 I
‘3’ i5“ I '20-? .6:ch i ‘0 E
£5 ““9" 3 (“39 g :8 i 8 a
' E g 55% “4:5 I i gt: +4 I
,9 , .4003. 09cm... , z "30373 g .1
....... ”—1me ......v E U)“ 3 (D
Q ”’03“ ”50' : c0030; - (U
- 3 gaggg 5.22% 81g3m 3:) a
o w~- :0 . s 33
ﬁ 9 02:8”: gmﬂ <( 8:”95 LUZ
= 35> E 0333 (.0 mime LL"
Lu .02- m._.c: ma: m =>-——>-. 09%“
(1;. 036) $44....“ (0 ‘5 - QJIT—‘J-UE': gﬁ
.c: '0 #313“ ng'vl (D ﬁwmﬁ) u.—
+-' E: :13sz c”... a) .5: .35“: O .
u. my: (Ext mﬁtgg] w ((8-53? Ca
. 2 $8; (/3ng 8303‘ O c0330, Q&—
0 mm} ma.gel gEE'éi c: moha 3C3
. '6 H51 mew raw: .2 23cm <v>~
(D u .5: '00) 2:- 1335 o +#me 09.0 1
U}! «93% ‘ EEQU $8,338: CD 1:.Qi-a81 £213 3
VW___ "-— m ......... U) .m-h— o 0‘.
Q 533 uB-ﬁg .gfw‘iag m 32%“??? “-3 £92;
“I“.- m m‘mm “3—.0} c; w m. 4...};
c5“ E0 0020;: 056% - '33[ 0.1.5253: max:
~= 8;; an an age; c» m g; 2,1: 0%: 93 ~59 “’5
(U *— “c” “'5 w:"" 0.63 “Q: m 0“:
0 CL: (:3 a)! 0-0 w .Qﬂwh‘ “mo
‘0 manna- .um “Iva! 4-“ U}! Q) a“
6 £3 889323] garaﬁ 8 elgsg @926
g “9‘0 Sca'ﬁ %28—~ *5 gig?“ wig”
<13 cc“ $15633 $$0-3 r» en E: .arghr
.3 0E am <0 Wawm '3" Egg? ‘66“03
H CD’“ 33559: “5 ma)! .5? ...._ CD _._. 0:»
“£9 "0‘39 (2"“003 ”03h!“ 2:: CG}.9 54-41::
:3 “1’ OEM- 3c::5 I OQHQ E mm
cm ”#730 El'“w¢’: E w 03w -~-
(.3 c523 ”03336, ogcwml wwwg @323
(DE .90) uEEE @[05‘5- 8 §ch £2 (1)0
J: 31.5: E“: q; Emma) “ nQCDCD “H (Dam
'H E“ QC” (305: ! “‘me c: 3,0
vn—u- w-—~— ho -“"‘-‘Ha’) I n q: “M“
m 42(2533! wtm «w ..... .c:-—- :2: (cc:
”5:" gﬁ $mwo. gggﬂ 5; $87? $33
.0 " .H “mm...— ‘
CD “5 ”03‘9“ 9%mzs 9-35 32330,? >033
% 323:: $8-99-g “5%8‘“ "'6‘ “’95“ “98a
9 >
5:: “6:" ngg Eagg g 933% .93:
....... C2?" -—-— :3" ..'""" _..... mc: "' <1)
~53. .99 23-98" «52043 g éacs—Q} g 55
,5 com nova .anom; .... 05-9913 .ﬂ mg,
'5) 52's 9.. a 33. 2» _Q:-:; q, 1:); .9 agar: .H mi .g 0‘3"":
"c 0;; ’E‘OCUG’ “"7339“ 5 czg'ogw. 0 (D125:
0 xx o-UW'U 0'23 (U. .9 05130) 5 Q ma):
9 (”C EmmaJ 3mg“; <z Eimwg <1: £68
H'- 53 c‘i ““c: D. O c: _o 0 oo
0 """ E c: . 49‘ O: '73 o .Eig N +-'S .x: .E
"c 64“” ”+43%: 4‘ 8;: ~04 % o»;
% x3 mmw'd" DI'HHIP 0 3‘99: cu mo
(U; go (:3 3...! C5236)! ﬂ Ci (9:55 ........ #5::
ma '" 09:3: "Imw-o Own”)! CD q, E
G3‘ ”“5 0:133”). 0:63 i {D waged 5.5:“)
G) 3 mmmmi £210,936}; 3‘3, mgmmw 4—» 4-40)!
'5 0913* <98ch “=s..<(.o‘ s_gh“ U) 0:33
07cm :5“... OtmNQ CD CG“— “#0)
8 .9E (Di-m-Oo 0"“{0‘1’ 8 (DEEGDO c: {:5
Z LZLE) 558- m_wgﬁ L1. LLLL8-g7i &&%E
LL M" “‘""‘ F—l— -—- ___z
E 5.9 Q3218 QQEE Q mange £30m.
i i . Lo L0 m I
co co wi- <1: <1: , ,_ .ml
”M 005$“. 09293;“. 0? N“? 0209 quwmg NSENSEJNF;
rim (DE'Q) 0'6) '6} ‘0) d(Dc-dcnid dmomom
0% %8% (58%) 8M8“; mmmmimm $$$$1$§
$m9awm9mwm9m magma” com, coo...wo. co g

E ' 'E ‘ "£13 ‘5
i s i
....__ 2 5“" a) ng— 3CD 0-) x
i 38 3 =0) 2 '00 ] 1'98 ‘3
41. I I In..— S: C“ . U) i
' m 13 m-- 3.... SO 0‘: 1 "3-93 .c: -f
m a ! m c ago as mm me: “a
m;- .czzn'! E l <5 80, i8“ Ez SE l~3gE “DOM
. H“ I ‘5‘.- I a “m “__ c,“
2’“ oo -- z '0 ~—' |O ELL— 093 £9. .5. o
W mm: ma) ; 2 m s!»- X E3313“- “L—
33in if}: 0E '%u_ a: £3 “3% 5.933 CUEL
8333,; 4‘3 9&0: g!— h a 0,; ﬁg :34: E09
tam, C0 - _88 ha gu§ Lu 4-.» 0&3 Egg
0323"“ 1.11me32. 03‘ CD 6’ “’09 “““’ 3“"
0&8 1.1..wa 55$ L E $5 9.2 —E 0°
*4 u... wmm'w'" 1:: “C m... mug (1)
3C: 0 '3’" 3‘" 06) -: ' 2G) ma) -m
39mg? cnmgg gé’wm 92 (0‘3 ﬁg 2mg Egg;
07‘0““)! 3:0"wa “D“ “J Clo .5203” :2:
MW $235322 2mm «s g; as sum: Era
0000} U) @0300 2539'“ G.) w G.) (23" "GJOE $0)
gﬁhﬁ| ﬁttﬁg “CE E ‘45 15-5 53 [8-0563 3%
: ~cn “‘— c1. "5.... .... <13 o
mmwtm Eggﬁc 8‘0"": 3 c3 ﬁg $9“ 0::
253033 w EEQ-o 30.30133} .Q'a-cg'cq; 530) £3
$33763 agnuig‘g 0§°§ %; '23 20.1510") ‘owg 50.)
aﬁmgi ﬁiagwm Egmrﬁz gwéﬁgg age 243
.-— 2: n33 ﬁg...“ 8 5 mg g: E :5 c0
1.1.1880) '0 am a: cu E ££me q; m ~-"‘"
(1) r“: mﬁOE 3L: " H'- r (Du— Q0) Cc: 0313
mach gimme, I Um “3 t ”E 0‘: 3:“ 30(1) (D
5.903) Ema} $03.13*{5533 “woo“c) cw (DO)
296%! 23%.;‘28 $521.9 5 6° aggg gas; 8%:
$569203; ‘5 mmgl‘; 5%‘35 c» 33155.0 :33“) c5338 62%
wivvaé $38.2 E; “”aa-a ; ‘aiomgg 28’5“ :0
89335 %§§$£ 833.9 323325“; i‘éﬂég 053:
ODE i Esﬁggws. M "(1)5... wﬁwﬂm .220) E
5.359] m >~5¥§3 533$?— 0 z ‘E’SEEKQ §“a 8gt
.0213 ”6‘25” m (vibe)? E CD bx,__5:.c: NE --‘...
ﬁsgﬁﬂal g g‘smﬁ §U32~Sig§ 5 gang; gm” 3%
”m-Qgi mm‘é’bc mmm'a 03‘60 30:2 LE
mmr: "- $H ﬁgmi— q; (1) <2)th CE“) 0
“‘“EE‘ mumqm mgmm_ .zwahﬁ mm 009
(DE g .2 $59,: .9 03 *5 3‘0““9 9“”? 5—65
(30352 ..... 00300 0.9 One :3 ti... 0) “(2)....‘3.
CMOM 3+»wa .“WO ow Elmma-‘Gc: c2130 mm
‘35:??? nﬁéﬁibg 0:91: «38 megésao >~z~agg E“?
mm- ' «~- 0 _
”magma ”£63 ME?" 0355}. 2.92::{30 c3351) 0’
#mCO'c CD 41:30) E £370 G.) CO 32.9;
...... ,5: 0w c: Q36) Cm ““"' CD G)“: 1 mm 33(1)
83-938: *" 023”" iwa “5"- E 533.3“? 'g'<'° (9"-
w-*‘.QOE :: >---58> hﬂowmc L'aﬁww 3L) 'O ‘3'“
23.5975 zﬁgwq $353102! 5 0.13%? E804; 3-5—3
4-»‘0 :5 CZ... CBC) in; .. h“ {UC E (D
c ”c E 63% a~-cx'.sE_“-.Z CD 0‘0
(DC...(D CD :5 [ (\l__ E...» ff; CD
smbw S.E—ggg E8613 53.3; g moogi“: gmﬁg “a_g
mugged} m‘aczqg'" '6QJC=OE[ -- (Uh C) .FEmg CCU
Cmmﬂ BIQ-* :3 mmm I OHW‘H H‘mw (Gad
m‘tse- QMLEU 2:: cm pcmO-mg (D ___c:
H... O . Q. “a 4-4 4...:qu 'E "W“
ngwwi 3-" Ogiag 93qu 00) .g-Q—ngwﬁa E 08
H mm 'gvl-J gm """' £13m ".Qﬁm: .0
Yaw: RENE 2-98128 gwmﬁéag 82
cg‘m E "0‘53 ..... --"UOU)O now 12:0
~—— N c: 3 pw- ..9 {<6 :2» DJ s..<D-—- cu a)...
ho -(I) .... {.0 £0 wm>xm n... .5203 ““130. “M
O--<O<U cn>~""'C3 i'"*‘®¥agﬂ> *- CD 0333-: 09 52:6
“ﬂ u..— I
.m-— (1)“ , g‘Om .L_ Oﬂng-oﬂhu ".0
$213339 5§$£?® ‘53‘3'3'03 E D oomwme'—— c;
83538 <§mgggio§msgg Egﬁggﬁcgg 83
~*.: xxw-‘DCD m Q—ﬂL‘ 0 ’w‘ 3 O
0....“003 o Qc-ggg 3Com mﬂl mgmwgmﬁ :0" mo
ago“: mam.” mhmw; "imo mmmmw 030)
c: 09' --— lmo ——-:3 c: or “09*‘1303 ‘” 0""
0:005 <1: @3565?" $£$§®§ ni-QH;£%r—"w£z £3313
mgggf ﬁgwégh 2.59m mo! $s£§imagaam 9%
(Dub; 52"”0 mmEE“ iw'ﬁamvwwnt'" ‘9
,5: £12..“— 03 wow. ._.: .— (”‘0 *4 3m “"0:
ngmﬂ $.22 Uﬁzguc-Qgé Bécwomémﬁg 96)
U“ 'U 9%.... Q)... ‘u... {:C “O (J
mmm 0 005 man sws- Cw—m 259.; com z-
Z§Z£Z zngmSEBWLL‘E mmg&55{%§£ "gi
l,i—FU-"gﬁz ﬁﬁgF—gggeégg Eagogazom mgr
. Q. m.
cogs: Q§Q0Q0m_ . ”WE
E ’ : V“ mv— ..
' : v-qx..1“l\;“"OQ -~:-- ‘0'"
L06) CQQCQSEgQ 35a xfgmﬁmg “31:." 0;“; Six:
NI} NI N" “’4‘ .N[ NNINNF‘; Ex“. Na) .63
'E‘-- 'NNNN xx. (1) CD ‘9) ,(D . 0(3)
E‘-- N .8.) — - ‘ o
.0: -Q>Q-8)o'°". om Omumﬁﬁg <1)“ ﬁg
0‘“ 8%‘9‘5‘9‘5? mm gggmwamn. (13:1.
3333“ wmwmwaz (DCL 5

In
1-4
r A W
€35“ g 30) «£3 E '
H” 0 0CD 0.x:
o (1) .22.: “'0': 1 "c3
2?; m 4:: m “3 0-5: 2 f i g;
i ....... 4"“ 9 CC)" iE Cm ' g Q
<1) ; c7) :5 S mh- mm .c: _ c5
0 i 3’ D" “Z 5a: “C3 s - i
8 5 13 £5 LL? $5.8 2+3
* a.) 1:: C 0 ~ on; - 3
(D 3 g 3 3 “m (0— “(Dag O
5 H... 08 5 (U 0““ (U
. % (U 5}} ma) tLLi_E (me Z
“'5 _._.l U) > 3:3: 63-9 :1:;:__ I LL
u-1 ‘r: <9 0’0) 5,, any;
0} C 3.__ ,5 i H... F‘ i
1 G) O _._.. CD—ﬁ‘HO CDWE 2 E
8: 3-: La: (:5 >me—ﬂ >0) f D =
o E E Q (SU(ch-a— (05:... <1:
2» “‘5 g. § “582390 ”swoé 00
w w .52 o 89""80 Egg LU
=-~ CD ~-~ o. c: Q --— a (D
m: E i c) Owawh 0393 g 5
<( Q.‘ .5: i E "G'OMQGD Eumm ‘6 %
LU g l .0 "CE 25373.!” 3‘88? (6 O
2 0‘ U 2? 389%2 Ext E %
~g .c: C: O memﬂ 0mm “'-
0; c: “3 ’- m "UCLCD.Q§: 138$ «a m
m l: -C3 .c: i mgmizgg 035:0: 9 8
o O ‘1’ 8 3 8' .5?in 8‘09.) <95 .c:
O": c . JD co ‘ ...a> ho; __ a .0 g
1..., E , r: O pcamg 2:03-53, <0; i “5
Q- 0) a z “"’ GJOTQ>Q_ m5“‘ 5| : E E
m 3 ”£5 1:: .032: 1:: (D O i
Q} E (U (1303 ms...‘ (3 :3
*- cn *" .wa' mmhw-E cum: .c:
25] w i {U .05.? 51:9 3....» c:cvm C m
U)- c) ‘ ”‘3’ 23m “3033 mgr: (D w
{U i <1} .5: g; CD CD 03} I Q
m 3 3:3. “’3' 43$me .51).: Q J 0:
(‘6 '35 ‘390 zm‘Do‘w 2:09.? “i s 3:;
E «00 (3&wa 02.": E O ' CD a
g: (f) .5; o: “m m.ﬁfg $6.3! C i G}
o ‘1’ u» ! Hm mcg‘Wo cqu' m g 3,.
mi 8 O E *0, w .Q.Q (1) “ES 03 935-3 c: cc :3:
$7} =: w I w xgmm mew x a
.._ 0 w .. mm: E HOE E E q.) :3
:t: w 0: ""0 'Q‘O'“— (13(1) 5....
E 9 *‘mi .213: mmwgm mm“- o E
H! (D 0:. m,” 0 cmh— 23.5.78; 2s 0
“5 U3 c:>- m “mm 0’ “*5 <22i a:
a.) “C Ed) 03 mhm (U ‘ml “I
s... (D H mm m.ﬁzwo “Coca C: t
:3 .c: “‘0 "UV: ““9- 03 -'"a> "3: "“" i
U} G3,: C: . AEH—CC'mu-D m a w
(D > CDC: 0 mad wleOmQ r a)
m 3 mg g UEOﬁpwg w F E
0: CB “.9: Om ~-<DC .H “c: .5:
WI — . “#2 Q) hmmzac,Qv-mm 4—- Q)
m 3 % cow 5 mm 9m“‘“-:::" .2
c: E 5:07 g; .czig'Um 0.}:030.) .E O
*- m— 0 mcammwmm '5 c
9 O 25 = g, C‘“me©m“8 .92, «—
'E (D Em cz-H‘ 2'50) 93:8“) o '5
O 5 .2: 0m xﬁz-ggwwmg m c
-— i :2: Q: 13353;: "MED ‘CD 9 E .9
o: 1:30 :0? m 93;...0 EN,“ 1..
"a (D g: m a com '3 “‘“’ i O .
.2 ca “1-— mq, o<.o-0 ,5; <0 0 DU
0 1:3 "58 “30 c.0333.9280% C ‘ <0)
83 "5" a) - ““ £NHE'“Q£B<D 33 “-33
o. r: w wcdmmEW-HQE 0'0
0: .gr: 0 cu: a Q:c:<D“*-H g x._
c0; “.59. 00> W's: m.gstO'chzf-‘Ji :3 0g
9’ O 0.] “'5 *5 G3 3 m_Q m (.3 O 1-— m‘*,Qi _ .52 O!
:3 >5: CH DC: “#00 CD0)”; (1) E
O" mo W “0 c5) comhmm ‘3 42:“:
9 gal $: 88 wgem’ﬁgggog] :8- “g;
E 2%.: 2‘63 2% ”$335.9[6gm E 453%
i"- U-c‘ LL13? a Zomzmn G) w :2:
“ 1"“0 HF: “~03 mammmozw.h Z ?-
C) Q0 Qg 1—,: 9—0153; m....LLc/):5 LL. 209
£30 Q‘".§H£—C¥“O §—- , a_g.
“2ng NO)?" N ’ i E C325
N161“? ‘ﬂ "V“ WQW N03?“ 5
-i\_!, IN! P V". ' N. N E I
N {hh- [\. -l\~ ‘N: NV" wc—“E N N '
w' N “~ ‘r\ :x’ .' . “i «-- m
®gom C3360: 6’ "D (D .0) CD 01‘ n. .
mmmmomww mam mom 0"“‘03.x-—<D <:::’<D 9-1“
mmmmmaoa; momma; momgmo- (5“. .x-um
‘H lwawa o (D .(ﬁmN Q .
mawmwmg‘wgo‘fgmw dam}?

A"

j
srzd/m“ sizitigaﬁozz measm'es should b3 undertaken and the scoping 0f the: EA: The ssuﬁs have made. it
very sisal: {hat impacts ”£0 5-. 35*} rights gig: be considered:

a ”When. considering the direct and s<ivs3.*se envimnmemal impacts {3? an applicmésn s33“ pi‘qject {m '
she First Natiozfs z’ighis? the ism: “‘em'iz‘mmem’” must be coastimed broadiy and. iacludss the.
susmiaiivs impacts sfs ps0} ac: and othsr {i‘sciﬁties m be {ievsioped in the mime 0:: these rights
Dene ??m" Firs? Narim’z '22. MOE, 2906 PC. 1354 s? gays. 34

w The: gmten‘éiai negative serivaﬁvs impss‘és Of. a project must 21150 ht}: taker: Ems account.
32%;; River .Tliwgz‘f First? Naziarz s. Brits??? Cm’uméia {P:‘Qied (4.3583332:em Dfrsczm‘fjf 2%4 SCC 74

@ Tbs .izziusious ait‘festisn that. a project. causes 03'} the. exercise. 0?? rights wiihin {E153 vicinity Of a
?i‘QéCC? 27:11:31 bs sakes £27220 account
Mii-ci.se‘w Cree Firs! ,ﬁi’aliwz’ 12. Céfﬁ’mdéii, {2085} 3 SCR 388

in. many assess this: assessn‘zsnt (2f petsmial impacts on s. 35 :‘igh‘is may :"squiss sessiéemﬁons tirzat are
different i'E'Qm s. z‘egalsr assessment incéuc‘iing is. ifsiaiiss to ssaping 0f the ?mject- Tbs Application
should 3:36 revised to adsirsss these. issuss. 1% is imperativs that impacts E's DTFN‘ s réghi’s and interests be
addresssd 'sefors the: NEE smsidsrs ths ﬁhgspiiss’iisn.

Accordingiy, we have 1:136: failiswing {g‘ussiims in. ssia‘tisn is £316 Applics‘izim‘s:

6 How WEIE the assessment of the Pssjsst {ska inst} cansidsmtmn the constimtionaiEyapwtectsd s.
35 righis 0f DTEN‘? What precess Wili ’86:. milked. mdsr s. :38 8f the Msﬁmsal Energy Boar's? As!"
{0 accommmiats this kind. 0f assessmem?

a: Will pari Of {E16 EA ssssss impacts 0's; D’Ef'EWE s. 35'1‘ights and iniemsts‘? If mi: Why not, 213143
how will these impassis 'bss assessed am? sansiﬁered?

a What aciciitiensi infermstien rsimimmmts will there: be 021 Wastcssst 3:0 assess pa‘stsmisi impacts
on D’I‘FN’S s. 35 :‘igh‘is?

#6 What 31.d.e;§itisnsl mfm‘maﬁan :‘squimments ssrifil them 2%: 0r: Wssisssss t0 assess the avaiiabilit}? 0f
iands Miihis D’WNE ’Ersdiﬁssal "I‘srrfiioryg m psrtisns éheresﬁ fbf 1:116: fumgjq sxsrsiss {sf rights,
and will D’E‘F-‘N bs eonssiteé is relaiims thsmts‘? DTFN is concerned that as other parts of its
"fsrritm‘y are sakes} up far iriciusirisi projecisg {hare wiii ui’tima‘i‘siy ‘06s: ﬁtﬂe 01‘ m lands availahée
:ii’sy she: sxsrsiss of its rights. We are endosiag With this 13%;? a map showing the exisﬁsg and
pmmsed distaﬂasnms in the. area of the Fm} sci. As can be seen from the maps {ﬁe 3.6st sf
distm‘bsmcs is Signiﬁsan‘i and D’I‘PN is very esnssmed 95mm: {has cm‘mlaﬁve impas‘a‘s frmn
pmjsci‘s 0:3 wﬁcéiife and wildlife habitat fish and ﬁsh baskets air quality, water qusiiiyg hesith
and its ability to smrcise its 8. ‘35 rights.

Attsshsd as Appendix “2%.” :0 this Eeiteg we have set out a numbey of factors that need K) b3 smsideyed
£11 assassing ﬁss psisn‘téal aévssse 'impacis {s DEF‘N’S righ‘zs and interests {mm the ?.rrsjasi.

£3
H ......M..
_. I i .
<3: C” 3 i
G) 2
m: .h E [53 1-
333 . G) .
m 8 1 mo“ ! .50) 42:00
m 06) ' EO‘“ “w“
‘3 .czh E 0 OD
.ho .... ,mm‘c mm‘U
Q21: g 2 gwtf-‘Sm .WSZQJ
cc: ' 53L}... '803'8 <00)“
“0! “H s «*"m mﬁwg
g “E ﬁg} 3 (033115;; “3*“:
i w I s. 3 LL}! 3... 033m—
% mwi ow ®EE mmEE
i h):- I 5-...» 0.2!!) £.>m
i an ow 39m“ -mnw
g mm 093: 2 03:20; OHCQE
: hm 3®~ l Em“ dgmm
F mg (9—5? gSUE _QE:E3'DBE
. am. w“ I now mm
‘0‘“ z 015-“ (m "*5
0 “~03 i Q) 3‘5 03““
- 03w... 5 0,090) ”[0300 E
--<D >03”: i #0309 «mm
a m w “t Lu: «
WU ”5-9—3. i .vagé ngg'
«1 ~02: £20303: (1)
1:72 Ewe EWEW: | 85x8
mm 233-: GJBQCU‘ . :5th
630) Oak wwwﬁ I mOQ-zs
m “Ow ‘01:) Q i ‘5me
3” $99 gwaw E 288%
£33 £1505 @3891 E 38c?
“Q. ““' U3 — g c:___O
3g _g%§ ﬁgag “gag
U)
m": tat; $8930: “039$
<1) 005(1) L— 23'“- c.0233“-
nan -- .... 4.: “CD 3 ° ‘1’ =5
w Q) m <0 w mm
5 "Dow CD m.gwg <33 Emma)
m 33:23 E “$26903 {5 Qw-CDC:
M? 0 ya 9 ~-- O G) 03-9 o
E“ Ewg w $85“ 6 “CC“
$8 3’9 w Qw'gv m 8.9-9-{3
«a mag u mmag ..... wﬁmﬁ
:3 " 1223mm C mama: C 3212'. (539':
’0 (1) Q)"‘"‘"" (1) CD...
bag 03mm #3203 @9252“)
m8 5‘3”“ g 'ngE g mega
1 cuts (138% "‘ ?- 59 "' a m
I u..." 4:: c; E “come. E “meﬁi
mm C: £5 £90303 (crow =
ms: 3.90) 3‘.BO§ E "SEEDS:
00 .9“0 0 Elan o 203'“I
o ﬁns...» 0 “1:: o ng-c:
Ed“ (30') £2: 233(1) “CZ 353:3 “C2:
3 kg Egg 0 mem 8 mem
g o ﬂ "-‘ ‘3: @f'UCO-C} 1:5 (DwCO-D‘
! mg, g g»; (6 ﬁgcmm “3 £38090)
ws— ‘39 CD3 mun. C3) “C2.
3 mm wai m! c‘o w 53
; cg m0 g 'ﬁ' "‘03qu “u -EICZ(UQ
t ~60) mﬁQi Q}! cwﬁ} (1)! Cmc>
E mg; mNE m (Dome; h; <I>....-—cv
2 mm c .-— :5; EE'U‘C’ :5; Ecv‘v
m0 (B(OU “3; Q3690} €03 QQQGJ
.SC‘: Ewcl g; 3:56.511! C2 3:32am
”0 3m. E 04:30; a) OOHO
. o :3 0‘ 3.» 4... 3:0“?
4:: masts; w; c: i .9 m w
:2 __-*--*CD , .E'"wml 1 .2 mm
“m 358 g ﬁﬁ<9 9 @349
__ ..... g: ' ..... '
.2223 9'00) 3% .gowa 5 .gigwa
3:103 gig; ,_._. 'cEwEB x .Qiamg;
z..- a: ”mm c: -~o® .
CS 353 O &REE O BﬁaE
.95 09.0 E <5 S32 E <11 Ct5a:
ma; O<z .. “E0 o O“o
.EIQ ‘: ~53 c: ogcﬁzg S: ”5:53
33 gmm o mﬁvm 6 x£u%
i "C3 3‘0“” " gmni m 0"“03'm
s 0 q,» c: E mm; 5: 593mm-
; Om m...“—'3 o (DOE?! 0 (DOS
5 03-5-3 mam @030. 03030.
5 .3: mmw ‘0 .chCOS CD £2.30”)
i (.03: mcg -...... 09mm“: .2 mmm..h
E 1303 ' “5'" :5 $305033 :3 come):
E c: $ .Q'OC ‘7 oww' ' ‘5wa
r WE“ mg m wow 0 “ow
unq’m Umw L... C'Ggs... L... £221)ch
{ ﬁgﬁ 58% E EEZE g EEZE;
(t5 -_. .
g Hot; I-Q-‘m‘ LL. 3—th 1»- +-+—€U§—g
5 Duo) QQE CZ] QQWQ Cl QQEQ
i l *
Q i N m: N m N mi co co 0') 0') m
i\~ i N :xl {M Ix. N PU bi! r; :4. P; r:—
<3.) [‘"w 03: ”(D G) «— G)! N N (\1 00 co
:3: adw-cn cnld‘ﬂ-Cn .dgg mdtadﬁgdﬁgngdﬁgadﬁg
act: Emc‘ﬂmomiwwwommﬁ‘émowmNmmwaNmimewNw
_(DI‘~—Q_HQ.‘U)1\Q_M&CDNQMCLCDh-wa-QWNCLﬁ/DNCLLUDNEL

IN. .
M' I ...__m.._-.,
._ m o
@2- 1% :2: 2 L.—
m o (.0 E _'E E (D "‘""
m B E 8 a EU) ‘45 i 2
mm x o 533, '3 . g m m .
8 E “'3?” g |*“. +3 ‘2 g e
c: 8’ s * ,8 9 ‘U aa-Z-E' a
O -......, C: E :u... G) U mo (‘3
1:} icon cu ' :3 i E -'§ 3369 (D
g ‘8 E cf 3 '“' a $8 E
u- w y E
(u m S .9 2 E “5 ”5‘5 18
Q 03 C = 'H O [—— 09 “.9 1.: i
+-‘ 5—- G} O +" EEC (3
go 2‘5 E E O a Q 0 “5C 03
IO.) U “Hu- ‘ Wu (1) 00) u...
a (D C: (D O 0 st E...— 1.:
s... g.__ e C: U) q) 30') Cm E
Q— ._ O Q) L. " 0363
"U > (J g) (-5 g: u... 8-»-
-£ mu m +6.5: 6, m cm E»
«m i0 V 1.. Q ('6 ““13
-I-I 1-4 (D
O ‘ {U 0...... . 03 la) “(D
M g: co Q0 5 (‘5 2m 0);; m
0 Q C: PE 3% > 03s... 07
(D 2.7:, ('0 C: ‘- 03 iWC?) 0')
EU: 0 O -9 Q J: CE .“"'" 0)
Q) Q) g “a C!) H O :01: co
--~ 0'3 3C: “.5: G} u: ECG) ('6
(U l... C“ ' L“ 0 EU >5
:3 .E (0 mm“ 3 :5 g3 rt: :
"U '23 ’Kﬁml U) L" “63 .......
'“ U 0‘ h? “3 "'“’ 2m 1‘5
3‘” 10} .Q’ ‘ 03¢“ <1) .09 «£3 ,3
m aw 5*, C M c "-3 m « 0‘
s— 1: ,,_ 03 66....‘19 0 E0 M
. ‘CD CL -- .,..... m_C: «5—! 0 1013 L.
C1).> in: (D‘s; O 4-“ -"""ﬂ (6
E m 93 Ec: ‘3 E ... H w W: 0’
59 o. {22: 3, L: 53$ 8 8. £33 a
m g 9 1.3:: E 493 ‘g 89% g 5(1) 00 Q
& O 33 ﬁg I 9i c: mgi‘ —- ‘g ‘38 :8 -
:3... m i0 0,. CD cc; “"5 .65 5.32;: '23 ‘
cu _.. ~—-~-— M H
g“: gm 0 53? '3 ‘52 2: a £907 a
0E > m s E: 52'sz 9: "3 02 <9
8 QC: ‘33 m "" E s 0 3H 1;: :—
Ow—C} $50 i=5 8 {D C: ‘5: ' mu“ O I
o 00) ,gaif’asg g. <0 0:: > ‘25 03*" 2..., '
c-HOU mm '5 3.32:: g; ‘ﬁ {:3 =C
05‘3“) 58 E c: Q >0 LU Q. cm 03
mic)“ (13-— CD "NCE M -QCU E
N*E‘“ w—w <6 -—~ (Do CD 0 H O-
03me OS‘E‘E 1 ‘3’ “3 33*- ﬂ £2 3.93 9
E 8.5;) 03L}. E I “5‘ 9:5; .9 E8 mg >
@5030 8pm :3 ' 4... o cw" O) '5‘- 803 g
5 03:: .9“; G) <1: £2.23 “E 9.0 “(U Q)
‘3ch ‘90 C: 8 >580 '5 039:“: (“-3 .43 ‘
GDW-C: >52 CD CL; 0) 003 s... ,cz-H g... C;
00 c”1:3 o .5: 0:12 W H: w z,”
0 ~-- ‘U:.....m ...._ oar co w—CD :20: =
+~J >~ze m aw co us ca 2 w 0-1:: o“ ‘0
ms...“ (D 0') ==- "U (D: Q} C33.“ ‘ao CD
wm- 534:0) m CD :5 O“- "" "C
‘35 33 @“m 0 1:3 -- W‘“ C“ ‘32 3E
GEE: £6 23...: CD z: 0‘” ‘* 05— O o
rt": 0 Eco m J: --- “0) (U 4.; Cc: c:
c 30$ “—63 m: .... eyes 3 ED 00 .—
E500 US: 5 '*'* ”6,; Eco ..... Q 8: .500.) O 3
w mu w- 13 (U Q) (Damn (I) “O "C 3
0303-5‘ (1):: O (D C "" 0:0 m... (D "
cjmo 0 4-40 :35 4—,! 028 “'"“ o "—5-" mo 5-4.4
0‘0 «N m‘t'ts' to (01—0)? ‘"“'" 00-7 0‘0" ‘03:”
m“w._s 0 .23: O ﬁ‘cn 1+» 4 1 w
E DE 2 0 ml 5 3,, gm €04:
m E E B- im '85 0‘) mg :0 mg: mg) mgww
.92) 9% O Cgi.§ (2:; g'gE 9.: a gm 3&3; “3 8E
wi'a7>— “"9 3 “5 335 8‘63 U% '688 a m”-
L_'s..-§ Sggsﬁ 5.... - 3 L... mg L— : $0) mhcg l— g8,
zzzclzgzg. z zzm Zthzazgg’ «23:!
LLLL..LL. m|LLQ3gLL-Qi u. LLLLfg m$§H%:QLL*5;O 11.3!
i—“F—‘F— EH H$ I‘m; {“‘l—"c i'“ “Elf: WIFE,” ‘1‘“‘8?
GOG :QQQL C3; 000) C} 0C3; =Emm£ 40%|
E Oi I 0 ‘6’ x H
m ﬁ-E; N15 gl 0‘“:- g
V'- ‘_' ' V‘— T‘! V‘“ V“ 'Y'" V.“
m ' -c>
. wrigh'. gigoélgobg-ob gobgobgob 0&030 52‘“ 5 §
.wcn.<1>m .mz.cp .q) .6) -cu .0a .029 .c: g. s
o- ommomiomocn‘omomommom- 0- Q.
meow.mw®mmmmwmmwm .cvww (Dru
whammmwammmamamo. wmmwawl coo. d

w E
H: g ,
— 3...... 8....

o '0 90 o 2 <1)
cm >365 w m m‘Hg {:13 g 3: =55
{m 7:366 u— "(a a Cam :2 (D
m :30 MC) (50) (D "C503 > co 5
W 3 "2750 {1’03 -9 8 Bags 01 963 E h
m. m --—-s g(DaJ -25 3:: CU 2"- 04-6 _...."-* 0.31073 :3: H I

«w 9’3 3.x: 00 03" (pi: 3m ..... ;
$123; 2:8 535’ .9 Ewmﬂg :30 3-3:: g% 29;
:55 (5 -0w ah Eu) CU 0332.23 “‘0'“ mntﬁ (13...: U23 F
0‘=w a: '0‘ 033mm E0 “:3 4C) :le
4.: 05:13,.“ 190) ”3 w :33.“ h “o- c: EQC-T'
05 33-35 2.».-5 g Q “ceg Egg 8.}, gr: gﬁm
9 38.59% E” g % 3mg»? éwo .m'ﬁ'ﬁ c8199
“5 aha“ $5 07 :2 @225 ’gg 3335 rm 0—0)
<3 ‘SL—mz 0'0 '23 Q I mwm ...H... ggo. 3.33 EC).
m m.ﬁmu. h gm m :Zkgﬁ $8 :wa, ,mm :59
in mg ‘55.?- ‘c‘ég in: m "1-250“ "-0: cs- *0): E:
a: ms—mc‘ m“ ‘1’ w “gar? So ‘1’“ $53 'ﬁ‘“
.2: wwh- Inc: '33 <9 0 ‘3 “’3: 6.9 s s: coa-
4“ 43(1)") m0 é h‘d‘Em m lm—w 2:0 0
_g $8,525 "5:: g. ,___ 2010-0 (6(3) lgg g.go Shag
1:10-53 00 1.... Q3 Hafoﬁ 67"“ m3) M50: (DC:
'0 “W mm 01.2: c; .c: 03“.} (3)03 ”- MM 4:03
(1.) “5:55... ECU .H J: (1)2 ms... .0) w... M.E'E‘
CZ OGJO‘” Q) a) C.) Q CDWCUGJ 5-5 m...
H 330) gs... 5 *“E 00) 4???“ U": L"
0 93ng “5‘3 w c: OCmo cmomcu oz; 4:86:
w 5:05—50 "" 9 0 93030 3®£h=ﬁm 0m 30“"E
a: memo EU) a e; .9.an 9 'asv‘o N01m05=
g 8%.??? $93 1% 0 55930 meggg 321500;
(a “:3 Ug'cw- =33 .Q~ *-‘ #031 5...... <0 , ”'5?
> (13;;an 5:3 cu m E C: :2: com; “.0; ”338'“:
"C X“ 1325, {1) E 1(2)qu _1.'=3imQ~ g §q._OQ
H 0. mm; c: o gth-J >OU=£2L E 0
o mmﬂh>wz 0 -- n— 1—— mac): m moo oECDQO
% thg'mgu. '«g E @3305 39"gﬁ angsgmm
a.) 00 Ho: |-~ q; Egg“) 0 +-‘ “‘15....{0 £6
£5. ﬁQQé-UO-E’J‘Q 9 ,... Iggggg m‘B‘HCJc/J gimmﬁgm
”C“ ‘ l": O .u G) U) H Ht!) 0') L...
(D Q'wa“%m :8 5,4053% 32325-58 cﬁgngw
:5 nglgﬁimﬁ Ea; mﬁsﬁm‘Ov xogﬁ'a “““HECUﬂJ
m. ggsw'§é;g Ha eyggge gﬁocw— i33£g25
8-“ - *- ' «~03 2 ' "c
mﬁi o 2-2 “' £13233 ‘1’ cc <9“?
3 nmggccwm a aww~za gzecu- égogce‘s
:2 Hal mxmg g, mwgmmm QWONH fogﬁwag
‘3’ g'Elﬁago’ﬁ 8 “giggha Eggaom {380.53%
0 “‘8‘“ 0-3.... c: Z'U‘o c3 ' .Hx'cue-ﬁ 428:: E
...... mg ,____, "Hm , H.) mm: (D 1
c: 038 --- 063mm 0 Om LJme
‘3: égio‘gﬁga 3 Pga‘ggé“: igggaé gémagwi
wwgc: .4...» q-a ‘ -V n ._ O ‘— cw 4...:
E gezm-Esgs 8 :Emggga 'ﬁvggeg 353%:st .
... mmiagmma ."8 11.29:” *5, gggmm 82mg“)?
(*3 mew'géwe Ea mama‘gm ._._c:m,93w “mmhwo
“ﬁhmo'wﬂ. I "‘5 2‘5 5... gadmmm Oi-w—m.o-§CD
5 % “’80|a>a, g D%$Qg<v meg-a'zs lmaaigﬁb
g; Uﬁgm'CéBx—t *" EmBE-sEESmeqQ ‘thwgth
v! Estgb‘: g HCvO-Ec‘j‘muee-Qm iwgcégag
w... 03+" ' >~ C: 95 ”~13 . --
3 “0 mom 1‘3 (‘5 07 8 co -- :GJ .Qw .....
co wmgﬁggwg cc ﬂﬁgﬁg‘éﬁfwgmg-wﬂ gagmlﬁé‘m
u— wgomo T5,... 0 13m.“ “‘“om'c-CGJ-Cc gnaw; .1:
O Coimcm-‘MEO <13 mcmﬂ’mﬁ CD: ,Qs—‘Wm gum-oimzh'
m mw‘moﬁﬁij-ﬂ mmtgehﬂgsfgzgg EHQ—aggmb
.EE .Sg‘ﬁﬁ-EEETQQEAQOEmaggqiggmgc {ﬁgmagg
h "_ !
§i 9aﬁgglEgqﬁgigslggﬁﬁﬁqg$53§ ,‘g’a‘ag-‘gga
--- --- 0c: {:8 wmwo 33(1):: . 3"{2009'30 “H
C: Cm:.mc:co~—i Cg“ "Gm cc: .wm ’ 4:23
....... ...._. (D: 1-.—
E Emmcogg’ﬂi‘é’gEﬁmwm£05+~w®l+~ “663 0'0“»
.2 .9£%8“5%"a§83Bahgggxgggggﬁgggnwgg
'8 Eﬁgggwﬂm 8m mgmaga<gm9i%ﬁe—8—J§}-Eeg
.. .. “"09 co “5 M (D “ «)3 I- (13031
5... k-cjozgﬁw'ﬁ 0,92 :50) cu “£09030!” (Dc) l»— 3.]
an a)“ o 2.1:: o “"0“” iNO-«E‘H O 0‘03““
0- O—Eigamaﬁgegm aggt‘amgéamqgwmggcom._@§
co m5i“.¥g£mu M%£ meo)”"0.90§ﬂ§09$wﬁ$gng
cm 900on 0933.... mazcmoﬁnccOimmwomngg—z“i
-g Sgsgmggﬁagm mmsgggmﬂgowgggwwggggl
i Q) S...“ ' :3“ 5 (I) m ”w '_'03 a)

C? O‘o-wwmgo O “-0 OUpmw-ﬂhmﬁgwb‘“9>‘5hww
é EEE£8123§1232%®5393§§Eggiéﬁiggz
s... s... L- N ' . C

m LL mu. U... 4:: mo 0 mm --. ,__.
*5 fig}:EEF$®W®W°E$OSEEO55%5588382
{:1 oaamemeﬁag.m.§_mzam 0 WWW
! I

2 i N
i g N 0‘; [N O°- - 1"- NC“)
i N: ”$1.0 mcoooolmgco N35 ‘92? 9% :00 MC)
' cow“? LO'V Lo‘ﬁ‘w'ﬁ'mo‘o co com Na, _a; .0
~®l _ﬂ) ,0) -(DI .G) -8) (-50.) C50} om 0m
0'30" 8a: 8%8%8% 806 M M £3 ﬁg
ﬂags? com: (no. mo. coo. wn.‘ mm. mm. Wwwm.-.

m MM“;
H
__ I‘EE‘ I J
(’3 >~
‘39 “-g .c: Q “
ex: 2:? i ELZL g 59 I“ I113 ﬁg
.5 f U)
m cu 22:"; c: .03 50} G) Imq;
:a-I I“- I" w ‘9 "" E ”a i»— E“ “-3:
5:; 35a: [2 In E J: 0.) 3g...— gzs $0 15......»
(C: I .5 I 4" 4“ “O 200 2(1):“) m:
-'—"E I”) ‘H c (U 31*.g Em la 0)“
“”33 G: ‘- 6: "- "" g :03;:- so) “5 Cw;
3—0 55 t2 3‘62 (,5 ,0: Lac :5 e) m
9*. +4 0... m (3 :‘O <0 EB. z 1:: ‘82:»
.10 93 a: “—3 a: g“ C (D 5C: a .....
C: a) L... 00"” I :E ,9 “O I_Q[ 10C
Cc: <1) mm E go; (,0 (3:21 3* gm 06:
was 5 4: :90 (D: '03 1:; (U; m .0 SEE:
go 3 ; m>~m '0 ‘3 “E3 32—! I33D 'm 1:153
“EL“ 5 .9! ONE :2: *"‘ c.)
s—w b as .C: L. I 41: m
”56% g ‘5 <3)”qu to .113. I0 0%: II" 2 m8
cpx .c: '0 Im'Cac O 0 =3) ma); *0 >-. 0".“
5:5 :3 5: imm'w <E ‘3 I2:- Cw'"! IN ."*" (”:5
030) I0 1‘5 ?..J:=IQ O 8 Eu: om; Ec: :8 80
CCg-Q 8 3,52: gag :wlwsxo
Co ->- ,5: 549 E (D 13-" g IE “GJQJO
30*1: § “830) O 5 03 +55% EU: “’53-": «c:
2% 3 <13 §ca $3 “3 33 '3‘ 85 '83 Ewgig
931:3 8 8“ :95 <39 8 Q- ‘3’ 53“ 3'1‘900‘”
(DC. *— w 00 0(1) SOCUOo-«GJ
0m C‘- 25, ‘1’") 0 Oai ‘0 0 0+“ (5 {khono
8.... CD 0‘: 858 (2335 cu 4:: 8I I3 igosi-ug
00') W v-n CD 0 QHU ""'" 01—5 , Em Imo.: ‘22:
NO CD CD (13“?) QDOIN 3:: O 3 q; = E2“ CO
00 m “0* ma): 3 0”! =5 ‘mﬂq’mg
4.. mac: Hg: (5 .Q: 3 3...; Or:
(/30) 3Q) Q) Q QCDQ w ,E E O 5 Eh”... O
*0 g-é; J: 33333; 0mg 5 0,9,: = :3 QQEEQ
‘33 ”'5 33 m8“ ”€933 ‘23 3%“? ‘9 '5 a®““§
$09.0; IO mL-mI : a 03.9 m c ,mgmmam
*- CU (Q) “h C ‘05:?“ GJCU 5'“ Q.) ‘“‘“‘ CUC:
“5ng H3 .980 I&Ew-gm 8 8-5 m .2: E8 “00
”“333 I'a I363“ ‘69!“ Q 8:: $ :1“ t...—5t.s°
.5: 4...; gevw 0') [m0 E I'WU) C} 0""mwo
“wwg I‘D 'Qm’" “?dm Q 063 5-3 [“302th
.g‘égmasmaséwmlg ghgw cc Ina, 23 g Ech—tog
O". 5-»... 4—0.... (UWEQD hﬂ'm '33 :3 I Ev“
Ewwcmomﬁmx 53 m a) 5 o H 8 [-“ggz-m
wag (DE cg “25.5w m3 0 % Egg. g x 3:30.925
86853:: m33£$iﬁw CD'Sé’ Q, EwQ E <13 IxZ‘SICZQJE
om “H ﬁ 90 c“"CD (D ;, 5mg; ,3, 8- gwwwno
@Echcxgcm ghw 1:" I‘D c3 0% ngo
§$8éﬁgiogealo 92% g agé g “5%” ;%+5-89
caﬁfchBcﬁﬁ“ 0—339 E I158 (U E Eﬂcggc
®E¢awiam888~9 .358 8 :5 {-920 E c. Eguggx:
‘Uwo i _ 03m :23 --
'a.w88%88hwdm82h ”25¢“- “a; Qéagwﬁg
mzwmoImOOQ 9300309 (D '25ch a} <13 EHQQOc
“LL&L-SHS‘awﬁﬁmmﬁ 5 08 *9 5 $503530
4...:
(1} 0:47:03 003(1)...» $o§23 :1 :3 “,9 a G.) {wmsmg
asgmg 05:30:22,222? 3mg c: ﬁjmmwxm
OWBEHcﬁcI‘cﬁmB 0250.) CD :50) CD 5 gaggg
I—UmmemIH—c: cm-‘ZO‘O Io 5“"55 Ow cn'o “Hg.
®$omﬁ “ﬁioozc: :29w 1*“ CH “:8 'ﬁCBi’im
Mamcmcmcmghm pg 'g mm .... i=3 cacao
mEO'CH'CW‘CE mug 0L1. h ,m “2“: LEE?) ____c,__wo
.c: 53:3“3 0‘5 0:31?” "-5“ O 0 0.... 9m U)(Dh'ﬂuw
“831x9x9mmlonﬁarg rg Icw E mfg “CEIQég
,....
gmclé Em8$ggﬁg<ﬁo o 3853 23:5 nggh
330: m m .12 ““m m m (D ”-- CU
Umoioxox0£1#3'§“~9 “5‘3 3&0 274...;13 ngoh?l
.""' "" .. ""13 '5 -... .,__, ~*— ......
CDUEEO 80—83 3.9 9? O 0 I293“: Ow gaxobgg.
O Z-w- -—-- ----I --- "- ."c: U)” Ou—O O
(D l-— acino 0.03350.) 0 Q. 0.. come; OQQ (Dy; 4...
1:0 . s_sh-w- (DC: (DM‘M .C: (2.0):
wcamwimmw3§mmw m w (DOE $EEH£§mwbg
0303'“ (DCICDC mmium mg“) 9 9 3kg“ 5..” CE hon».
“H m-hO.tO-h£: Co) CD "-— ~-—- ac» ': ,.. o (032-3....‘0:
0°34: 5:23;: 3m0£isc :5 :3 (5130 23a: mhgg (13¢:
a) ”H ‘ 0-H: o :3" UI (L) O" (0*— (DCTHGJ‘
"“00 Umscrw cro 0",... m_. ‘0 0>®3
(D (D CD CD +3175 (13 b 0.} w u) U)! (D +--' CD - GD - "" (D “u. g 13 CW" 1.... 4.... El
L.E'U “mike “coma; “"90 ““5: “53%-E s"‘0 a; 0‘) as =
zsazmizmz—zz>IzEzgzggzmt 2223:128ch
“-G’éz’ﬁgﬁ‘t’ﬁﬁﬁgﬁsgﬁﬁmﬁco ,9; . ﬁa‘fi‘gﬁ‘go
t—w“ ' «- w- o
38898Q80‘508Iogagoggaog QmQQQonQ
i g . x g
"" or)
00 c» c5) CD CD NI 0! cot: .
N$“EP‘ENENEE‘DEwEwE comma)” via) ﬁjcu
' - ‘ ' '0") :5 mi <5 :2» L5 6 O") (.5 .2 <5 .-- o c» o
8mgggm38mwmmwmmmm mmmmg- watt: ﬁg
mmmmmaiwmwammwmiwa mama. (D

a
N
53:;
W «H I AG) ‘6
g 2‘5“ :35
up 5
Q. C:
u: (D .9 z
9 ,5: H (D g
H O J: H—
a i c: g H {t O I
.Q ““3 i: c: Q :5 5 $68
3 a 88 0 "” £0 3 3 ﬁ- ‘9
Mg ":2; 3% 8 a 3'8 2 ﬁg “26' _
-__ L __ .c:
g i f: 2532 “3: :8 £23 2% 55m 1—: § E h
C5 "“8 4...: (U {1) ca: 3 {B.Qu— E
5—— ---- C) m U) 630) s... U 0 .C '
‘Cg ? -8 g 8 “w: Q E63 m 33-9
EC!) O E&— (D 3 CC E {U - 053 f“?
w» “a mo 2 g gm g3 «9 :g-Qm aw-
w'” 5 H5 1“” 0C3 ‘2 1—2.; O z “’w “5a)
03.4...» £15: -362) +73 5 .62.: C1. “0;: -......'--~-
WC: E a)" ‘3 3:»- 9 cc: E (U E EC“ 01:
CD.” (6 £133 .Q 3 '5050 :3) $3 '--- O “:3
1‘01: (1) w (.3 Eghmﬁﬂ '-- O o 0063
(5-4" 5"“ 0...: 3 Ihgmmw «mm 2....“ -_..0 EO-
99’13 ‘23“) 0:5 ﬁgﬁ‘ﬂ’ﬁ ‘03 9'5 73 ”am “*%
EMoQO 1:0" E hm g; i=3 . (2 "ﬁ g-EP“ >5"—
+~03MC “E “m O'HGJQ i“: :2 MC: cum.
2 C20“ >0“ 5:21). “53>” E30 """ <3: “-- >6)
““ 30.30 —-~ ' O“ c: ”32.: ~40 4—4 92005 “'s...
.5: <1) CL <1) 0 co
"" was 13-4“ 3 5" 4:03 {32—03 J: @mh—A mu...
ﬁwcm CO 13-3 gaff Q» "m 0) w kaJ 5......
ix CZ *-' G.) 5...: -13).... o ....... w
gwggg 0J0 1'32 93$ng §.m._tm£0 ,g; ,9; .6115“
:hxfﬁ 3m 1;},{6 c: mag 35139 m w w§g {ho
§°-i 0:: ﬁg *Emﬁcw 'w ‘HE‘GEH w ;= a ’m-Q.
'me (9Q #3 943-00 “Owoo ('0 33(21 .5120
¢c=“'°’ £28 <6 EM“ 533:: ommha’ ﬁtmn‘wha
(”0‘95 “CU Eﬁiggir‘go: meuu: 2m {S.V'? 050‘!
Egg Ex 05*Cm53.§.>“" 0930)” m . engage)!
QUWE 0Q) OEEQ'W‘CWQ 3H.£>m E i“, c-9 “3‘5!
L"'03“ .—.CD -0 8- o H: 9—- :3 “MO >~£=
>13 @123 :20 g... 8520-0“ xmcwﬁ <3 U’*""‘<}2
(Dc: Q) (65 m'wwﬁimm (1)."05mq} 9 Mg:- 0.1::
wmwﬁ> w HM 3’03““) mtm w co 0303003....
-.._0 (33>. ‘00 md—JWBCD ““ 03.30 5-— “ 0
ago; mo ggggmgmcg cgamg cu .. mam“
.9;ng 3w tgHE—EO—iﬁgo $3232 «*5 “c3332 8.9
(DLL.O¢5 CLO gun saw; toxﬁm” “€02: 2...:3
"§H%ﬁ we gm‘eg: 53-0 Ewazra $3 :oa—wwg 9-2
“man, 02: o“ mugom ><W=o¢ en ﬁn“ CDo
a.gw;0.g_ >IM‘ CU {USCG} 15.0mm“ "" E0951:- WWW
?hmmo 0:3 :3 3.52%,0'0 £0338 .53} Eggﬂgs
gfogam ’55.; 033.33%? gagm‘” 9; “ts.” (3‘1:
mgm-gg 0-7- 88 >wm§= “mE-‘ég o *Ev9c’ﬁiec
m :mO-q, m9 Mr: 363qu ucD—wc o ”'gboaasm-Q!
a: (”who (5‘2...- 8331-3113:; 6366030 <9 Wﬁ'mté
8mi¥8330mhv9$ amoﬁm 33:86:30 0) “@Wqﬁiﬁgi
ﬂ 0““gomcc: mvco’h‘" ~5'H‘O-ans E Omwgi-CCD
‘ ' N CEwwcggo g31%'a“%5 5230?; g Q-c-Sgégn
-_ H I" ”an—
“338““6OU’E'8 E&ngggmﬂ’ ”—8031: ES. 23.6miwg’
a: “—3.?“ceam c'uwn hzavh-mm wkum c»:
5&st mﬂw'wo‘ 433:4. Siﬁ ’“'12:“ H ‘3 “c:c-H
U mew'chg-Q U—w Czl-woﬂu 803053.88 _Q-aw'wlgg
Dgawhgzmg 9‘5 mE‘ﬁ-csas g oE-‘égmﬁg "ESQ niﬂiwm
3g §Q£ou~ﬂm wzl-o-umm Hg“; coo“, D&Bczgwb
"""' . OPEO'ijﬁB ‘ C: n. O #63an m .Qﬂgc...
“a s w—Q Cluw-ﬁ. g E (:(D 5:3“ "'03:: 030
g axo:,__,cZgW-ma>w gC‘SHmOE‘ﬁ-ﬁmgﬁé
m; : Oiaamwzugh wmwdwc mmwhmzmw
Q' ‘ 3”““LL‘” :3 g Qﬁcw$cocmﬁwg
E 3829-589: oQOEm’“hww'-os-£§$
& ‘ 53.15.50) zgscwggzggggg mm
E :5 I WEEZXQmo—aﬁhwm “’95
N 1““ 1.1.0) £90.) UFO) £2:
- Goo £9 E “wmwm
“OLISV- I... LL>hLLaZ 0.5: 'D
o N (Gask- E H C
mt “q, .w'U -<_/2=U- > m0
(U Q i m-‘ww' L'Q P‘E'ﬂ't ‘4'“
(D {3): a E 05
’ agm- .0) m QOQOZD’
£1. E E {:10
«i ! o
a 3 "'“w-u.“
l «-
E NNN
<15 0'03
mm. mg
”’30.

H
N
€23
Q5 0') i
5:; (t: 2 Egg
ﬁx 3 LL- L“ -
M c: I“ §- g i
8 30 $5 w«5%
f—L 3‘4““
(1) ‘3 9C3 '6 :3 O
m g ﬁgs: i 9:32.43: a) q; 8 H
c: .52 gHQ awn g _g M o
'“ —- w a) a: o a} W ‘0‘:
3 , "C‘o 05: c: :33...» m 3 cm
x. t: Q03 $13.9 ..... '00 a)
U) :O-o—uuc-do C 1.... (Dd) .Q
m o e; , «ﬁﬁ‘ﬁa’g ; 4- . BE *5
£1" E “3-9 $6) 9x58 :2 2 i . 03$ m
M (D 133" mgiwbo'" cu «w < :12; (D
2:: .> was 3 mm}, 0') (U m
> " ‘—C2. Qongw‘u '-- "‘ O m
U: “7 s—o H'w‘wow W =3 <9 +~ 'H
o ‘13 <11w cw”) 5‘5 m w 3: mo- 0
__. w wx Ca.) (1323): c: m ..... :3“ m
8 8 3% imagmﬁm é @ E gm 3;
O E “.5513 50550529» 8 E ‘0 £33 -._ s
g 7; £3 m£z-§§g m 8 j g ”58 *5 E
'8 WE : omgwems 3% i =1 gt. e :
”C3 G) O s (DH: mmw’wiw i=2: 05 (D Q- t
33 ‘0. CU E 0-0' .urzhwsw g-—— 33...; 0.... ~-
13 "’ 2% ‘ 05 wﬂﬁowb‘" 57» E .2: Eu: m
cu-«J-Q “-3 =3 $0 ”@532 0 o 9 <1) - C:
«35:5 :3 Ho gu- Esﬁzwg >-.~ :5? £3 .93
7.510 gang .__ O—g 031:3 O_(DO__ (DC: a i—m o
0;ij ;+-' l u... ®-~“U®3U :3 >.Q > _{U Q.
.02: co co 2 Q n+1 o— ; «c: -- --~ as 13=
w > 0:: ‘ 06‘“ “>433 <0 :30 o- <1)
“5: o ‘99 »Eﬁ5’=£35w3 8 mm :9» 0% 4“
83‘: $03 ﬁgECES-ﬂﬁo 2:532 5 5- g
33.... 8 m3" ‘3: Oio'”EEQ—]3 "‘3": g 03’ ~53
““ “5 EEG) ®szﬂ‘53mw m 3'” C-Q m a
(00):“ “g £3 mmi'wccw‘“!-@ ‘B-5 .E .030 H E
Cé‘; wwhlw Qﬁ «MC:
.09 . ; ._. k. a: M: l c: <6 i
30*“: 3% .g mswwawws 8% 304* :95 ’
(6% U) “m § ~33?me 50 U) ““l mus<0
£13 8 mg; 9—3: 3:9 £??th 0 “a 8! cgg—J-g a";
- ,___ “o"- ECDL- . 0. Cut 1::-
558% ES wwz~moﬁgm§ 9 c:% 4;;330‘: 5.,
hammwﬁ mwngww aw ~53 0}
:s‘mecuq-g Owgiﬁggcm c: 00 o (.55 CD
{DC‘Omms- C: IG)~..... O C: ca: 1-:
O c: w“ .334—4 -5mO_WEEw*_—5 (D >~-—. H.— _.......
:0 ﬁtsin - GS Cm monO’m <90, acme: .....
mcuwﬁo< C: {:33 cmooﬁim 3-— 3mm“ 3
(2.0) mi -....w c:-._ OD) o
c5030; ,0 top (50-... 1;, wmeq; .=-
gﬂmowom $m®8gchmm (3-935 £3th 5
£9ch Ecz-HWJ: oz >ah s..-—L_..QQ_£ mg; ":qu .._.
> 3®$w+~ i=3 “3 "(3'03 5*" ‘E 0‘ 371:2:"0‘9 E 1
aww»w~: 133690)ng ...., m: ““r-“a’m o
mﬁgwogw c: 23.9 wHE®8$2 29f $138?" .1: :
”gygaggg wwag-ng-hw was $10515 a) !
Omgmwmc “g+- gzgnm g: Eémw‘l’ =é
Qowcoaaﬁm SQmEhwrng .09 'whﬁ; (U
@0636.)me M'memggm :2: .E—wc "-'
w>\.c:£=®*~ .53 9&0): c; QJ‘CS Eco 0’
“>“>~i“®m cs 9).. m 0(1):; CD Hg. _Oc:nO Q
05’: ggomm 'ahﬁzggftm“ “"‘O 803% "£3
01:; ECO 0'3 a; S —; ‘.C2 (1)95 2.: uwc: Q.
(Do 00mg...» (“5(2) EQC ‘33:” mo. mome— CD
“m_C‘UEEWC-z 0 ES CD(DEggXO -g'“ HQWO "S
mmﬂg‘mc-o x mwﬁiﬁm'“éE 1—2 Smo... 0
CM 50.0 (D (‘6 0"”1‘5r-ma... (J) 13!... 90034.": C1-
m_o><m'oa> mugizgoga}; (:3 m_wm-H o
mumm'mmci :‘*"" wﬂ'n— g 5mm; _._,
(D (l) 8—“: mgmﬁ’mwom O Q“ q..8"‘ 4-4
5.93 mC‘g-zsgi ﬁﬁgimmmﬁg 0'3 .3“; oqgo w
>Um®®m meWEEHUOO ’59—” 01—0.) 0——
i—DLJL'EchoQ c: Oowt’oﬁ 9 “-‘m’ 0 5'3 $0)
gnbme-a; 2 cs: 0%.2-02-5 w» c»; 24—592ch 8%
(“CJQJF‘tuGJ LLZZ C: 9350 O” 2i: 0'); “03*“5 ghi
boa: LLLLZGJ ¢z== w “w%* w ~ wD-é
C,- in}. memCUL-cd-Om 'i mwﬁli’? mm?
QogkngSiZ.§2m-§«Qi EQQ‘E .:_E§
N . QEF‘mmf-i-ngﬁ c2086) 3w;
* N 1 CI) OIF-QJ C :3 Umv
mm] — ‘ 'CQ. (.2. U” 2 (OCT <13"!
.Wmm Q Q: Immivg mgam.~e
8%684 “WWW? : mod: Piwhsgi-Q
03:1. (130701“) qiccﬂ N -_ . LLworwm
w“ mmo’a’ ’ -‘""~<r “a Can
. Dawn} 03360}? K)?‘ .2 c 4-4
0.03m o. .0) E
CL mm 0:539-
(Dmgm Q I
9—4 I
i

N
N
m w 3% 193 s _ ;
tags “5 “5 1:3 '0 s i 3
g .3}: d—r i C: [ 1 E 1
m ‘0. l
, 1:50) ECU 03 t 1 . E
5;» Z i m_C (D n“— c: s [‘56
0-9 -- a>c c2. ‘ <3) “"
Q (l) G.) .Egﬁb ...... >1 J: >5
-- 33“- “66' 43‘5“ 8 a: H CD
55 gg 23 : 3kg CD‘ a; ‘53 W 5
q’ ”3):: o g I '08:). “t5 {5 m 8 m
0 l :3‘3 <6 z .93 Q" .76 — *- 0: ‘13
2 two 0 E 030)“ is... L— (D 3 .c:
okra >5 I QCu-m a w ;E 8 . 1
"“ a0 “C? mtD-o 0’ m E --- 3 g
o (D&- 3 ___®m CD a; £30 0 O a
”I ““0 H +4 U) 3 (D -- i
a: 03> w 0:553 LEE <33 ‘3- ‘” -’
"" 4:32 03 .030 w Q .c: w - (M
u a .H m 58.90) g: o “w “a 2:09?
‘33 5 5:5 :5 I :“cﬁ .0 0 E o 1'; 0*
% I '90) EU ' g 'Q'O-Uw 0 El)» 0 ‘5 5'30
: _c:..+:: if: i 3 032:: “a in ~- 'u [0E
:03 i (UQCUH H'" 0 CU
>~ 33 '-~- i ﬁhwxw it: ~ E 1-
“ a) __ E 4:24} '6.) C; - w 5030
___ “(D (‘15 “.030; .Q E o ““-
H (13,,” (6-...CU I'C} ._ U) U}
c: a) c: 383-3303 Ea) u; -—- 05..
Q .29; :2: mew— a. 03 g: ”a o EC}.
0 (Us... '0 @mﬁom u” C: E
z 3...: m ‘ iwuzmox WC:
8' mm x lmugw: $ 3 « ﬁﬁ
= 23~
% .§£ m; %aarﬁ D % § 9%
3" >‘ B 9 5 ~ F-Bﬁom g H6 0 ﬁg
92 2 3:30 “a : g mmﬁ‘i‘a £05 :28 3 Wm
E3 3 :5 0% U E C: (6.8'gw {D E": E33 0') 8
Q) m L'" (DL... M I “M.” .
{/3 U) >~C 5...... m 90... 5&0.) ‘0 G) (U 0"!
.9 g-Og z m gmmzﬁﬁg : 3-6 3 mtg:
% - “8.5:: ?2‘: g mg-ﬁwmm “3 55% 8 mm;
38 20:6 GEO 53313333 .5“ 8g :5 rag:
Q— ' 2 U) U) i u...) chums
3% 835% 2% g E: alﬁmg-ggﬁ g 8-92 3; so 9‘
“'53 CI" :3 z w. 23‘: 3’ Q ‘“~ ‘CDD—
BcEOC% a amigooeﬂm w w8 9 Na
0 0-03)“ m 'C géaquc: (‘5 50.0 63. C24;
(00 E <1) G.) ET: ”“GJ O 5 : ‘t E03“
(6 E :3. (.003 .._. 0') <1)
‘1’“ 0.22.0, “3 wgwmh‘aw 22,-». W03 4:: EEG)
MC >6) :4: (D G} (D 1 Q (1)03
0 “C3 42-“ 3"!) <13 :3 0):: c: Q
0.) ”<65: w w wbﬁcbw O_(U "" '“
_ghl (1350 C: “I “0"“me E33 mg: “C CD-D
moi “3;th °~> 0% 00.520922: Was H m 3-23
G.) a .C 4—4 :3 C7}: C 23:: c: ._m:® 4‘: 5.3:
$2? HE“ Q -.... $3,520 CD"... h-::s*‘c::.£: c: 4:225?
Win 0613.5: -c:s : g5 wtmogg “30330 "o “50?
06: c$* oE UaE ms :5nt '* xgi
go ._ >53 . O ogaoomw 13:: CD 0.92;
0...... we) r». l c: smug £42: :~—-—<:Q '5 5943'
wt..— ‘0“- 23 ~--- 09.22—wa gm’ﬁo “3 E
4:8 mm ICU 1'5 :25“ '“w-E‘” ' E “'3 0.5.:
* rs: 1L * o 0.x :5.qu .2.”— H
C: Hr—‘k— Eu) 0(1) . -Q 0&0 (1) O
(:0 EN 5 (D Q} 9.13:2“)! 0.332(1)...» 5: 0w
o c:"::£3 1‘“ X x 63 maa“ cm «H :3-
18%: '"Eq; .(ﬁl>~ CD mwm-Q mioQ'o'Umﬂ.) u... "723*”
005 U ma) CD ' CD "03313633030330 O #0)
(D * CD #3 “5 (Dmc-o-c IQmHh-mm 03w
">83 B$$m§91£ 56*‘Ccl'mc8mmn 8:5550
CD‘” 0-0 4—- mm; c: C 00300 Qm-mhﬁgw 0+“ 0
~-Q :3. EU M? ---~ .moggmmoigmwm £5228
50> cmmmﬁo’ 2:: b-omwm ’ Ecr‘: “39.9w-
Q. ---c:>ES"-:<D <33i QHCmmt-QEEBMW ><th
.500 *‘OOs-m'a 1;): O «.mmmgmm‘og '->~E-'-'—‘5
i 0 EQ- :— ‘ “€23 CZ%'“‘ (3W1: (1)" “D...A-u-m
RQE mommitv Oi Q’wbg 036.....Eimh CDQ’CO
(Um hwmgﬁ (D 9:: Ci“ “—123 C£E>Hzm® aniOc:
“-0 (D: E 4-4.4: "'" -w-QQ-QC:®W® E0 Q 1003
Hg BEQCEEC g Oé‘aqjmmmmact'"o (migm
m: hgwﬁgw icémmom 'amuh‘a’o .gr-ME+—--9—
cum gn'Ug-wm <0 msQ-CWOMo‘Umc-c cairn“
0:: {—003 03‘” m mmmmmﬁBQ—ﬁc '5 2+“§
30 “13"5 ; aghwoiom “’09 G’Wtom
mo (1)2.sz2 #32503; 2.9653)- 9303;“),
Q)“ :LL‘I—‘h' : Z Z OTC)“ (DLLWB “(DO
“mU—m: .512 £512.: :3 3 C ha)
C: £35300 ; P"? F'S‘Cle-L C30 (v 02
L_HQQ‘ CD; (50 f—U CLLL .95...- ‘D'
i s E agoog CWQP-G) wU—BI
w Ev— ‘ Q<U<£ocn~c= mxk‘o
- Ia- E _ H (Q’Q i
V” V'" i V": Y“ v... E c
“3%“383 (\EQNQNQNVE 3‘0qu ‘1: ’
016!)ch 8%Omdmdm .(wa‘ﬂ'oo c":<ZJOC\I¢3¢3E
mama- COCL (Dec (Dru (13%E dem ‘0) ~90)? ‘
a mam {‘5 0C»;
meQ, 0305(1qu
(00.090.

m

N

{1; CD

‘"“ “83:23 i

é...:_., _E$£m—l
333% =
<3) mm 3 m C
“22.53% 1 :g[ m .H :8

o -.. £ ’a: ... (U
mug: 5 8 r6)“: “0“ 24'
m.gzm 8 O 10 42:1,: 1:...

£000) ‘ .0) EC: .‘o :23 ‘0) f
Ommo o! 5* '" 003 0" <1) _c: ‘37
C3 5 “5 aw >- £ :6 J: 4-” .E
Ewgc "3'3 0" 9 g; (D H C: C:
2013.... .52 (3) <1) .29 E .E 0 <13 (5%

“~- ,£: é U) (1) _,__, 9Q ‘3 {U "-33 "CS .._.
030:5 '“" :H w (n :5 03 523. cu - 0
QJQJcZ-H ‘33 (5 Z“ O) o .03
SCUEC} CD Q1330 i (U ”W “t: (D .c: h
Ummo -5 35,3; '50 E a 8 U) Q
95-1300 E5 85am .9 3 H a 2 E
Z C‘: 1 '3’ mo; 6’50} 3.... O Q) LL I‘D !
mgng i "I ":38 Ed) img_{c 1-- i'“ (to: 2

awn: * 5‘ -=-m'°.cn‘a $03013 c: Q 03 i
Goat 8 30(23th .000 [:3 CU Q .
dmgq} .___‘ -oCQ-E';“w max ('5 g ‘—
COW: 5‘04: L. CD (00)

“DE 3-: ~haamwbw w-—*“ ”a; E ":5
$590 '0 {-0 (D 635553 .3 ._ (15

-__ CD; >‘+—oa) J—ﬁ C3)
.QML-O 42‘ humor) ®"+-' “- 03 LL» 0 (D
:6ch .... a'agﬁ-Ego 8g“: g: g Q- “as
F%Qw E .3 ‘33 8+“ ngxg l'a'oﬁ c3 ‘3:- «E .....
822% I «3 atmggaw £932 % ES 8 8

“u... .u-uo—J "w N...“
885m | 9 Eggﬁéﬁlgg 8%;3} Z 2 g 9
uvggw ‘0 +_, 0-05'0». “0‘03 1”: <1) 5*“ Q-
(1)0 .“Q a): Qm‘h-CL-M 1:25—[1— C) .c: :23 (u
www'zngj 5...; (UGJO 3‘1"” eww u. w 0 4;:
cu 'm: <D= Qaw-Qw KC» O‘:-— L. M
86-3299 gi Euc-SM;GJ‘U “£263 :3 (D "g s:
amwﬂa .M<:3®G)a®_g ®,Q€D , C2. C6 ~....

“0+, ml 4.....* Owgﬁg 1-: ""“" m (1}
389.com 0' 010389 “”0 ng 2%: ““ =-
Q—iw'w-Q {U .qu “DE 5‘ N 5
oh...» “‘" “303va0; canon; :2» :3: c3 93*
C: QCDO U3 $$$$$me 0.....10} "‘ﬂ '0 I (DE

2mg“ 3; Ohmwmsw 2.1330; 1".” H O) (u?
E&‘a%$ 8? "omwz-a 8°?“ .2 E 8 8i

' c:
§Q&g%é .5 E’QgiEEm—Q "Dx'g ’3 '9’ “'3‘
www <1“ 3 'm‘asicwko ié'aw a 75 a=ac—

Ogmu—i (U —:Q.c:c30 :03 w age:
803'me ‘33 03>~°'-*"+..<D *- -$~’ :1 C: ht‘”
-... -——~ .2: ~- S 73 h .5 7" c: m -- O .9 c3; .3; .9 a: c; :2
HO "="'C3 0 (2-4-0 {'6 q—aztzo E'— x 2&3
(DQQ'DG’ ‘4—“3 “5598 1.: o 03030 i“: 0;; 5:285:
E +2“; a) £56) 53:3“??? .5503 C” .s.. £08.53}
63.12230: 5- (”=8 5..“ Q-....'CS Q13; 3,2... 53:00.:
“HO“ O :3 hi mW—Clvw O (D g“ 00)
®>‘QJ mg... U) :5?0 O‘mica... 1.... C'- 8 .0 id.) 33:03“;
35“"mi ‘3 WWEHOQJ“ Iwmw o zﬁﬁiamw
mt’OO o (DQJBICD 0.5 imsa, H Ems":
3'93 c".O O “i *" (WEI: m“ ”0 m-.c:: 6: 42:4) .9...
":3 CD “‘- QJ‘U c:[ ‘33 0‘33"” E42: :3 E SE “3 $7.833

. gmwgm g guasngawwgh m %3§mm
“gm” 6’ 3 ‘Cgﬂgcmcﬁ-EHO <0 mm‘d—Sﬁm
“360‘: '— ooﬂwwwwm C: CD «Ho w“
@0003“ C :tz'ﬂ'm-Uzmﬂ “DO...- U? m'wIw—z
c:c“UQE 0 cm“ :HMQEQJ .05 (.0 00) ;
.... :25: E Ozg>mrz~=m 13+“; ca 0.90 ”~—
3.“: CU Q3.__; .9 [£O“£1" :3 £00 .EC: 10 .Q CD mg i
w :5 03“".53 "C31 .9 .5 28* €3.52: ELQ i‘-—- 4... “3,5: 5.3
cu <9 r o! 133:0 common: ~03 :42“ .H
gO-E*E= "—3 15.30me mhm-E 0 mo 49'“
“8E5: [ 3. .9033).ng 0:99. l” “85:3
w“:m'$ 93‘ Q.‘ “x"'='5‘° mg (-000 O O EMQW‘”
.HQ Din m Qoz’ﬂﬂJO‘c H630) mP-soﬁmm
0 mm a) m J00»; “~— 2: KmHH§CD3~Q
cgﬁ (u .=-- wmﬁicom 03.03”“ 0;,33‘ m
:5 Z ""- mwg‘“mgﬂ'mwﬁ_¢ 35>.ci>~um
Z :11.“ :5 -h 'mwa “mm“pﬂ C6356)"Ec3>c:;3
mgm—w U =5me =woo § owv'owwo
}-—~GJ~0[3*E 9 Uﬁmczcgﬂog S m_wnw
Q ‘c "‘5: <1-)(:34:cn'r-‘mc'; owom mEgDSWB
gm.-._= 2 “cﬁmOmgmoOJ—zm m.GJ+~2*¢750
“E I—- u..- gm 1 mwwmc>~oc

gw_C2CZCZ‘U5 mmmmm£'~m'"
[:3 thma) 0 huimzim ’wQM-Uomc
miwlu-mz Bsmaw'uw “ma;
EQOgHMmCUﬁ-w m,'——mcml Coma,
P QQ§HE<Zevw889wgan
“53?. ' aguﬁwiﬁg 8'885‘60’
‘QL‘S‘C‘BV‘Q mﬂgb'animlzﬁﬁm$
00). user * “Q‘Ch—ﬂi 359.:

Wf:mo® ”ON f N“ 0 Own“) 3...
wmimmdmmx‘“ -0 x3“ QEEH‘Cm-Sa)
immmcn~cumW’ 'm‘U iDOSU’"
(Dalmgo‘m c: 94::

imam? ma} 4...? E ”wut— -
‘ ma. &O. Oct: V "m.“
(Q ,CDEar-w
8 dmpoo

”mggg 3%

0
(00. mm
(1)05
“MHO—

W
N
m 2
5i} E
a “-- 2: g
c» O c ‘6 S 92:
E: O U) m m (D 2:: ' e U)
:8 9 £53 <6 “3 *- g +~ "3’ <13
t E 0 -... "" 3 *—
(U “(D |<D B H L...
(D "a O E :0.) (D {D
.0 gm :2 . _§ wc- m 5 EU ‘23 m
.5 ‘9'? 8 E u... (2 G) id E‘a Q.) (1)
c: 3:3: i»... <13 <13 '5 £3 (‘5 c: w E
(J U) C 0'0 O 8— (U L;— O Q [C
5: Egg 0 “80- E s... .5: o ~{:5 $4“ 3
""‘ :"'..::(U “-33 1:573 60 :Z 3 .;>.. C m m
‘1’ T— m g :50 (9 ‘LL ”U [0 <0 £ U:
‘0 EC). ‘0 --""' .: ~c: c: (D 2:.
{'5 (DO *4: 05’ :3 I"“c: G) o ‘“ ""
E '0‘— ‘43 X3 O" 5:30“:5 ‘5 c: ‘9 E
“5.0— 55: (DO ‘41) ~03}? -——- ECU ﬂ h
-<:) :0“ 30> ma) 8-- “O(U-— 33'- ,o (D o
.c: 003 9 mg 2 3951—30 1% .c: m:-
5 03:” (D 90 LL ,hwqaog ‘3 3 go
B $3 "C: (5“ E“ 35““ ""'""‘.u—..c .9 c: :37
Z; _.__. <1: -*-'.s:.90 03 50
C". LLCD Hu- 3 Q .waa: w. .0 mm
0 H13 10 3 ‘ 'Uoo .9 00C: mu:
1...: Q... 11:: G30 1:: >5“me t.O G)
05 O «3 :9” O mw'amw- Emir: mi?
q; :30 ‘8 E“ (n -QEGOU‘Q‘EE‘BH $_c
c: (D c: g a: mm. 030)
o “3 *~ -—-- m Qwsnv—Uogmm oz;
0 0'9 3 go; ; “5% Qaw‘zwgih ‘60)
9 “€£— g NB$O --- ngcw.§%®mgo (DE
(6 (Do (D “—03‘3: ---- ‘33 mmowwc “CL...
.C “L... Q I 30 E E&QOOQ—J‘Q _9w 04—:
4...: U3 1:: C 4...; (D‘—:3S"“ CWCD ho
6963 E On- CD Bw‘ﬁhmwo‘“ 3;: mm!
m ”.0 41> 3630: *-' m +~ .Qwé o
.9 .938 ‘3 wmﬁ 8. ‘ﬁhEW8o—rgag— mﬂ
a .gg '8 {€333 ; £§5§8ﬁ§g59 £3)
M" w __ Hu—
5 2A '35 .9023 $2 wwgmwggomz tier;
”W }——~--—--' 7:) '— B O (D.GEHQ) 0 mi“— E
t C36) 3 0% awwmmmo‘gwm “Egg
0 "£5 ““2: 5: M06) OE—ch‘ 9:30
o. ca“: 0 u. O .959. m f- c:
. 0.: x0 'c: Emh -..-_-. gcﬂ':oo.wzmgim max
L" (UH... -- g CU “wmsihwﬁzhm'w x...—
“O ,9 3w Q ,0 cmg-oso.“ a) co 0 m
- 0) w H». mm H: :5 0303-01.... n—«CDQ
1: 03 55(1) ‘5 mOmUQ-ﬁdw 065 who
4.... C30. CD 3....5 U) EQQCZJZZQGJk-O—“w “0‘;
o o... H... 8.233 -- mahogmgmmw :13
:5 "Om o boa) 0 m£m*‘u~§§<ﬁ“3:c ”03$
‘0 cor: c=>~ a: im“®®hhtﬁm§%$ E“
‘0 CM U 2""(1’ .c: ’mmmhowomp40 4-” t}
c: on; .92 LL*O> 4... (Ummm‘oczEn‘ﬁgq ﬁlo“:
CD tam 3": H013 W whxml'ﬁm 0);; @E-Qm
a (0:5 “(‘5' (3%") (£3 omwngh@%0.ﬁg (D
5.. i (1) .C: wgmgc} 05C: 0,E>"5'
E was": c5:>*6 a “’00: ‘OEw-wgﬂwmwa
O 795: ”'5 CBC c; g.gﬁgmmméoﬁﬁmvc
8°63" " “”0: O EQEME'QQ'Eu-mzaaméé
0:02:31” CD 30333 c: gagﬁmgmmocuﬂmﬂmﬁ
maog a g3; ngwc‘éccgtﬁg-gg m.ﬁfmi
Egg: agoﬁm ﬁgm£ox%$$2$mﬁ<w0’
*" (6.0 mcw- E >~“‘“ 3’ mulfmcﬁl—GJGSQJ-
390:2}: {- «98—65 wmb‘gmm:mmmﬁ QwEEw
EON.“ C1 00"“ -§‘U'Emm£££.§*8$m DE
"'50) " CDQ_§ @3‘“HEH“} 5....“6 ?Qm@,§m
23M): 1:: 2'3“"; ~c>caclsmouwwsm~w
m.§>u— 12'me Oﬁngwmng~waﬁtwhaog
Ergo 'Eemga wmogmwnoggo‘:w=3mi
0....52 “’55: “3'66"" “Q’QQMOth “3-3033
<*>me Ummwg..n £33005 mwommwm ....
2:1:682-;m,ggguggogecg’zg®$£$Agﬁ
H m
£3ij fagg-mwgmggcg'gscmﬂggwg“88
QmwOUngs Uwﬁ'KHOQOMhEmHo-C "CEC-HO
gm LLQJIOCD §%moq> c'"w‘mQ*‘4-"3.93; OH”;
k-Q'EQ) “"53 g “" >ﬁ (U 3{3) gm 3 mzoaig. “-95.0
CDOZ>3<DH tU-Ccv'ﬁmm aé'o[-512.mimg:*_‘mm
ummu-mx—mg os—wghwugwwiwﬁg m“
:2: 85“ g ('5 *3an ° 0 Zé'fumEZ 3 ‘55 Owls. git)" "O; "'5
Sn Cmmr: LL. g5», mﬂmzlzocgmgw
C3.__E<E-‘: r—m ommw"? :3 ‘- a: -
1—- OS‘DMm-J—n-G) mmmg 6;th
H‘qcm wwE-wiw— 0):: LL.“
'“‘ E<LQ ‘3'”0 Ema:
COFCW“ . or) V w
“638)‘8‘9 93 gm? Cgcommﬁ ;
(Drum? :55 1.30)’.9 :omgwg E '
mama c3) 00) ﬁwﬁwmm .t
l i: “’05 03330030030. .

L”
N
Ci} 2
04; i
511“ 1...... _ é
C3 (U 05! ”C A m
g g 9‘45 i = .59 "- ““1
co 0:: 5 G35; E m = c 1
I..— E I won!“ ‘4“ EU a 5
o I o M0 c: c; :
“c3 5 D? I ~Q§3§$ :60 8‘5 a
....... .E Og'a <(- .032 a ‘2:
a} .__ L- , W E O
m «1;: 0.3:) (1) £14. :38
O 0 -...:-~ m LL
(D m g 0}me ;_ 5 NC) a V
- Z 3 ' ' 0 ‘~-“" (3 .>
O a) ““C‘Em ' --— ‘25: cu
.2: 031': ' c: go A *“
3:: .9, :5 avg 02 £3.59 E 0'3
g ‘0 e “a 21:: '35: <9
a‘ C: CD...__ C: G) O h" I
C: i CUQ'U E R c Q-
U) |‘ 32': E “£00 0) m9 3 ‘“" E
CD C I “3 Ex: ‘ CD. q3c}. c: E
a o m C}. a), 3;. 33(1) 3 C) ‘
<1: 0 9 .QBEM‘ uh. z: 2::
z... E (l) m 5:: 2500, Q 0*“ “h- (D
i '-- J ‘O—Ooc '-- “:5 E Z
Z .9 i 6-) E'ﬂ'ww U) 30 (a 4—:
LL 5: 3 ﬂ’ M.Eh’m CD OE: “‘- U3
i...- “ E i- 2.3-0.130 E .5: §""‘ In. '20.;
C3 '- .EE ms: '01 i H 3 a 14—"
‘5 a..- “u—o‘ ' O “Q; E G)
O Q) m mﬁntl i H m II“ “An
c: . 5.. G)! I 0 m
? 93 CD “7:3“ng ? .93 £5: ‘- w’Ez':
g ’ a a E """c62% ‘ g mgdgs gm:
; <1) E 5: 92‘5“ ‘- SEQ‘Q DEE
‘Ih-ﬁ l ’n HW'H Q- ‘Hm E
Q} Q .E 0') Emmg I Q 8&6‘5“ 25$
6 g Q. I .Q 91'.wa : Q’ Q‘ﬂU—jz g mg
.5: i G) b '9 {Um . 20. a... cut 00
E; 4-» a :chwaaz i EMQ£O_§. {‘03
'- 5 3»; Maﬁa): a.gﬁmmig 3})
3: ﬂ 3 CL; 0 Own: v.9bcmi'm 3.5
Q U) U); cwwm ' 633“"Eio 6J4“
-—— - <13 ‘9 .03 Err: a . 3:38me 42$:
t2 ’w ‘0 ”03-....0) mam ‘- ““‘ 1
6-) . 4"” w w-w v... ‘ CO: H M H
W}— C: c: >§ “:33 8- s CD} ““‘003033‘ CD ’
WC) "" O- “”3394; E3 Nimcu'oca cwi
G.) 2 2:55 3...: P“ «w; $030 00) '53
CL- u’) i m3 F'O ,____, EWWQE .QCG
m. c» a)“. 1; 35-13“? menu; wE
'U'U c: m Q) "H o “5‘“OHN-H‘b ag‘t:
$93 as £2 agga E| 'Eu§°2£a 72.9
~52 : c ch‘Q - 8 755' mggﬁmg 3‘5
ZQ. (U .— Lmbm L-l (D c®@.cE 13 0
m8 c 1 & case “IE amvamgm 0%
Mo .Q E '3 .Q~—~.c:.2 Z ; nmmggzwczm g
cavi "0 5; “LEE,“ i"; g; cusw—g: morn 0‘“:
Eat g Of 223%; C3? co Jiggggygﬁ d2?
5:. .._. g g 0) >5 ..._ :2 “C2503
g“? C” '””’ .3038? 2' “5 .og’Ef‘zcﬂ’gme m3;
:3 .S .9 LECQL-l 4'“ <1) Homm'aﬁ‘aE 13.:
“<33; 1:» m 23”“ C: m 00.9% 0 "3"”
(D (U Q. QWEQ H“ U) .03 GJUJt-ham 0-0
“8% n; :3 gigs.“ § :3 ghwc—J‘ﬁ‘? Kc
8:3 33 ‘E $Ta§$ E :3 agg.%zga= :0;
wt: "‘ (U :> '-~
,9: % o— .amgg, ‘93 ax 233m£vg $0:
“—9 CD :3 4:.me (‘5 .62: “Qwﬁwel =38
0.... ‘U *“ 3330(1) <1) H: O'aa’w‘“ 2'73 .
(DCG ”c; gwcn @ c:E “H E'hRHGJEm‘U
.mc “o a; cum; i ‘- 1:54;: WHC'OmwTo‘
O G) i H (D (U '4'“; (DI {DOG} $.95»... 71""
5.9.3 ‘0 '-- “3’ "U L): .,,_, 9.... oa’wh—
QCG—CZ C.) ‘H i
Q“: > (Drug ms (5 Hﬂm-uo
'-- E c: “.00: mm :3 CD u-_a_-: 3:30)?
13-0 (.3 '-_' CD “(13 O! -9‘ “OH...- L‘“ :5 92 C34:
8'“ <1) 85 ggszc CL :5. Eggmecgheg
. i "" Q‘“
8% $28 9; §§§53 g 3: xgg§az=§£ag
8.21%.; 0’ ‘z-Qgﬁsma618%0039w182
"" 2"" 3' 3335356): CD: 52- “Z'Qﬁmg “H
(3)15 CD :3 r H; ‘ Q) m u.__~o._-QUJCU
.ccr mt, 2 cung c3213! L_gwm “amu‘aszg
:h-GJ F‘s L1— ‘Uczcmm ‘1" :6 “9“"F'Emczsw'0wi
h 00> ‘5 8'5'33 z z Bigamgopgcg;
"'“‘ z " 'MO “‘n
my 3 (33.93% & Lg. Zr903“_gvgtcguw
”~*- E ”3'50 Q P“ U" <D>¢bz (Dim c
c:"“' 1 I Q i‘"‘-€‘~‘_8-=:“—«C=“1‘3$2cs:
owgfi 0’3 . mewF-tgqmw
.3: (13:0 wit, (*3 50') ‘ OEZQF‘E
omﬁww-Q “"8 Q mini 0"; N LQZ
@wmodDBWGJ-n 8 w'cLON 0'5 or)
{00—09 -wwmmu°€®n ONcLO c» .
“0—0) 'mmmmo mm‘g {:03 no
“9-0) 'mwmom‘HQ N
WmmminEO at .Q 5:8
mzmﬂ‘ﬁb (u; ‘8‘”; .9
:‘DCL‘ CD? ‘5‘”
030. $3
LL;

.Elzwimmmmtal ﬁg 56 381316311
1% H.213 a dmisian been made whether the. EA Will be 3 Screening <22? camprcherzgive study? DEN
axpec‘is :0 b9 mnsulisd in. relation to this issue.
a What is; the basaiina for the EA? is it a. pre—dismrbame baseiims‘?
w By Whai pmcess Will DTFN be consaited. 0:“: the. ideméﬁa‘:.atémix of value campenw'és ta be
asgesssed in. $126 EA?
ﬁgmmgjiﬁmiggf»;
'E‘Eze. NEE Filing Mama} states that 322:: appﬁcmmn muss? ciem‘ly idemify, describe and. justify What is
c-msidsred to be? ammg 01562" things, “0:126:17 activities and physical werks ma}: are énsviiable and win
occur if the applisd Jib}: prajmt pfroaeeKiss“~
in our vitm; i316: Appﬁaatien aims 110$; comp}? with this ZEQFJiE‘Sﬁ’iQm in {ha}; it dGﬁS no: considm‘ {he
patentiai impacts offthe: pipeline. {3013190216111afﬁx: ?mjeci.
In its Application, at pagé: 3.} Westwas’t sigma {hat the ?’ijE wiii 1&6 123:0 either TransCanada Pipelines’
:pmpescd Hem River I‘w’iainline Pipﬁlim, if camimcried, 0r Westwagfs E-Eishnet Pipsiiﬁea and that
apjpmvai far the: tieuin Wiél he appiiezed for separateéy N0 nmmion is made: elbow thﬁ _;:>roposed ti.e~in
optiom in the: ijs—zct Eﬁescripiizm E1“: the Envimmnemai anti SOCiQ-«Ecenomic Assessment. D'1“§:'N is
concerned that {his approach is eswzﬁiaiiy "fprqiectwspiitting”. The: ijec‘t cannot. Operate Without some:
kind of tie-in m a pipeline. As a remit it is inappmpriaieﬁ arid premammg to amsider the iject in the
absence of mnsidem‘ciom {3f the pipeiine mmpamni. ”E71719 pipeé‘ine C-Ofilpﬂneﬁi alternatives mad. :0 be
scoped mm the Project degcﬁptim in {hi3 .Appiimiiam 2.133;} cozzgidered in. Em: ﬁsssszzaem cemponems 0f
the Appiication.
E§Q®_®L®§zﬁm~ﬂ§§§iﬁm
Please advisse if; mid hmag :he Federai ﬁaﬂzarézations C(Hfssui‘éatiim P35010801 With QTFN (the: “Pmmad’?
win he. utiiized with respsct t0 the. ?t‘aject and advisa 213 m the feiiowing:
ﬂ What peymitsg decisicms 0y Emilaarimﬁms are requimd Which trigger operatian 0f the: Pmth
and Wha‘ﬁ: am {he pmcesses and time: ﬁnes f0? any such. decisions?
as} Wiii DTPN be ceizsisiéted in respect 0? 31%.)” decision. £72}: a federai department as to wheizher 01' 110E
provisions Qf CEAA are: triggered, pursaam ii} the deﬁnition of “Federal Amharization” in
Section. 1.3 of tht: Pir‘mmmi‘? {fnmﬁ why not?
@ Willi D’E’PN be censulied in mspeci 0f the, swping {)ifthe P103631; f0}: EA. purposes pursuant to Eha":
deﬁmtion Gi“‘"§3ed€1'aiAuthorizatim”insectim "E. .3 Gfﬁ'ge Proiocoi‘? 1'me why mi?

l
a i _ i “‘9: .
—‘ C i E 93:5 cm
1 3 O a C: -93 co EC: £5
.. "CS 0 1:3 4-4 -....;__ .C'.’ (0 0‘3
‘3‘“? '03 g “3:: E (U “c: ‘35 1.... 819 2:.
1'5 8; (b g ‘9 Z <0 "0-0 . mm “M;
w 3 '3 g q) :2 c: o .ﬂl-‘E <1) -92 <19 C:
'33:" I ‘0 22 ‘3’ "‘3 fisc .E :3 +5;
11313“ :9 93 s: g “2 9% a .38 .0;
........ 1.2% 8' --~ 0 m 131—; 3 1m»: m
Em 1. ‘5 o w pic: *“ 16‘” C!
@112 GD 0 n "c: L“ -w..._ “U W...» :5
£2.52 5 c: m 01.9 cm g 3 L90 8
>15 g... ~13 .3 3.311.93: 89 +_. i $.98 9
ﬁg "" E '5 “<3 5 8 25 g I Emilie 6:
3; 3 2 .x: E ' m 1L8 .g ggbg ;
"-— -i--'
3% g g a 9: .5 £38 -c= 8E3 3
“'5 L— - u: o. o (1)23;E a a: Q;
Ca) 3" O “- “cu f‘“ 3;. 4...:
Q> ‘0 z '6 a... £2). '5 c: 03:,“ E
a; ‘8 cu “- Q. (:2. M? <6 ‘05::2
c2; 3 c: :Q cu :3=:=: c:cn--- c1.);
‘0- m o o i
.90 8 .9 a .5: U) ﬁE H $320.. ﬁ‘
H m vh—I "" U) U)
5335 3 4:. 5 “— 3 “5 aid) 0'76 cﬁg 33
o-‘2 E c.- '5 .92 g g :0 Egg :3an g
(0") w 0 ,q, C) I 1...! ﬁg "" Z”;
“-3 "3 $3 13 U i “I :58 95—" 11.0“5 .9
0’0.) m m .9 | 1:33 Ow 3.9! ;._c:‘2_ (9
~05 a Z a o c: h-w 113'W {3038 w
E .h' u 5“ "- 0):: w“: l.— (5
0‘0 ‘H ‘3’ v; Q- il ca :50. 3 a)” .__
----w- a ,3 l“ a D-u—I- iE:§ ‘0‘"; 4...; 5'"
gm EB) 4-“ ”a O) 0.03 i Q 15:43...“ O.
1;: {1:3 8 C E Eon EEQE icu'wg 9
mm "*1 ““‘“ 1"” I . -—-..:
“‘16 E c: g 33 1 c “51% Imwm :2 a: a g
6:: “a “5 3 g ? “5 wit Egg i§€5w 0:
CO E: " Ii; SE 753“” F0038 CD
(Dc: ‘3 1+- --. 0 CD 02(1) (60;: ...Q-o-¢ O
“’0 en 0'10 w .1: ”L? ino 1::
931.319 (.3830 (U «(—6 “Elm 95-0—0 £43 E
'93 ’: gﬁi‘g E M 0950 C: c2..L-: @136 CD
'5‘: ig 0W9 3 w «933 “'8‘” 57‘3"“: '9!
8 1:: qu “(:3 0-3 'a‘z" 8H6; m‘C‘” E
:30) u..- C"..- --__.. £1 cam w:-‘: :3
.4,“ g; mEm>~m w 80:: 0mm cane: 0
HQ- p: ‘5“.5?) (D! 2.75% GEO} c: '05 33
3929353 O&Mo "63’ (6C3 0W5. "~99 wi
mmzm‘u‘mmcu ... g .90: waaa; a: £2 03:
5$9=§m§s$g% ‘0 0:342 “(00 $8: $5
5' - 1 i .C: m 1
Q. himoomiomﬂg I c: CG.) L. @0‘" z=
OCmM-oaav‘a; 52 1 C E 0:33 Eco .0; .
$8.:f'ﬂﬁﬁgg‘ﬁg 1 § gig gag 832m :4
35329893123; l 0 ”?:‘w -Qﬁo— #3160. g:
'agwktgmmﬁzg 8 9353;12038-1 mﬁo c»!
mQJQ’WﬁmBuot-o 1.... M39115: £13m .9
OM'QS>'"m'~C-m Q :5 Hmﬂcé Ga) 0
@330 "3 c: await o Q... 2:» 0:53 63,21,203: 15031;: .3
‘°""' $a'“omo-*O C3) 1...? ch""_c§ lum‘Ctzz O
8%xgsha’aﬁa o gamegm 10153 .c:
(D Q03 :1:). 1 ’“‘ ---®s~»£::n BE cue.) '33
co 0 R c: ngw m , 0m, m-mmgmm ; gag
'*30100wm:=cm 1-0"); Egg; “3‘0 ~- E
m,“ .. ‘“‘”: 1 0:51 03:3);20303 “£7501:
~w919622!-§%£~—2 0513,1369 1x30 .9
<B£-a=®:;wu_im 4—- ; (330‘ “mchvl’ ‘GJOQ" 5
swwgésgesgs 83 35.1.1me 5&9 w
wwo o :5 c: (D :23 “C1. cu c:
+—' a_n'Ggg-EB 33‘” ‘9'"ﬁmm I“) 351. (D
U) (D 03 0') 5:52:
sgwﬁmgewga 8g Eggigm E89??? ,3
a ‘ -—-—~ *4
vgﬁ'gm oggug 9;; mugogg “,3 z
§w®¢3%gh=u*asu L 92.0ng 32% u.
23 U-giwwm-‘D‘DC two“ ZEH-tr-‘ioh (35.x ‘33
goghccgh‘uﬁg’ 1:38 HQ‘DPO‘Q
- m . ,
- <1- ‘ LO '
(’0 (Q N c: g ,
E ”0 cg: E8: mg“? 0 .9 91
CO“) 010 ,2 mgwm Lav” ‘H 4:31
0 ~~®mmmwﬁi HO) 0‘ 0 033
1:30 WmiQ'U'JC—D C310“) 00‘; CD 1...":
8% 8mgm‘fmw‘7gﬁgga com ‘0 3
l co m... U) 0.. Eco -<r £1. 00 ~<r z mm~———~~w~-w-

. E
= i
h i
N E
i1; 4“ “g g g m
m 0 (D '8’ G) a; (D g
a e '5. E 4-; x L.
m“ a w m l 8 *3 E 0’3 ‘3"
m 18 1‘3 I “t: O I i E *— 3 9
a) m (D m 4: i 02 E “
C1. -( l... ,...... CT) 5 :4: g ('6
>5 0 g; :3 ‘ Cu- 2 .c:
“w 8 E I ......' Q 033““ E i‘-
‘ 03 cc 4:: z :3? '53 i
3': C)... ‘ Q! g Ei - f (D
U) U 5 . I.- { C:
E a) £2; a)“, E m s (D
a *" “'3 1 g“ '98 5'5 £3 ..,-
“'" O 31-"... .
t: 8 :m g 9. .20 ﬁg :2 g 8
o nuan- c E n WM U33..- (U H .—---5
0. im a) . ...... 80.. C a_- L, 8
<1: 5.9. E 'U a: .9 Q m . Q.
=- 0 <1) 4:33.: C: >~ “" E
--—- (5 .503 . 2:: 'cu— , C: ' c: .9 g
g .cU)‘ - *5; 00, <12 ‘0 $03 1‘: ‘
QDIQ 0} tie)! x C»... 0) CO P...
E “m, 0,. Cmf m c:c_ c: {3. -
o 4}. E . m 003* cu -;—_ :z: w G)
1.... W CU I 3": C: (D w
0'} .Qm X9) 0'} mm M. '3 C 0 Ci 3 G)
g 1-5.5 0.3:: g cm ”5i 0 ‘D m. 03 as h
:3 noihw 2 O “58 m; E 93 a CD 5?
co ”0:150 o. E m g...“ (Di -~w E
E O 0 g z E (1)} “C3 1.27: U) C: >. GS
« 5....6‘) (1) E 0.0.... Q) OEO‘O mg;
<12 go 39% :3 UJOi 0 3th“- c3303! “3
.2 3‘“ - cc ‘6 wag; 9 HM- 03 5.9; <13
'53 ~90" 0349‘ 0 £1.52: CL 35% U) gm .9
3‘3 "8&33’5 8! 55‘ f: ‘38:: 01: S
E 0.4—»;3 (DO (13: ‘5'"“w 33“: D.
"- D. .c: f (D (1)0) : 0 <1) :1) g.
0 Qw’ﬁ-w , _h “:3 -9}: 0—5 3- 3;. (0 (1)5
m gm {-3} o a [ :5 go (0? ma: :3 0.9 E!
{.0 a) 0-H O“ *— GJ‘ c: 0‘” 0-”:
CD .9 >""” o a: 05:3, “o M g: “5 m a a);
r: #2332»? h 25:” c: '5 O ‘1’ 21‘5"“ 5’!
g m 32-58 1:: m8 o 305 8 “‘1
g a.glw—g; 3 m9. 2‘5: gw_m 8 5, ﬁg
5. 03:30:: o.’ m E”: g ‘3', 0%. 5,9: 8'
O OwE-Dw 4:1.) 1:0 (B CD mas: o a... .___
a ﬁwidg & PE '35 "'5 wggg “3-9 .9
o. <13 go.) .a: :0 <1) ”a mu; g'a :
‘5 Ed)”: 9 ‘3’ “i “(Di *- ‘--* m8 0 <9
(D gmhwm {—3 8‘ 3.2: cu 803.5] mg; 8
*" 01.me ‘9 s: G’a)‘ o :3)th 53*“ 9
. “C3 1.... :03 c 'c C“! +-' ‘E‘“ (0} '5 C33 '3
C: C '0 0 C O 0 Q ; C: “E <33 c:
0 “5 3:393:33“ =5: r: “555' “a Qségi mm %
m '0‘... -- CO :2 "W “‘“E (‘5 ....
8 8.3803069... a? o “31- 5; Sim-ﬁ’ “"53 “as
.H CZ'U M O»;- Q' E EC) .4: gig: 0 £5 :—
8 “5 ‘3’ ”'3 mm a cu .._. a; ' t-w as C m c:
m :5 BUDEOE .— Q. (‘5 L_m c: c: o c: O c:
O mcgaaoag c 0 ga c: saga 0% i=1
G3 'a-- um...- -- o ----——+~ =5: :6
l... 4—; £2.23 (6 0 ‘1'" C: CD“) u... 4"“ 0:5 t '4'“
35 030 G.) lo :3 0 E .9 EC. H c: on c: _..__, o, .5
{‘3 g cz‘g'o-a “*1 «o '53?- 0% 2| 9% g 5-9: mg
g "o q; wqgo --i 1“: 3. 39: “’5 "- ‘3 >~ o “3; O
”aeawia a; g: man 8; 88% 0%! 0|
w '—_‘ O") 00— 99': E "'- E CD
g BE$EQ¢QE 3 §I 8' E0; 3; $35 $5: 9:
>5 Emmi... :3 E 3... (D; L... L...“ Iﬁ-E‘ .5
m CUF-imﬁi‘gw E w; 8 o :1 “‘55- 30;! 0‘
CD 39.65 0333 m 0‘ 5;: 091' ”:J[ :3 5-63 C3“ ’ <12
456 O‘C‘GJ ST) (2) o I: :3 5:.9 cl 8-03 E 9') gl 5“
E (.0 ‘5 5° ““1: "" m (D (U: . 223: me Li.
L__ O O m > 3 L“ L- 2 LLO LL. 0 F-
o 5-3.ng (Die?! 2 L“ m . I“"imsx CD-g [:1
o ZtF-"E-gh‘sm u. g; 25 *5 mow-
0’3 ”— 8 ‘1’“..82‘3 I S {:3 i—0 c:
EL 3"" 0.53;...«5 (D Q C33. 05
C3 (‘OEH‘Q i C) “<3" CD
(9 § x i 0) “"03 1 C: '— C:
; .— E 00“) (:60 cm) g1) O >8
3 a "'31 a ~52 “voo‘*®9m~=w3% cm
":6; ma: L. “(D.Qm’mmdsmg‘gﬂ—m {1(1)
-~= ‘“ i 0’ w‘BmQ-qucvwo- «(co 40”
m; w a. c: C: Q as £2.09“ magi“?!
c2! ‘1: m] m <13 9-” <(C0Il.<ﬁ
(pi 3’ (9 (94(00-
wi C9 Q 5

co .
N'
m i 5 -3 —.
€12. : i E g:
:13- +_;i a i
{1290, 8 05 03 | i
u...“ (D (D . 1
>5 0 s... E
m i... :5 (D I
g i :1. g q; >-
I E“ g g a: i3 i? i
8 .53 g «2’ 3"" E
.0: ”t3 -—- E E8 k
(1) Q) "'55 “cs f
"" “i “o E£1". ”E
a 8 ~— E °° “—1
u-u m (D .9...) :5
o «w '0 ,9 :2: o
..... 5 C: C :t: > W
E i 09 “5 3’ «3: co
0 j E w 2;: £08 3-“... (6
c: 6.) CD 0 ‘3’ (D
o ‘26 :3 “3 EEC” E3 ‘* I
o __ "$5 CD WE cc “3
c5 2 8: L..- .CDQ 0 <1)
E '8 <0 +9 57E .92.. '5‘ I
O >5 C5) OE “O o 8" i
U) i .11: C: O C).— s... Q: .
(:2. ‘m E (DE (2). a)
'g m .9. 5 C” CD ~51
0:5 :5 'E G) q..-§ g 4....
O CI : """
g C 3::- QE CUIQ "C5
3 q, 5“ mi 0 --c: '0 c
' £3 0 .Si c: (1:1; 9 3
c: u... 73! '3 cto ~-— 8
o U: Q o .Q'CD :3 ‘-
5... (3.} Q Q) M-n-w C3” :3
'S i 0 c: "W (69 (D m
5 m ...... O “D... s“
C: ; O L... CD S... 'C}
Q) : w D. :51 (D C:
. w o (D «M
m s... G) (D 03-3: (U CD
(3 I Q. '——I 4: >4” w
w o .H . E E 09
O c: h 0.9.. .4... C:
i H a) Q. o 8- o <0 o
I 2:: co: «w CD as“ 3-" > ""
' o. c»? “H 5-9 “W 1:: ~93
cc :2 CD 0»- “5 m :3
cu «s; a): E =3 <13 03 cc
_9 m. m, :3; mice .c: E ---
H (5 G) E "am 4—! 1....
4—4 1.. U)
0 c: “3; Did” "‘3’ (D a:
Q <13 m w; mgr c: :5: .9-1
Q c» c; “‘32:. m “5 0:
g E 2'5 0% 0ch C:
: "<6 :2 m 1.1:? 422%: m “5 w“
' i... O U) (Q[ Hi .4: Oz
cu *- "" H 0%“ E E C?
C: ‘5 "CD" CD Mi!” s... U) (DE
:3, e.) m g ....:m 0- e w‘
E i 3:”; >‘ >~ 8.; 33! g E!
H g mi % g -g 5:? "as; 8 L.
0 O o ‘7': C C? O (”l
c: ’55 O O: 2:“: ‘5'
2m -9 o 0! cc: 5; g G),
«3...; ._. m ~..—..—i .9 o o: :5...
mo £9 ‘0 (U; +£2.13 2:: C5“
:02 _._. m x; .93“ <5? “I 0
m... :s :3 :3 m: z: c. *5:
£9 8 m 0)! :3 :3 --§ ........
0C2. C: CE 030) (n w? M
m] L): Q . 0 o o 0-3 Q.
m a 0 DO I:
033:3} w; “3 co! ‘3 --- .E
3 E ""i .h ‘: ma.) G)! a)
i 3.22 :3; :3 :3 xx .2 hi 9
5 (D123 0. C)" :3“ 2'5 3 _ :3 '5; .5
‘ s_cv Q 0: cu 0‘0“"0' C"? o-
2'33 “ =- Q‘DECD CD? cu
u. “3 Z Z! Z ‘— 5 L" L"E “
._ [:3 Q Q imiw—CDH rm: 4...
QQEQ Q: Q
g N «3 ~<r 2;; m WW
T" " -
é mag 2w wﬁim“ m a we 3wl©
>0 gowmcw-«Ccémo 53;: ' *7 V" w
<13 -'.."5 CD .--—~ (1)).9 > 0 >3 {U o (9“ CCD— 5:53!" C
C33 Qomasmd‘wm -2330.) .u) ,3... CD>O >0 t>o
<6 qmmiammaomqomgmycgc‘é -wG>-maag-m
a. qwasqmaqgcﬁgmwagmmmv‘%&8%%8mlqo
wa<vm§m®a<m¢l<m32g

m
N _
51;“) 5
WP; ‘ I
; m 5
:2: c: i "U m I
53°“ EI " g g g g
. Q. 4-» :3 i
a) (I C: U' .
CD _0 (D 93 :m
. :3 m E g 0
. w ‘5: a; >~ Z C:
m] .9 . 33 .9 g g
...... a} Q. 5"“
E, E g g; E i :3 CD”
'33 C Q. “g - o <13
a g 8 SE § '33)“ g
)5 14:, ..... G) L“ ‘
:2: g g; 8 9 Q8 ”5
. g .3: .-:.—'rI 2: g 28 3
o g E! ’63 75 3: 8 8
c: m 1:5i £5 :2 00°
. .9 c: s: O .9 C9 E
«(—6 -C 05 G.) E .9 Q35 C:
3:: Q 33 I: .9 “55°?! *9
(:15) “E m M 1': ’ 3553 *5
.... .c: - “'—
. czi O .33 :2: E "(5 5 E
<13r E w B CD :4: “‘
O Q f: O O
m c», ct: c3: -— 04': “5
cu .QE (:5) £2; '0 . o .....
.1: “U c: .Q‘ 3 I g :1 ”H
8-“ a '8: m g : 4.. "° %
s... -...... C Q) O -c (D O;
s g; ”a E; 8 8 T” ‘5 9
O‘ 6 m: C: Q I ~08)? 'g
”E E Ch: L—
»I .93.. 1:: GE) .23 ' 3:: Q"
8, e, g E w ‘9'; g
‘ 2%? “i c: o: 9 93 a) Q.
Q G): “"' OI 'CS (‘5 l“ (U
(0 .Cl (0: I <1) :3
=— w' w 9 w 8% .2
(Di 0: U) '0 CD ' 1"“ Q)
m m! ,0") E h :35 >
Q) my
1:; 25 m; (D (U 823" .12;
£9 ._... C: “(:3 g 035) C:
» 5:: g; "Ci 3 co 553:9: g
:8 ‘26? $ 0 '9 *5 E C
{'0 ......I £0 _0 § (1) a, CO
3 z 9 :3 8i é ; «Ca; 5:.
4-H Q) “i *""'" 0 >8 I
Q in: g' “E3 :2 | C— ‘33 ES“I
m. .0 :3- :5 O 030 c:
LL. :2: h h 0 «~15 (D
4...; C: I mx 5::
m 3-H DH 0 '9 I >3 3
i .0 C: c: Q Q ! mm C:
£2. {'61 (U (D 8 (D 8 O
59 C: c: I: 4:: O
'55 O c) ‘H 5: “Q C:
i g E: g: B O 58: O
O o C: *
3 -.—_-. :3 g 0 8° 5
(D g £9. 1:33 “ES 2:5; “
0| 3; '5 8 g , g C Q
g c: g g m E a g 55,: .
r h” 8 O O C: I C: CD 5:
z o Q C: 003 O...-
I E‘ <33 ch 33 com wzl
I ..... 9—“; .h .2 $9 $3 83
z CD 3’: =3 :3 "-— mi hrs .2
a g C}— C" :3}...
E «wt CD a) O- Uﬁ—‘i :30) :5
E O L- L. 9 gm; g-E g
(DI LL. LL: 2 Z.E 2.9.
. a [m p.‘ E: LEE; LL'E E
Q 0 cs: mg 5 g 5:
: i
E N w [ n... I
N i -00 . CD,
v:- <97 :02 «38 ﬁ ‘* N
co Scwgcémgéwc . .. ‘T‘ ; NH *
m 'I-I-HQ) 'ZaT-ICD .13; (1) ' .9 I O T" >
Qommoma 0 2'4—4 03 ... 0
CU o.cumgq; 0030—0 CDEQQO ~wc3<D .35
c1. <mm;qw§%£§g$*woawwg ggwgg 82",
I “H ,, '
: <00-~—<<D£OQ— <09wa 5ch

a “Wm"...
M 1
m- i
I‘l-M. ‘- “i:
53“. E! I; g
(B G) g
1.... C: G)
c» “(:3
O. a >., C
a g g :3
o, I E g
n: C 015]
.1: -;m H
i ’2 Egg 3:
5 Egg .9
c) Emﬁ %’
:1; ‘ Q’EO .....
CO E59 .9
5 an”. m
2 33w} a
r 8 . (2% 8
r ml 73.83“; o
4...:
o. «2-—
(U CZQQ a
i...
Q“ ' 8.2.305“ “3
“' ”$3303 0);
a "g :3 a)
? 55 £203 .9
’ EL"? £1wa ”'63
(Drum
] cut» 0 w
0’0 £mo ..
3 (ch “L... 0.:
co— hag 433%
m8”) amt: 0
EU “Diem E
1 ((503 ._-&=
g “C: 23:30: O
f Ca) C” (D 4—»
m-w (DUO
1 Eg “9%; £3
rt: 0)
‘ 85 wi&$ a)
5.... {Z}. ,0
-~>-~o Elm w
(5' “E
r O.“ Qw'mo mi
3* a ch-
0% Qoug g
3'3” :38“) m
be. 'm c:
”’0 3:60 o
‘5: o.—_.:: -__.
0'5” 3:2“ .Q:
0:" 0’00) c.>' ,
“g2: ”-=.S m
’ 8o— gﬁ‘ze’ 3
Q.E “mg 0
5° C£§.-E
: (:0 m¥ﬂ~$>s
0% 2813.93.51
2.7-3.5 (5.2? mm
mm 030:: cc:
ca) 9:08:0“3
Ok- 9 O w
(3:5. Oomwmm
m wﬂ'cs mg
was wm._f'5....
0’09 h‘m>_ga>8
‘58 ‘s'wemeg.
3 “" 80.3 .
0‘63 3410—
: 91%; Mia-
2m Zwe s I
1.1.03 1.1.0) E
H39 F": i
DE (DE- .
E .munnm_—l
'" “4 E .53!
N - NN' m c:
0’4 “2v: .mcr; g Q)
. w >0“ >00; cu E
(D :-'m(D .mm, CCLE
*‘m ’ron Q8m 630.0
*‘m o.cnm Q. Q“ (Dino
«5m (:00. <0)

? =4 122*0'o'w
i ﬁw? 1%.; ~37“ - . { , -_ A w
1 77: :' 5-.I‘f1i\:. ﬁgit 2mg” ': ‘~-‘-f~1 r m -9. : saga _
' ‘ 7 Area of Interest Sf":*::*~——~;.._,.j “’1? '2‘ : §‘ P?Q‘LEF‘ * a
‘ ? =-«'£a- . - . ' ~3£§§ra‘ ' - , :
' i ' i?” ‘ -. ' “:23 25:3 ' , 4 '.“_‘ l
L q. 30 . , 1 $5} 2 1‘ 4; 3 13““;4 ;
. ~» , a4 ﬂ 5 n? V 1m»: p . J s
“K * E? ' ‘ ‘3 "i ' ilk" ' “
- ~ I .r - ,‘x ~
I . x y V 1:, v w m}
I ' ' , ‘ 2-:21 '9'}; ' f I“ {
533 x « I . A 3 f” géa‘
“:35" J34) ‘1; ~ 9 “E ;::---.. I (m 5’ g
--_ ”0‘3 \\ ' 7' ' h ""9334 .‘ .. ‘3. N
r . x‘- ; V‘Q'v r l i
, ‘\ =$¥§ i’JA‘ " ‘ .'
w a , -r ‘ fig:
? ” {51$ .' “ 3.. vs ‘ 3‘"
; ' w- - g ‘ ﬂwaé's;
+ I y w x w)? 1
\
* 1“”.49' ~ I ‘.,.«
.~'~é‘:4¥4 *’ *4 ‘I‘
, e . .L ‘ .. 3- ‘ . A A
‘ a ’ ?"q ’" \’\\ ' ':-‘1 ”1““
. .,_ - $59.: - 5‘. $5
7 ‘- ~ ‘ " ~27 . 4”? 3' a 1;? ‘“ ~
0 ii: ‘%94 32;; -6? 33%“ ‘M W;
~_4.__ h ’ \ g? - =‘ . ‘ : rt» ‘ . 33% 7_ -, v—T
‘ a ”m 33 $3 33"; g a (M ~ . " ”35:53
v . : m ' "9“”? ix: § ~..~ x
. Q ‘ ‘ . ','-'_,.sr{-;;;LL “w. K ‘ hi“ ‘1 513% .4 £53523??? 5 . . _ ,
v ‘ ' wag?» :-
‘ 5% ~- --- nag;
i ‘ . - ﬁ- .\_ .. _f§'3§‘7-; -_. a ‘2 ~;-“";:i ad .
'7 2'. v 1"; ‘ $4; «izévm‘ 33 ‘St‘g i?£§~ ,- k '1 ' ‘ ".
°___"» --. ,' “$5 ~13- - 5: -. ‘ #1:: — ‘ ..' j j I'
3 ‘ '7’ ‘ , ~ ’ i” ‘ “-m .- O I - g, g '-1? '1: -"i;%~-.;‘fji-‘- . 21:1 o' vi 3 .
. ‘ "“‘ 7- r~--‘- ,, __,_' ﬁ - v g _, :3" d :r.5'”~:~:i~‘u1 .- ‘ ‘ ,, A '_
£7 . 9’ aa’é‘g ﬁg? 3? 13:5,. “W ‘ ‘9
‘ I‘ i ' 2.3-: 'A ~- ) “i ‘ 3:27.:- ‘
1 “W " " "I u g "1 a?” .' ~23“ b '
‘ ‘ ‘ ' *‘ \‘ir’ g 5,". - ~:-.-.~‘-;-: ‘ ‘O ‘1 ‘
: e ‘ x = , gxwﬁw Légg : g , 7T 59
* . . . .. ﬁg :~k.¢’ﬁé a -
~ - 7 *x‘?’ - "i a Wife "Vﬁﬁﬁﬂ
I-i ' E“?! éﬂ‘lﬂé r'i‘g-‘J‘Z‘Qs 3‘5 +1951
3 ,. NJ , - e, ”aw .
writ,“ — J . \ 4 .
l f ‘ “1» ”i‘a ?g‘V‘W’M: "
'- z - gafmw - :
' w? ‘5»;- d:? a s} 3%“ ﬂ: ‘ ‘
7 ‘1‘“??‘ie‘EJf ‘3’” 7’ l “ - Q? ~2- 1"- "ft: ; ‘ggr-u, ii: , li‘ %
> ."Ii‘hi‘i 4.33.5 gm. 1"" ‘31:; e. 4 5‘:- ‘ . “kg K3 .3; :1 j; .J.:“:,,;»«:v;
H :-pf;-.,f i=2 a‘ V‘ Q *I - :71 ”’23:“: , 1}“
w; “m - -. m- ‘43: 7i t ‘ w '-* W“ *‘ﬁ i s
- m“ ~,. . ~M e a ‘ ' ' ~ rm}. 3%
a $3,” 5.! “m. xxx «1: »*m¢9. 3 ﬁg 92%
L ﬂ..1_,_-I~i~ii~;'u. ﬂ; ‘75".'T:IL‘:§2‘W. ”M a «— ?:?E‘l'ngHL ; , . géé. é;
egend "‘ ' ~ 3 =~ H
SEpe'Ctra FN North PrOjeCt -Proposed Diqturbances DRAFT DATE 09/08/2
X|Sti (Arcis Sahdganah Creek. E C , 009
. - mine)
|Stu rbances .- E‘Ist'ng Diﬁurbances (OGC and Encana data} NTDB" OGC' Encana‘ Spectra, TCPL

‘3?

We £00k ferwm‘é t0 heaﬁ mg §er you 033 these matters.
Yams truly:
lanes Freedman Kyle. Law {faz‘para‘zﬁim
Per:
Regamte M iayic
RMKﬂ'ejz'
Enciosure '
cc: DT.?N Chief am} Councii

Vamie Bonnes, DTP» Lands Department

Trzwy Campbeli, Cailiou Gmup

Robert Freedman, James Freedman KyEa-z Law Csrporation

Wesicoast Energy 11113., Arm: Peter Spickc? (via courier)

APPENDIXA
Petehttal information Requirements to assess potential impacts of the Preject en
DTFN’S Seetteh 35 rights .
Set out below are a number of questions which, in our view, would hetp guide any planning
process related to potential impacts of the Project on DTFN’S section 35 rights. DTFN’ would
be happy to engage in consultation on the questions and suggestions below.
Exercise of Rights ... Preliminary Questiens

1. Does the Federal Crown dispute whether or not DTFN has existing, constitutionally-
protected rights within the vicinity of the Project?

a) What tends, if any, does the Federal Crown say have been taken up under Treaty
8? Within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in 8.0.?

b) For any lands taken up or occupied, is the Federal Crown aware of any
consultation that was carried out by the Crown in respect of such taking up of
lands? Please provide details. .

2. Has the Federal Crown conducted a pretiminary assessment of the strength of claim
. and assessment of impacts

a) Throughout the parts of DTFN’s Traditional Territory in 8.0 where the Project is
being proposed and where development, such as forestry and conventional and
unconventionai oil and gas, are being contemplated/have been appiied for?

b) What information, guidelines and/or policy has the Federal Crown looked at if
such an assessment has been made?

3. To what extent, if any, does the Federal Crown factor in potential impacts of the Project
and subsequent development on DTFN’s ability to meaningfﬂlly exercise its rights?
What information and factors go into such an assessment of impacts on'section 35
rights?

2
impacts at industrial Activities on DTFN’S Traditional Territory

4. What steps has the Federal Crown taken to determine the extent to which industriai
deveIOpment within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in 8.0., which has already been
authorized by the Crown, has already deprived DTFN of a meaningful opportunity to
exercise their rights?

a) How does the Federal Crown define “meaningful opportunity” in terms of the
exercise of DTFN’S rights?

b) Has the Federal Crown consulted with DTFN on what
ecosystem/environmentai/socio~culturai conditions are required to sustain
DTFN’S ability to exercise their rights how and into the future and to provide a
meaningful opportunity to exercise their rights?

5. What steps has the Federal Crown taken to determine the extent to which approval of
any oil and gas and forestry that have already been approved and/or apptied for within
DTFN’S Traditional Territory in [3.0, would deprive DTFN of a meaningful opportunity to
exercise their rig hts?

6. is the Federai Crown of the view that there will be or already is increased human and
financial hardship and expense to DTFN members to exercise their rights as a result of
industrial deveiopment within DTFN’S Traditional Territory in 8.0.?

7. Has the Federal Crown assessed what lands and associated resources (wildlife, fish,
water, air quality, access) DTF N requires to carry out its constitutionaily-proteoted rights
now and in the future? if so, what specific information was assessed?

8. Has the Federal Crown, identified any lands within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in 8.0
that will permit DTFN to exercise their rights now and into the future, based on the
answers to the previous questions above?

a) if the answer is no, why not?

b) If the answer is yes, what criteria did you use to make this determination and did
you consider what use other F irst Nations, Metis and other persons are making of
these areas and what thei:~ future needs are?

0) Did you consider the direct and cumulative impact of other industrial activities
within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in [3.0 or Alberta when making that
assessment?

9. What federal permits, iicenses and approvals have already been granted for oil and gas
related development within DTFN’S Traditionai Territory in 8.0?

3
10. What federal permits, ticenses and approvals have been applied for in relation to oii and
gas that have not yet been approved within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in 8.0.?
Regienat Benchmarks i Targets
11.Are there any regional benchmarks or targets in place to assess the impacts of
industrial activities on the rights of DTFN in the 8.0. portion of their Traditionat
Territory?
8) If so, then what are they?

b) How are they aimed at assessing impacts on the rights of DTFN?

12. is the Federat Crown prepared to consult with DTFN on the following, prior to approving
the Project:

. a) To identify the key resources (species, numbers, uses, air quality, water quality
and quantity, etc.) and lands that DTFN requires to sustain the exercise of its
rights, such as through the devetopment of and funding for a Traditional Use
Resource Ptan?

b) The deveIOpment of appropriate baseltne data, benchmarks or related measures
for wildlife, fish, associated habitat, air, water quality and quantity and other

. resources on which DTFN rely to carry out their rights, to ensure that potential
impacts on DTFN’s rights 'are properly and fully assessed and accommodated?

c) To prepare a baseline inventory of all such key resources?

d) To establish effects modeling and proper scientific rigour that can be used to test
the conclusions reached in the EA for the Project?

e) To imptement regional targets/benchmarkslmeasures for DTFN’s key resources
and habitat to preserve DTFN’s ability to exercise its rights in the face of the
development of its Traditional Territory/to serve as an appropriate and
meaningful measure against which to assess potential impacts of the Project,
and industrial development, on those rights?

f) To identify critical lands that should be protected from further development, to
ensure that DTFN retains a meaningful opportunity to exercise its rights?

9) To work with DTFN to identify and assess the cumulative impacts of all existing
and reasonably foreseeable development on the rights of DTFN including, for

example:
i. Projects which do not themselves trigger an assessment under BCEEA or
CEAA?

4 .
ii. Projects beyond those that have been applied for or approved?
iii. The tenures that have already been granted, the potential development of
the same, and the potential impacts on DTFN’s rights?

h) To implement rigorous monitoring and assessment programs, on a regional
basis, to ensure that DTFN’S key resources and lands do not fall below the levels
required to sustain those rights?

i) To develop credible and detailed reclamation measures for land, water, air,
wildlife, habitat, vegetation and other important matters on a local and regional
basis?

j) To determine how the development in DTFN’S Traditional Territory in 8.0. has
adversely impacted or infringed DTFN’S rights and how further development can
be done to avoid or minimize such impacts or infringements?

l3.To the extent that the Federal Crown is prepared to engage in consultations on all or
any of these items, could you please identify:

a) The statutory and regulatory mechanism(s) by which the contents of any such
consultations will be integrated into existing decision-making processes for
regulatory approvals?

b) The means by which the contents of such consultations will be integrated into an
existing/on-geing regulatory/approval processes for existing applications under
review?

c) How such consultations and any necessary followup will be carried out in
sufﬁcient time to be taken into account in all relevant statutory decision-making
processes? '

d) The process and timeliness by which consultations be carried out, including when
and by whom?

14. if the Federal Crown is not prepared to do so on any or all of these items; please explain
why not?

Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
Dene Tha’ First Nation
Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Environmental and Socio-Economic Impact Assessment
Final Report
Calliou Group
www.calliougroup.com
(P) 403.453.1405
(F) 403.453.1402
                                                             Final Report
                                            Dene Tha’ First Nation
           Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                           For
Environmental and Socio-Economic Impact Assessment
                        Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
                                                              Prepared For:
   Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
                                                                   Calgary, AB
                                                        National Energy Board
                                                                   Calgary, AB
                                                               Prepared By:
                                                                 Calliou Group
                                                                   Calgary, AB
                                                               On Behalf of:
                                                        Dene Tha’ First Nation
                                                          December 4, 2009
                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
 Information collected for this study remains the sole property of
  the Dene Tha’ First Nation. Citation, use or reproduction of the
information contained in this Final Report is permissible only with
        the written consent of the Dene Tha’ First Nation.
                                  1
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Executive Summary
The following Report, Dene Tha’ First Nation Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study:
Westcoast Energy Fort Nelson North Processing Facility, for the proposed Westcoast
Energy Fort Nelson North gas processing plant (the Project), is intended to identify
Dene Tha’ First Nation (DTFN) Aboriginal knowledge and traditional land use
information in the vicinity of the Project located in northeast British Columbia and within
the western portion of Dene Tha’ First Nation traditional territory. This Report also
outlines Dene Tha’ First Nation concerns with the proposed Project, as expressed by
interview participants.
For the purposes of this Report, the Study Team reviewed 19 interviews conducted with
Dene Tha’ First Nation members. It is assumed that information collected is
representative of the broader Dene Tha’ First Nation population.
Based on the interviews, the Study Team concluded that DTFN members extensively
use north-eastern BC to exercise their Aboriginal and treaty rights, including hunting,
trapping, fishing and gathering. Specifically, study participants described the Project
area as ideal habitat for many of the plants, animals and fish harvested by DTFN.
Numerous environmental changes throughout DTFN traditional territory were reported
by participants. The reported changes include a fragmentation of animal habitat,
increased access to their traditional territory by non-DTFN people, decreased animal
populations, lowered water quality and decrease in vegetation availability and quality.
Most participants attributed these observed changes to an increase in industrial features
including pipelines, cutlines, wells, gas plants and logging.
Based on the amount of Aboriginal use identified, and the environmental changes
observed in areas of their traditional territory, many study participants expressed
concerns about the proposed Project in addition to the several other proposed Projects
in the Horn River Basin. Concerns included: impacts to water, wildlife, fish, vegetation,
human and animal health, increased non-DTFN access, limited DTFN access,
consultation process for the Project, and cumulative effects.
                                              2
                                                                                   DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                   Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                              Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Table 1-1: Potential Impacts to DTFN Treaty Rights
      Treaty                 Category                  Concern                        Interview
       Right                                                                          Reference
Hunting               Wildlife - General      Decreased animal                 D. Ahkimnachie; R.
Trapping                                      populations and/or animal        Pastion; J. Penner; D.
                                              health                           Wasp Colin; R.
                                                                               Metchooyeah; Jane
                                                                               Providence; G.
                                                                               Ahkimnachie; Janice
                                                                               Providence; A. Didzena; S.
                                                                               Tsonchoke
Hunting               Wildlife – Caribou      Avoidance of human               D. Ahkimnachie; R.
                                              activity by caribou; caribou     Metchooyeah; G.
                                              migration route near             Ahkimnachie; A. Didzena
                                              Project
Hunting               Wildlife – Moose        Displacement of moose,           Jessie Providence; D.
                                              decrease in population           Kolay; Jane Providence; R.
                                              from the Project                 Semansha
                                              Contamination of moose           D. Kolay
                                              from the Project
Hunting               Wildlife – Bears        Contamination of bears           R. Semansha
                                              from the Project
Hunting               Wildlife - Furbearers   Effects on beaver                R. Semansha; G.
Trapping                                                                       Ahkimnache
Gathering             Vegetation – General    Contamination of                 Jane Providence; G.
                                              vegetation from the              Ahkimnache; Janice
                                              Project                          Providence
Gathering             Vegetation – Berries    Contamination and/or lack        Jessie Providence; D.
                                              of berries from the Project      Ahkimnachie; D. Kolay; R.
                                                                               Metchooyeah; R.
                                                                               Semansha; G. Ahkimnachie
                                              Increased dust on edible         R. Semansha
                                              berries
Gathering             Vegetation –            Contamination of medicinal       Jessie Providence; D.
                      Medicinal Plants        plants from the Project          Metchooyeah
Hunting               Vegetation – Timber     Fragmentation and                D. Ahkimnachie; R.
Trapping                                      destruction of animal            Pastion; D. Kolay; R.
                                              habitat; clearing of trees       Semansha; Janice
Gathering                                                                      Providence; A. Didzena; S.
                                                                               Tsonchoke
Hunting               Vegetation – Muskeg     Destruction of muskeg &          J. Penner; R. Semansha;
Gathering                                     mosses                           June Providence
All                   Water Quality           Contamination of water           A. Wasp Colin; D. Kolay; J.
                                              from the Project                 Penner; D. Wasp Colin; R.
                                                                               Metchooyeah; R.
                                                                               Semansha; G.
                                                                               Ahkimnachie; Janice
                                                                               Providence; A. Didzena;
                                                                               June Providence
                                            4
                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                      Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
All      Air Quality            Air pollution from the            R. Metchooyeah
                                Project and associated
                                effects on wildlife,
                                vegetation and people
Fishing  Fish                   Effects to fish                   J. Penner; D. Wasp Colin;
                                                                  G. Ahkimnachie; A.
                                                                  Didzena
All      Access                 Inability to access               J. Penner; R. Semansha
                                harvesting locales due to
                                gates from industrial
                                features
All      Access                 Increased access to the           R. Metchooyeah; Jane
                                area by non-DTFN                  Providence
All      Traffic                Increased traffic; traffic        R. Pastion; R.
                                causing animal mortality or       Metchooyeah; E.
                                animal avoidance                  Chonkolay; A. Didzena
All      Safety                 Concerns for safety near          D. Ahkimnachie; D. Wasp
                                Plant sites; fear of H2S          Colin
                                ‘Salt spots’ near industrial      R. Semansha
                                developments (ground that
                                does not freeze and
                                harvesters can get stuck)
Hunting  Noise                  Animals and people avoid          D. Ahkimnachie; G.
Trapping                        areas due to increased            Ahkimnachie; S.
                                industrial noise                  Tsonchoke
All      Health                 Human health issues               D. Kolay; J. Penner; R.
                                resulting from                    Metchooyeah; Jane
                                contamination of water,           Providence; Janice
                                wildlife from the Project         Providence
All      Industrial Activity    People and animals avoid          D. Ahkimnachie; E.
                                areas with increased              Chonkolay; G. Ahkimnachie
                                industrial activity; rate of
                                development
All      Consultation Process   Communication of                  D. Wasp Colin;
                                information to DTFN
                                community
All      Economic               Difficulty exercising treaty      D. Ahkimnachie; Jane
                                rights due to financial           Providence; A. Didzena
                                reasons (travel expenses)
Trapping Economic               Decreased fur prices              D. Wasp Colin
All      Economic               Limitations on DTFN               R. Metchooyeah; Jane
                                exercise of treaty rights         Providence
                                because of government
                                regulations, traplines
         Economic               Lack of benefits and/or           G. Ahkimnache; A. Didzena
                                compensation to DTFN
                                from industrial
                                development
         Social                 Cultural loss                     A. Didzena
                              5
                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Authorship
Study Team
      Report Authors:
      Tracy Campbell, M.A., Senior Review
      Adena Dinn, B.Sc.
      Germaine Conacher, M.A.
      GIS Authors:
      Kathrin Janssen, B.A.
      Adena Dinn, B.Sc., Senior Review
      Interviews & Summaries:
      Adena Dinn
      Tracy Campbell
      Cathy Baldin
      Kathrin Janssen
      Dene Tha’ Translation:
      Thomas Ahkimnachie
      Ricky Pastion
      Robert Tsonchoke
      Ernest Chonkolay
                                          6
                                                                          DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                          Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                      Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Abbreviations and Acronyms
DTFN           Dene Tha’ First Nation
TLUS; TLU      Traditional Land Use Study; Traditional Land Use
AK             Aboriginal Knowledge
The Project    Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
NEB            National Energy Board
ESA            Environmental and Socio-economic Assessment
BC             British Columbia
AB             Alberta
RFMA           Registered Fur Management Areas
HRB            Horn River Basin
GPS            Global Positioning System
GIS            Geographical Information Systems
LAA            Local Assessment Area
RAA            Regional Assessment Area
MEMPR          Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources
Westcoast      Westcoast Energy Inc, operating as Spectra Energy Transmission
                                        7
                                                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                                          Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                                     Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Contents
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. 2
Authorship ........................................................................................................................... 6
Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................................. 7
1   Introduction ................................................................................................................ 10
  1.1    Purpose................................................................................................................ 10
  1.2    Fort Nelson North Processing Facility Project Setting ............................................... 10
  1.3    Traditional Land Use Studies ................................................................................. 11
  1.4    Incorporating TLUS into EA to Determine Effects .................................................... 13
2   Methodology ............................................................................................................... 14
  2.1    Report Design....................................................................................................... 14
  2.2    Interviews ............................................................................................................ 17
  2.3    Site Visits ............................................................................................................. 18
  2.4    TLUS Limitations ................................................................................................... 19
3   Community Information ............................................................................................... 21
  3.1    Introduction to DTFN ............................................................................................ 21
  3.2    DTFN Traditional Territory ..................................................................................... 22
  3.3    Aboriginal Consultation.......................................................................................... 25
  3.4    Historical Documentation of DTFN Land Use in Project Area .................................... 26
  3.5    Previously Collected TLUS Information ................................................................... 30
4   Project-Specific TLUS Information ................................................................................ 33
  4.1    DTFN Knowledge .................................................................................................. 33
  4.2    TLU Information Organization ................................................................................ 33
  4.3    Hunting Areas....................................................................................................... 34
  4.4    Trapping Areas ..................................................................................................... 38
  4.5    Fishing Areas ........................................................................................................ 41
  4.6    Gathering Areas .................................................................................................... 44
  4.7    Travel Routes ....................................................................................................... 49
  4.8    Sacred Sites ......................................................................................................... 52
  4.9    Cabins, Camps and Settlements ............................................................................. 53
                                                                 8
                                                                                                         DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                                        Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                                   Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
5   Changes in Land and Land Use..................................................................................... 55
  5.1   Increased Industrial Activity .................................................................................. 55
  5.2   Harvesting Restrictions .......................................................................................... 57
  5.3   Lack of Financial Resources ................................................................................... 57
6   Project Specific Concerns ............................................................................................. 59
  6.1   Water................................................................................................................... 59
  6.2   Wildlife ................................................................................................................. 59
  6.3   Vegetation ............................................................................................................ 60
  6.4   Access.................................................................................................................. 61
  6.5   Health .................................................................................................................. 61
  6.6   Noise ................................................................................................................... 62
  6.7   Rate of development ............................................................................................. 62
  6.8   Consultation Process ............................................................................................. 62
7 References...................................................................................................................... 64
                                                               9
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                 Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                             Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4 Project-Specific TLUS Information
“We are just like the animals that we live and depend on. We are not from this land; we
    are a part of this land; just like the water is a part of the land, that is who we are”
                                                                             - Robert Metchooyeah
4.1     DTFN Knowledge
As part of the study methodology, DTFN interview participants were asked to provide
Aboriginal Knowledge and Traditional Land Use Information in relation to the Study
Area.
During the interviews, participants often related information about areas that did not
overlap, intersect or fall within the vicinity of the Project RAA. This information was
expected by DTFN participants to be applied to other areas, such as the Project site.
DTFN feel Aboriginal knowledge is not tied to a specific place; rather their experience
on the land can be applied to multiple areas with comparable ecological conditions. For
example, when a Harvester indicated that increased industrial noise on their trapline
displaces wildlife, the Harvester expects that information to be applied to industrial
noise in similar areas/developments throughout the territory. This method of relating
traditional knowledge can be noted throughout the interview transcripts.
In addition, the Aboriginal knowledge shared with the Study Team generally included
first-hand, personal experiences on the land. Participants also would recount historical
oral accounts that were passed on by their parents, grandparents, community Elders
and other DTFN community members. Both of these ways of sharing information are
accepted in DTFN culture. In fact, if a Harvester is questioned and they do not have
either first-hand knowledge or knowledge through a recognized or credible source they
will often respond with “I don’t know” or “I can’t say”.
4.2     TLU Information Organization
For the purposes of analysis, this section of the Report has categorized this information
into the following sections:
    •   Hunting Areas
    •   Trapping Areas
    •   Fishing Areas
    •   Gathering Areas
                                               33
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
    •   Travel Routes
    •   Sacred Sites
    •   Cabins, Settlements and Camps
4.3     Hunting Areas
DTFN interview participants identified extensive hunting areas throughout their
traditional territory including northeast BC (see Figure 4-1). One participant explained
that Dene Tha’ hunters rarely set a date for hunting, rather, if they see an animal while
out on the land and they require food they will kill it (R. Pastion). Ricky Pastion stated
that most Dene Tha’ would go hunting “all the time if they [could].”
Participants indicated that wild meat is used by DTFN as a source of food and when an
animal is killed it is shared amongst the community (Jane Providence, D. Kolay, R.
Pastion, D. Ahkimnachie, R. Metchooyeah). Numerous participants stated that food
from the land is preferred by most Dene Tha’ over food purchased from a store (D.
Kolay, R. Metchooyeah). Robert Metchooyeah explained that the Dene Tha’ do not go
to a “Safeway” and fill their fridge, they go to the land. The animals typically hunted for
food by DTFN include wild chickens, moose, ducks (including eggs), lynx, caribou and
bear (A. Didzena).
The area surrounding the proposed Project was described as relatively remote; that is,
not easily or directly accessible by all season roads from DTFN communities. Interview
participants indicated that they access this area for hunting via winter access roads.
Alex Wasp Colin explained that he uses the winter roads which connect to the Sierra
Yoyo Desan road. This allows him to access Cabin Lake and Kotcho Lake for moose
hunting. Participants also reported hunting on DTFN member-held registered traplines
in BC during the winter when access was possible.
Ernest Chonkolay explained that the Etsho Plateau is excellent habitat for wildlife and
has seen many animal tracks specifically in the area west of Cabin Lake, including
moose, lynx and caribou. Robert Metchooyeah also reported that the area around Cabin
Lake “is not even touched yet, there is no disturbance, just the way it is naturally”.
Robert noted many animals in that area including caribou, moose, mink, squirrel,
muskrat and beaver. Alex Wasp Colin also stated that the area near the proposed
Project [Etsho Plateau] has a lot of moose. The biodiversity present in this area was
restated by many participants who noted numerous species while there on hunting
trips.
                                             34
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Participants also indicated that the area surrounding the Plant site was an important
area for caribou, consisting of calving areas and migration routes. Jessie Providence
explained that this area is used by caribou as they migrate along the Alaska Highway
(#97) on their way south. This was echoed by Robert Metchooyeah who elaborated
that this area is used cyclically during their annual migration. Ernest Chonkolay
indicated that caribou require specific lichen, traditionally known as “caribou feet”, as a
food source and explained that it is plentiful in this area. While working in the area,
Robert Metchooyeah located two caribou faun antlers around Cabin Lake which
indicated to him that the lake was used by caribou for calving.
Kotcho Lake was also noted as an important lake for caribou because they will often
stop there in the spring and summer to eat the berries and calve in the willows that
surround the lake. Allen Didzena explained that Kotcho Lake is an area rich in wildlife
including caribou, moose, otter, muskrat, beaver and migratory birds (ducks, loons,
geese and swans). In the past, DTFN members would hunt caribou throughout this
area. However, currently many do not hunt caribou because they perceive caribou as a
protected species and some do not enjoy the flavor of the meat.
The area surrounding the Project was also identified as an important area for moose
migration. Ronnie Semansha noted that from July to September moose head for high
ground as part of their seasonal migration. Diana Kolay also noted that the black spruce
present on the Project footprint also indicates that it is important for moose because
they prefer treed areas.
A number of participants indicated that they avoid hunting or trapping near gas plant
sites because of safety issues. For example they expressed concern about perceived
hazardous gas or “vapors” (R. Metchooyeah) and the area being dangerous in general
(D. Ahkimnachie, A. Didzena, D. Metchooyeah). June Penner explained that the ground
around industrial features such as wells and pump jacks often does not freeze because
of salt deposits and can be hazardous to hunters.
Current and historic hunting areas in northeastern BC reported by study participants
include:
    o Area around Kotcho Lake (A. Wasp Colin, D. Metchooyeah, R. Semansha, G.
        Ahkimnachie)
    o Sierra Yoyo Desan Road (A. Wasp Colin, J. Penner, R. Semansha, R. Tsonchoke)
    o Near Kwokullie Lake (R. Semansha, A. Didzena)
                                             35
                                                                            DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                            Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                        Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
   o Along the winter access road that connects Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (D.
       Metchooyeah, D. Kolay, Janice Providence, Jessie Providence, J. Penner, R.
       Semansha)
   o On and around DTFN member-held traplines, including #755T013, #755T014,
       #755T015, #756T014, #756T015, #756T016 (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie,
       G. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp Colin, S. Tsonchoke, T. Ahkimnachie)
   o Around July Lake (A. Didzena)
   o The Etsho Plateau (A. Wasp Colin)
   o Area around Outaandetday Lake, Tooga Lake and Desan Lake (A. Didzena)
Specific areas reported as current and historic hunting areas that are intersected by the
Project RAA include:
   o Area around Cabin Lake (A. Wasp Colin, R. Semansha, A. Didzena)
   o Area east of the Texaco Lakes including Kwokullie Lake and north of Kotcho river
       up to the Petitot River (A. Didzena)
   o Area east of Komie Lake, just north of the Etsho Escarpment, east of Kwokullie
       Lake and south of the Fort Nelson river (D. Metchooyeah, Janice Providence)
   o Etsho Plateau southeast of the Etsho escarpment (Jane Providence)
   o Area between the Texaco Lakes and Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
   o Between Cabin Lake and Kotcho Lake (R. Metchooyeah, A. Wasp Colin)
   o Etsho Plateau, east of Komie Lake, Southwest of Etset Lake and including
       Kwokullie, Kotcho and Kimea Lakes (E. Chonkolay)
   o Area east of Komie Lake and west of Kotcho Lake that extends north to the
       Etsho escarpment and just south of Courvoisier Creek (R. Semansha)
                                            36
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.4     Trapping Areas
DTFN study participants indicated trapping furbearers both currently and historically in
northeastern BC, including instances within the project RAA (Figure 4-2). Furbearers
discussed include beaver, lynx, mink, rabbits, marten, otter, muskrat, squirrel, rabbit
and porcupine.
Participants indicated that they generally trapped in groups, often travelling out on the
land with elder family members (A. Didzena, D. Ahkimnachie). Participants would
typically complete two trapping trips per winter season and use the furs for an income
and the meat for food. Many interviewees noted that the majority of their current diet is
still derived from the land.
It was also reported that animals can be used for more than food and pelts. Robert
Metchooyeah and Jane Providence indicated that porcupine quills are used by some
community members for art.
Ernest Chonkolay and David Ahkimnachie both stated that it was no longer profitable to
trap for a livelihood. Both participants felt that they could not recoup the cost of the trip
because of the decrease in fur prices. This does not prevent them from going out to
trap, but it limits the trips. Many participants echoed the sentiment that financial
reasons have resulted in a decrease in trapping.
Allen Didzena reported that some community members use industrial developments as
trapping areas because the sounds and salt produced by these installations can attract
animals. Additionally, participants indicated that they use cutlines to set traps because
of the ease of access.
Current and historic areas in northeastern BC where DTFN study participants report
trapping are:
            o Around July Lake (A. Didzena, D. Ahkimnachie)
            o On and around DTFN member-held traplines, including #755T013,
                #755T014,     #755T015,       #756T014,      #756T015,           #756T016           (R.
                Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp Colin, S.
                Tsonchoke, T. Ahkimnachie)
            o Area around Kotcho Lake (S. Tsonchoke, G. Ahkimnachie, A. Didzena)
                                               38
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Trapping areas identified that intersect the Project RAA include:
          o Area east of the Texaco Lakes including Kwokullie Lake and north of
             Kotcho river up to the Petitot River (A. Didzena)
          o Area extending west of Texaco Lakes, east of Kwokullie Lake, north of the
             Fort Nelson River and south of the Petitot River (D. Ahkimnachie)
          o Around Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
While working in the area (unrelated to the Project) participants also noted that the
project RAA and the surrounding Etsho Plateau is good habitat for and/or signs of
animals routinely trapped including: mink, lynx, squirrel, muskrat and beaver (R.
Metchooyeah, E. Chonkolay).
                                             39
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.5     Fishing Areas
DTFN participants indicated they fish for jackfish, suckers, pickerel, whitefish, finescale
dace, trout, walleye, longnose suckers, and northern pike throughout the BC portion of
their traditional territory (Figure 4-3).
Jane Providence and Ricky Pastion emphasized the importance of fish for the DTFN way
of life and indicated that they depend on fish as an essential part of their diet.
Allen Didzena explained that Courvoisier Creek and other creeks in the Project area are
fish spawning areas and that the lakes around the site have an abundance of fish.
Ricky Pastion indicated that beavers will often dam these lakes and creeks which results
in flooding around the Project area. If the water is high enough and there is sufficient
oxygen, these areas can support fish for the season.
Kotcho Lake was indicated by numerous participants as important fish habitat and a
central lake for fish migration (E. Chonkolay, D. Ahkimnachie). Gabriel Ahkimnachie
pointed out that he catches fish in the Hay River after they have migrated from Kotcho
Lake. Robert Metchooyeah also indicated that his father would fish in this lake for
numerous species.
Many participants noted that, while BC contains various fish species and is rich in fish
habitat, that accessing the area in the summer is difficult because it is mainly comprised
of muskeg and peat.
Current and historic areas where interview participants’ fish or where they indicated
there was fishing habitat within northeast British Columbia include:
    o   Courvoisier Creek (A. Didzena)
    o   Thinahtea Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
    o   Kwokullie Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
    o   Kotcho Lake (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, A. Wasp Colin, G. Ahkimnachie,
        Jane Providence, D. Wasp Colin, R. Semansha, E. Chonkolay)
    o July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie)
    o Shekilie River (G. Ahkimnachie)
    o Hay River (G. Ahkimnachie)
                                            41
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Current and historic fishing areas or reported fish habitat that overlaps the Project RAA:
   o Lakes and creeks south of the proposed Project [Etsho Plateau] (A. Didzena)
                                            42
                                                                                 DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.6     Gathering Areas
Aboriginal knowledge includes information about many types of plants, herbs and trees
that are used for food and medicinal purposes. These same plants and vegetation are
also used by many animals that the DTFN hunt and trap throughout their traditional
territory. Gathering areas in northeast BC are identified in Figure 4-4.
While DTFN participants indicated specific berry and medicinal plants during interviews,
June Penner also noted the importance of muskeg more broadly. She explained that in
addition to muskeg being excellent habitat for berries and medicines, it also acts as a
natural filter for water in the region and constitutes an important source of potable
water for DTFN Harvesters out on the land.
        Berries
        Throughout the BC portion of the DTFN traditional territory there are many types
        of berries. Interview participants identified blueberries, chokecherries, low and
        high bush cranberries, strawberries, raspberries, wild rhubarb, gooseberries,
        muskeg berries, cloudberries, and some berries where the Dene name was not
        readily known in English.
        Interview participants specifically noted the Project RAA as good habitat for
        berries including muskeg berries, gooseberries and low bush cranberries. This is
        because the Project is in an area dominated by muskeg and close to numerous
        rivers. Robert Metchooyeah explained that these types of berries characterize
        this type of habitat and are present on both high and low ground. Helen
        Ahkimnachie also explained that anywhere muskeg is present, berries can be
        found.
        The Etsho Plateau was also noted by interview participants as supporting an
        abundance of berries including low bush cranberries, raspberries and
        cloudberries.
        Additionally, participants reported that berries grow along the access roads
        between Rainbow Lake and Fort Nelson. However, it was noted that accessing
        these berries is difficult as this area is predominately muskeg which limits access
        in the spring and summer months (D. Metchooyeah, Jessie Providence).
                                                44
                                                                       DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                       Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                   Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Numerous participants noted that the berries were an important part of the
DTFN diet, as well as food for animals. For example, Thomas Ahkimnachie
explained that the root or stem of raspberries can be eaten in addition to the
berries; this stem does not need to be cooked and has a flavor similar to carrots.
It was also noted that berries do not grow as well where the land is disturbed.
(D. Ahkimnachie, D. Kolay, J. Penner)
In northeastern BC, participants reported berry gathering areas:
    o Along the access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (D.
        Metchooyeah, Jessie Providence)
Berry gathering areas intersected by the Project RAA were reported at:
    o Etsho Plateau, east of Komie Lake, southwest of Etset Lake and including
        Kwokullie, Kotcho and Kimea Lakes. (R. Metchooyeah, E. Chonkolay, D.
        Kolay)
    o Area between the Texaco Lakes and Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
Medicinal Plants
In addition to the numerous edible plants identified during the interviews, DTFN
participants also indicated various plants used for medicinal purposes. Plants
that were specified include juniper, poplar trees, black spruce (cones, bark, sap),
tamarack, blueberries, “mooseberries”, rat root, wild mint, strawberry root and
various herbs.      Study participants explained that when some community
members harvest medicinal plants from the land they give an offering back, such
as tobacco. Janice Providence noted “that if you take something you have to pay
it… but you have to believe in it.”
“Mooseberries”, a white and orange berry, was indicated by Diana Kolay as a
remedy for liver and stomach ailments. She also reported that boiling strawberry
root can help with diarrhea. Also, black spruce cones and bark, when boiled, are
good for colds and stomach aches (D. Kolay, R. Metchooyeah). Participants also
indicated that rat root, juniper (berries), aspen bark and black spruce (berries)
are helpful with colds and chest congestion (R. Metchooyeah, D. Metchooyeah).
                                     45
                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                 Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Robert Metchooyeah reported that the Sahtaneh River is a good place to collect
mint. Additionally, Ernest Chonkolay indicated that the Etsho Plateau supports
an abundance of traditional medicines. These medicines were specifically
identified by Diana Kolay along the Sierra Yoyo Desan road that is located on the
Plateau. She and Janice Providence also indicated that juniper can be found
along the road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson and that it can be used to cure
many ailments.
Many of medicinal plants grow in muskeg areas that are typical in northeastern
BC. Helen Ahkimnachie indicated that anywhere there is muskeg, there are
berries and plants used for medicines. For example, Diana Kolay and Janice
Providence indicated that rat root grows in swampy areas. Participants expressed
concerns that if muskeg areas are developed or contaminated, it will destroy the
vegetation (R. Semansha, G. Ahkimnachie, D. Kolay, J. Penner).
Don Metchooyeah reported that rat root collected near Assumption (Chateh)
tastes of oil. As a result, people no longer collect it there, but near Habay
instead. He said he was concerned that vegetation near the proposed Project
could experience similar effects.
It was noted that the proposed Project area has an abundance of black spruce
and that the habitat present on the site is favorable for medicinal plants. June
Penner noted that the site is characterized by muskeg which is where many
herbs for coughs and colds can be found.
Participants reported a number of specific areas where medicines can be found
in northeast BC, including:
    o Area around Kotcho Lake (A. Didzena, D. Kolay)
    o Along the Sahtaneh River (R. Metchooyeah)
    o Along the winter access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson (D.
        Metchooyeah, Janice Providence)
    o Sierra Yoyo Desan Road (D. Kolay)
                                     46
                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                 Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Participants also described medicinal plant gathering areas which overlapped or
intersected the Project RAA. These include:
    o Etsho Plateau, east of Komie Lake, southwest of Etset Lake and including
        Kwokullie, Kotcho and Kimea Lakes (Jane Providence, E. Chonkolay, Jessie
        Providence)
    o Area between the Texaco Lakes and Cabin Lake (R. Metchooyeah)
                                    47
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.7     Travel Routes
In the past, Dene Tha’ people followed a seasonal migration throughout their territory
in specific patterns to ensure successful hunting (DTFN 1997). While these migration
patterns have evolved with DTFN over time, travel routes and migration patterns are
still an integral part of the exercise of DTFN treaty rights (Figure 4-5). This evolution
was noted by Robert Metchooyeah who explained that dog teams and horse teams of
the past are not widely used anymore and explained that most people currently travel
by quad or skidoo along cutlines, seismic lines, baselines and right-of-ways.
Prior to roads, DTFN participants indicated they travelled throughout much of northeast
BC following trails (horse and dog team), between lakes, and on high ground along
rivers. Steven Tsonchoke, David Wasp Colin and Robert Metchooyeah both pointed out
that the rivers are still used as a means of travelling. This is because northeastern BC is
characterized by muskeg and the rivers are often located along higher ground (D. Wasp
Colin).
Interview participants reported travel throughout much of northeastern BC. For
example, Robert Metchooyeah reported a seasonal travel route between July Lake,
February Lake and Mid-winter Lake. During these migrations, Dene Tha’ people would
also often meet at central locations such as Kotcho Lake and Kwokullie Lake. Gabriel
Ahkimnachie explained that he would often travel to Kotcho Lake on foot in the winter
and construct a birch bark canoe to paddle home in the spring.
Interview participants indicated that they currently travel to northeastern BC via the
winter access roads. Participants also noted that they generally travel with one or more
person by vehicle. David Wasp Colin indicated that the access road that originates in
Rainbow Lake used to be an old horse trail and recalls former Chief Talley using this
trail to travel to BC.
Many participants indicated that they currently use industrial features as means of
travel. For example, Don Metchooyeah and Ernest Chonkolay use cutlines and find it
much easier than making a new trail each trip. Additionally, June Penner explained that
a positive outcome of another plant being built is better quality roads and this makes
access for hunting easier.
                                             49
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Several of these historical seasonal travel routes took DTFN people throughout
northeastern BC. These included:
   o Winter access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson [Powerline Road] (A.
       Didzena, R. Metchooyeah, A. Wasp Colin, Jane Providence, E. Chonkolay, D.
       Metchooyeah, D. Kolay, D. Wasp Colin, Janice Providence, Jessie Providence,
       June Penner, R. Semansha, S. Tsonchoke)
   o Winter access road from Zama area to BC along the 31st baseline (A. Didzena, R.
       Metchooyeah, D. Metchooyeah, D. Kolay, Janice Providence, Jessie Providence,
       June Penner, R. Semansha)
   o Between Kotcho Lake and the Northwest Territories (A. Didzena)
   o Along the Hay River and Kotcho River to Fort Nelson (A. Didzena, E. Chonkolay,
       S. Tsonchoke)
   o Sierra Yoyo Desan Road (R. Metchooyeah, A. Wasp Colin)
   o Along the Petitot River (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, R. Semansha)
   o Between July, February and Mid-winter Lakes (R. Metchooyeah)
   o Along the Shekilie River (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp-Colin)
   o Southern portion of the Northwest Territories (R. Metchooyeah)
   o Along the Hay River to the confluence of the Shekilie River (D. Ahkimnachie)
   o From Assumption (Chateh) to Kotcho Lake (G. Ahkimnachie)
   o From Assumption (Chateh) to July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie)
   o “Fontas Road”, a winter access road into BC from Manning that heads north to
       Fontas (D. Wasp Colin)
Travel routes that intersected or overlapped the Project RAA include:
    o Travel route from Sierra Yoyo Desan Road around Kotcho Lake to Kwokuille Lake
       (R. Semansha)
                                           50
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.8     Sacred Sites
DTFN interview participants identified numerous instances of burials and ceremonial
sites throughout the BC portion of their traditional territory. Burials and ceremonial
sites can be more broadly identified as sacred sites because of their cultural and
spiritual value to the DTFN community.
Participants noted burials throughout northeast BC. Ronnie Semansha explained that
there are graves “everywhere”, because in the past, there was often no way of
transporting the deceased home. Instead, they were simply buried wherever they
passed away. Due to this practice, many burials are not clearly identifiable and their
exact locations are not known. For example, June Penner stated that her grandfather is
buried in northeast BC but she is unaware of the location. June explained that there are
many burials throughout BC that have not been located. Steven Tsonchoke and Gabriel
Ahkimnachie said that people were often buried along rivers or lakes. Both participants
noted sites around July Lake, Thinahtea Lake and identified six burials at the confluence
of the Shekilie and Hay Rivers. Ernest Chonkolay elaborated that these burials are
situated near a historic settlement.
July Lake was identified as a sacred site. Robert Metchooyeah and David Ahkimnachie
explained that this lake is known as “A Woman’s Place” or “Tsuk-aye” [phonetically].
This name comes from the instance of two young DTFN women surviving at this lake
over a winter season and has since been a sacred place to many Dene Tha’ people.
In northeast BC, interview participants noted sacred sites located at:
           o July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke, R.
               Metchooyeah)
           o On DTFN member-held trapline #755T014 (D. Ahkimnachie)
           o Thinahtea Lake (G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke)
           o Confluence of the Hay and Shekilie Rivers (G. Ahkimnachie, E. Chonkolay,
               S. Tsonchoke)
No sacred sites were identified that overlapped or intersected the Project RAA.
                                            52
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.9    Cabins, Camps and Settlements
DTFN interview participants also identified cabin, camp and settlement locations
throughout northeast BC (Figure 4-6).
Often, DTFN community members opted for non-permanent camps that left no
discernable mark on the land. Allen Didzena explained that Pauliss Metchooyeah,
Louison Ahkimnachie and himself would sleep under tarps with blankets by an open fire
leaving very little behind. David Ahkimnachie said he frequently camps with only a
canvas tent and there is very little evidence left on the land when he camps this way.
Cabins and settlements were generally more permanent in nature.
Generally in northeastern BC cabin, camp and settlement locations included:
          o On DTFN member-held traplines #755T014, #756T014 (D. Ahkimnachie,
              G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke)
          o July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie)
          o Kotcho Lake (D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp Colin, J. Penner)
          o Confluence of the Hay and Shekilie Rivers (G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke)
          o Fontas Reserve (D. Wasp Colin)
          o Around Kwokullie Lake (R. Semansha)
There were no cabin, camp or settlement sites identified by participants that intersected
the Project RAA.
                                            53
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
5       Changes in Land and Land Use
DTFN participants noted changes and observations about their traditional territory
during the study interviews. Robert Metchooyeah indicated that these changes are
especially relevant for northeastern BC because the area was relatively pristine and is
being developed more and more in recent years.
5.1     Increased Industrial Activity
Participants frequently noted an increase in industrial activity throughout the BC portion
of their traditional territory. Allen Didzena explained that the most significant change he
has noticed is the impact of this increased activity on wildlife, specifically moose. He
said that while caribou prefer the cleared areas resulting from industrial activity, moose
require “deep bush” and as activity increases, “deep bush” becomes scarcer. Robert
Tsonchoke also agreed that there have been effects to wildlife. He explained that his
trapline is still usable for hunting, but things are changing because of the amount of
development. David Ahkimnachie also felt that prior to development, his trapline was
ideal wildlife habitat consisting of rich boreal forest. Overall, David felt that the habitat
in BC had changed so drastically due to logging and industrial development that the
animals have left. He reminisced that it used to host an abundance of lynx, marten and
mink.
Robert Metchooyeah explained that if the animals are gone there is no longer a reason
for DTFN to frequent this area. He felt that “if the animals are not going to go there,
there is no food for us.” He further stated that “the more people come, the more
disturbances they make” and explained that with this disturbance the animals move
away.
Interviewees also noted that increased industrial activities have an impact on
vegetation. Janice Providence explained that she has noticed an increase in clear
cutting. She explained that once an area is cleared, it can take between sixty and one
hundred years for these areas to reforest naturally, or be reclaimed. Don Metchooyeah
also felt that increased industrial activity would lead to contamination of medicinal
plants. He reported that rat root in Alberta collected near a pipeline was contaminated
and felt that this could occur near the proposed Project, especially since the area is
composed predominately of muskeg, where rat root grows.
                                              55
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                 Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
In addition to impacts on wildlife and vegetation, participants expressed concerns about
potential health risks as a result of industrial activity. Allen Didzena felt that in the past
there was not as much sickness in the community and attributed this to the increase in
development. June Penner also expressed concern about health risks from increased
industrial activity and explained that recently when she dries moose meat there is often
a white residue on the meat. She attributes this residue to an acid or salt from
development. Gabriel Ahkimnachie stated that the food he harvests does not taste the
same and he felt that this is related to industrial development.
An increase in industrial activity has also led to a restriction of DTFN activities. David
Wasp Colin noted that he used to canoe and camp along the Petitot River in the 1970s
and felt that it was “a really nice place to camp.” He also explained there was “not too
much oil and gas and the land was still good”. June Penner also reported that with
increased industrial activity there is restricted access. She noted that some roads in
northeastern BC are now blocked with gates.
Ronnie Semansha explained that near Plants, in particular, there are often “salt spots”
where the ground does not freeze. He explained that these areas are dangerous as they
look like solid snow, but are actually not. Ronnie cautioned that these areas are
dangerous for DTFN Harvesters. June Penner also noted avoiding industrial
developments because of safety concerns about the ground not being frozen.
Additionally, participants noted the level of noise increases with development. Gabriel
Ahkimnachie explained that this increase in noise has led to a decrease in animals and
indicated that now it is difficult to hunt or trap on his trapline. David Ahkimnachie
agreed that where there is too much noise and too many people the animals will stay
away.
While many participants noted several negative instances related to increased industrial
development, there were a few positive outcomes from this increase. Don Metchooyeah
explained that while he does not like the industrial development, he does use the roads
and cutlines that come along with it. He finds they make travelling to his trapline and
hunting areas easier. David Ahkimnachie has noted a significant increase in the number
of seismic and cutlines within DTFN traditional territory. He explained that many DTFN
use these as modes of travel.
                                              56
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
5.2     Harvesting Restrictions
A common misconception among DTFN Harvesters is that they can only harvest within
the boundaries of a provincially regulated trapline. However, many interview
participants noted how DTFN previously utilized the entire traditional territory prior to
the imposition of these restrictions. For example, Jane Providence noted that prior to
the traplines the Dene Tha’ would “go everywhere”. Gabriel Ahkimnachie explained
that before this system was in place, the Dene Tha’ had no boundaries and could hunt
and trap throughout BC. He feels this is no longer possible due to restrictions. Robert
Metchooyeah agreed that many years ago when there were no provincial borders the
Dene people would go “all over” to hunt and often followed animal and fish migrations
cyclically. He explained that if these borders were not in place the Dene Tha’ would still
go everywhere. Robert feels the Dene Tha’ are limited by traplines, borders and
designated areas.
5.3     Lack of Financial Resources
Many interview participants cited a lack of financial resources for a change in their land
use. Often this lack or resources led to a reduction of time on the land or a dependence
on others to travel. Jane Providence noted that without a vehicle it is very difficult to go
out on the land. She explained that if she did not have a vehicle of her own she would
try to find another way but it would take determination to practice her traditional
lifestyle. Jane indicated that a vehicle is necessary because they have to go further and
further away to exercise their treaty rights. This increased distance requires a vehicle
and money to cover the cost of fuel. Jane explained that even with this financial
hardship she would still continue to go out on the land as her family prefers wild meat.
She estimated that a large majority, “90%” of her diet is comprised of wild meat.
In addition, participants reported that the decline in fur prices has reduced DTFN
trapping. David Wasp Colin stated that trapping is a lot of work for very little money.
Ronnie Semansha echoed this sentiment and specified that he finds it too far to go and
does not have the time required to trap regularly.
5.4     General Wildlife and Vegetation Changes
Interview participants also noted general changes to wildlife and vegetation that they
have observed over time throughout the traditional territory. David Wasp Colin reported
                                              57
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
that in the 1970s he would often canoe along the Petitot River and that there were
more bears than currently.
Allen Didzena also indicated that in the past there were moose everywhere but now
notices the population has reduced. He attributed this to more hunting and an increase
in predators, such as wolves.
Ronnie Semansha also noted a change in wildlife numbers, indicating that there has
been a drop in caribou in recent years. He explained that there used to be a significant
amount of caribou in BC but now there are hardly any left.
Janice Providence and Diana Kolay also felt there were changes in the wildlife
population and noted that in certain parts of BC and Alberta buffalo are more plentiful
than moose. They thought that the level of buffalo was related to government
conservation of the species and felt there should be better management.
In addition to changes to wildlife, June Penner reported a change in vegetation. She
explained that in recent years, the berries available in BC appear smaller and are more
widely scattered.
                                            58
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
6 Project Specific Concerns
During the conduct of interviews, DTFN participants expressed concerns directly related
to the proposed Project. These concerns focused on how the Project would impact the
environment and how these perceived impacts would impact DTFN. Participants also
identified broad regional concerns and related these to the proposed Project.
During the site assessment, representatives also expressed concerns that the Project
would negatively impact DTFN Aboriginal and treaty rights.
6.1     Water
Interview participants were especially concerned with the location of the Project and its
impact on water. Numerous participants explained that the water from higher ground
flows to the lower lying areas and eventually flows into Kotcho Lake. The water from
Kotcho Lake, in turn, flows south into the Hay River which is used routinely by DTFN (E.
Chonkolay, R. Metchooyeah, June Providence, G. Ahkimnachie).                          Due to this
connection, participants expressed concern that chemicals from the Plant may have the
potential to contaminate the water (A. Wasp Colin, R. Metchooyeah, A. Didzena, R.
Semansha, Janice Providence, June Providence, Diana Kolay, G. Ahkimnachie).
In addition, participants noted that if water courses were contaminated this could lead
to an overall contamination of DTFN food sources, such as fish and wildlife (A. Wasp
Colin, R. Metchooyeah, D. Wasp Colin, R. Semansha). Ronnie Semansha noted that the
creeks and lakes in the vicinity of the Project are often used for fish spawning.
Robert Metchooyeah felt that DTFN concerns about water are not given enough
consideration and these questions are often left unanswered by industry. Robert said he
wished that industry and government would “look after” water. He said that no matter
how close or far DTFN is from the Project, they are closely connected to any impacts
through water. Robert also attended a one day site assessment with Baptiste
Metchooyeah and expressed concern about the destruction of water resources present
in the Project vicinity.
6.2     Wildlife
Interview participants expressed concern that the Project would cause wildlife to move
away. Ricky Pastion explained that they see this occurring in Alberta near industrial
developments and noted that cutlines, roads and the sounds of vehicles act together to
                                             59
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
push the animals away. Other participants agreed that once the Project was
constructed and/or cleared, the wildlife would be forced further away (Jessie
Providence, E. Chonkolay, R. Metchooyeah, R. Semansha, Janice Providence, Thomas
Ahkimnachie).
In addition to the Project, Ricky Pastion was also concerned that the ancillary features,
such as roads, will act cumulatively to push the animals away. Ricky explained that he
has observed this occurring in the area around Rainbow Lake.
Participants also expressed concern about contamination of wildlife from consumption
of industrial by-products either via water or by consuming vegetation near the Project
(D. Wasp Colin, A. Didzena, Jane Providence, June Providence, D. Kolay). Robert
Metchooyeah noted that DTFN consume many of the animals found in northeastern BC
and if the wildlife were to become contaminated, so would DTFN community members.
During the site assessment Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah noted
Project construction would result in the destruction of woodland caribou migration trails
and wolverine habitat. They noted that both these species are currently classified as ‘at
risk’ and are concerned that Project construction will negatively impact those species.
6.3     Vegetation
The proposed Project area was noted by numerous participants as being rich in both
medicinal plants and berries. These participants expressed concern that the Project
could lead to contamination of those resources (Jessie Providence, R. Metchooyeah,
Jane Providence, G. Ahkimnachie).
In addition, Ronnie Semansha expressed concern with berries near the Project
becoming too dusty to be consumed. He has previously noted berries near other project
sites being covered in dust from the nearby roads.
Janice Providence also indicated she was concerned about an increase in tree clearing
that she has observed in northeastern BC. She feels that clearing the Project footprint
will contribute to this problem. She explained that cutting down trees does not only
affect vegetation but wildlife as well, stating “you cut down trees, where will the
animals go?” This concern was echoed by Diana Kolay who felt that moose would no
longer frequent the Project area once it was cleared because they prefer treed areas.
She also noted that clearing of the site would destroy berries.
                                            60
                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                           Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                       Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
June Providence expressed concern that the Project will damage the muskeg and
mosses in the area; she explained that both are found in the Project vicinity.
During the Project site assessment, Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah
expressed concern about the destruction of medicinal and edible plants. They also felt
that the vegetation on the Project footprint was suitable for wildlife habitat and this
habitat would also be destroyed.
6.4     Access
Participants reported that increased access to the area would facilitate DTFN hunting;
however, they also noted concerns related to increased access. For example, Allen
Didzena indicated that with increased road developments, predators, such as wolves,
experience an increased advantage to hunting moose as well. He felt this applied to
roads, and cleared areas such as cutlines/seismic. Jane Providence also expressed
concerns about increased access and an increase in non-Aboriginal hunters frequenting
the region.
Participants also reported concerns related to restricted access to the area. Ronnie
Semansha noted that there are already many signs that restrict access in BC. While he
noted that he understands the need for safety, DTFN also requires access to their
traditional territory: “There needs to be balance.”
6.5     Health
Interview participants also expressed concerns about perceived effects of the Project on
the health of the community. Robert Metchooyeah reported there are numerous
community members with cancer and attributed this to contaminants from industrial
development.
Janice Providence explained that if animals become contaminated it will affect the Dene
Tha’, leading to increased cancer. Janice expressed frustration because the Dene Tha’
have to “wait and see” what the effects from the proposed Project will be on their
health and no one can provide answers on what the long term effects might be.
June Providence expressed concern about chemicals, such as mercury, affecting the
community health. She felt she needed more information about the by-products of the
Project to ensure that dangerous chemicals such as this would not be produced.
                                            61
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
6.6     Noise
Several participants had concerns with noise. They felt that increased noise directly
related to a decrease in wildlife (S. Tsonchoke). Gabriel Ahkimnachie was concerned
that the noise from the Project will affect the wildlife, noting that this had occurred on
his trapline.
6.7     Rate of development
DTFN participants also expressed a general concern about the rate of development in
northeastern BC. Ernest Chonkolay reported seeing drilling rigs in many places. David
Ahkimnachie was concerned that if the rate of development continues unchecked there
will be no wildlife left in the area. Participants felt that if development continued, the
overall area surrounding the Project footprint will become damaged (A. Didzena).
Steven Tsonchoke also expressed concern that the development of the Project would
act as a catalyst for increased drilling in the area, as more wells will be required to meet
the capacity of the Plant.
During the site assessment Baptiste Metchooyeah and Robert Metchooyeah expressed
concern about the cumulative impact the Plant could potentially have on the area. They
felt that gas plant proliferation in the area was a major DTFN concern.
6.8     Consultation Process
Participants in the study and the field assessment also expressed concern related to the
consultation process. David Ahkimnachie expressed concern that companies conduct
development before the community is properly informed. He explained that many Elders
lack the technical knowledge to understand information from companies. David said
that more time should be spent in the community explaining projects to the Elders.
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah noted that an archaeological
assessment had already been submitted in July 2009 and did not include DTFN
participation or input. They felt this was deficient and noted that the singular site visit
they participated in was insufficient to assess DTFN concerns related to heritage and
traditional resources. The site visit was conducted in November 2009 and the site was
covered by approximately 1 foot of snow. This made it extremely difficult for DTFN
representatives to properly assess the previously located archaeological site or identify
any traditional uses that may have been present.
                                               62
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah also noted that construction on the
Project site appeared to be underway prior to Project approval. They noted equipment
tracks on the ground and trees felled. They felt that this was inappropriate activity as
the ground was not yet fully frozen.
Overall, DTFN site visit participants felt that DTFN should return to assess the site when
there is no snow on the ground.
                                              63
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
7 References
Bouchard and Kennedy Research Consultants. Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC.
Prepared for Calliou Group, Calgary Alberta on behalf of Dene Tha’ First Nation, 2009.
Dene Tha’ First Nation. Dene Tha’ Traditional Land-Use and Occupancy Study, The Arctic
Institute of North America, © The Dene Tha’ First Nation, 1997.
TERA Environmental Consultants. Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment for the
Proposed Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility. Prepared for Westcoast Energy Inc.
Calgary, Alberta, 2009
Goulet, Jean-Guy. Ways of Knowing: Experience, Knowledge and Power Among the Dene
Tha’. © Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1998.
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. First Nation Profiles, Dene Tha’ First Nation, General
Information, Registered Population, 2009
http://pse5esd5.aincinac.gc.ca/fnp/Main/Search/FNRegPopulation.aspx?BAND_NUMBER=448&l
ang=eng
Robinson, Michael, Terry Garvin and Gordon Hodgson. Mapping How We Use Our Land.
Calgary: Arctic Institute of North America, 1994.
Tobias, Terry. Chief Kerry’s Moose: A Guidebook to Land Use and Occupancy Mapping. Joint
Publication, Union of BC Indian Chiefs and Eco Trust, 2000.
Garvin, Terry and Northern Forestry Centre Staff. A Guide to Conducting Traditional
Knowledge and Land Use Study. Northern Forestry Centre, 2001.
Roberts, John and Pamela Williamson. First Nations People, Second Edition. Toronto:
Emond Montgomery Publications, 2004.
Valaskakis, Gail Guthrie. Indian Country: Essays on Contemporary Native Culture. Wilfred
Laurier University Press, 2005.
                                               64
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Jane Providence
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Jane hunts in British Columbia (BC) during winter in the general vicinity of the proposed
Plant site. She travels to this area via the winter access road which is generally open by
mid-December.
Jane mainly hunts for moose in this area until spring break-up and mentioned that she,
her sister, her children and her grandchildren eat moose almost every day.
Throughout the year, Jane and her sister kill approximately eight moose. They usually
kill one moose per trip and share it with their entire family. Last fall, Jane, her aunt and
two sisters went hunting at Sulphur Lake (Alberta) and killed three moose which lasted
the families until December. When that meat was gone, they went out and hunted for
more. Jane notes that they do not only share the meat with family members, but with
anyone from Assumption that needs it.
Jane notes that she very rarely hunts for caribou because it tastes “too wild”.
Jane’s husband, Eric Kolay, traps in BC and on registered trapline #756T016.
She notes that porcupine are increasing in number in BC. Porcupine are trapped for
food by some Dene Tha’ and their quills are used by some people in their art.
Fishing
Jane specified that the Dene Tha’ depend on fish as part of their diet. She noted that
her family mostly eats northern pike which she catches at Habay with her father.
Jane has also fished with her father-in-law for jackfish at Kotcho Lake.
Medicines and Berries
Jane noted that the plant site contains black spruce. She explained that the bark from
these trees, and the pine cones they drop, can be boiled and used to treat chest colds.
She noted that black spruce also contain purple berries that can be used for colds.
Transcript 9
 Jane explained that black spruce is not the only tree that can be used medicinally. Bark
from aspen can be used for the stomach flu and she collects this bark in the fall.
Travel Routes
Jane travels to BC via the winter road from Rainbow Lake. This road crosses the Hay
River and is also known as the “Powerline road”. She noted it is about 254 km from
Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson using that road; she generally drives out and back in the
same day.
Observed Changes
Jane noted that before the traplines were instituted, the Dene Tha’ would “go
everywhere”.
She explained that without a vehicle it is very hard to go out on the land. She feels that
if she did not have a vehicle she would still find some way to go out, whether by quad
or skidoo. Jane believes that it takes determination to go out and practice the
traditional ways.
Jane explained that the Dene Tha’ have to go hunting further and further away in order
to supply their diet. This means they have to spend more on fuel and it becomes more
of an expense. Jane finds the expense to be a hardship but specifies that she would still
go hunting even with the expense. This is because she prefers wild meat to the meat
bought in a store. She does not like the meat she can purchase from the grocery store
and estimates that 90% of her diet is from wild meat.
Concerns
Jane is concerned that vegetation and animals can be contaminated from Gas Plants.
She heard the Chief of Fort Nelson First Nation speak on this issue and noted that the
Chief said there are lots of wells in BC and she interpreted that if moose eat vegetation
from a plant site they may get sick.
Jane noted that she would not go near the Plant to hunt. She explained that her
husband has done a lot of firefighting in BC and while there he learned that one flare
stack from a gas Plant can often emit upwards of one hundred chemicals. Jane believes
that all the vegetation around Plants “are dead” and if a moose eats this contaminated
vegetation it will be passed on to the Dene Tha’ when they eat the moose.
Jane believes that the government paving the Sierra Yoyo Desan Road is bad because
currently there is no one out using area and Jane would like it to be left the way it is.
She feels that the paving will eventually lead to easier and increased access.
Transcript 9
 She feels that an increase in development is bad for her personally, but would still go to
the area even if development increased. She feels it is very beautiful country and
wishes it could be left the way it is.
Jane noted that the Dene Tha’ depend on the land for the majority of their diet. She
explained that a lot of people have left the traditional life, but just as many still go.
Transcript 9
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:         Janice Providence
Date:                November 4, 2009
Location:            Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:        Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Background
Janice is the daughter of Don Metchooyeah and very interested in the environment. She
is currently completing a forestry course and has an interest in trees.
Janice has three sons.
Hunting and Trapping
Janice hunts with her father in British Columbia (BC) via the winter access road. She
specified that the road starts in Rainbow Lake and goes all the way to Fort Nelson.
Janice tries to go hunting with her father every winter because she has three sons and
would like them exposed to the traditional ways of life; Janice and her father generally
hunt for moose. If her father is not going, she will sometimes borrow his truck to go out
hunting or to his trapline. She will often head out just for the sake of being outdoors.
She noted that most people hunt for moose in the fall.
Janice uses the cutlines for trapping rabbits and sets her snares along them.
Fishing
Janice fishes in Habay and Rainbow Lake for pickerel in the spring and net
suckers/jackfish throughout the summer.
Medicines and Berries
Janice noted that medicinal plants grow in patches along the access road to Fort
Nelson. These medicines can be used to treat colds. Janice explained that these
medicines are seasonal and there are specific months when the leaves can be
harvested.
Janice also collects rat root; she explained that rat root generally grows around ponds
or in wetter areas and must be dug up to be harvested.
Transcript 10
 Janice also indicated that there is a type of juniper that can be found near the water fall
on the Hay River. It has tiny blue berries that can be boiled and used to treat coughs
and colds.
Janice also noted that the cones of a spruce tree can be boiled to help with stomach
aches. These trees are generally found in muskeg and the cones can be found on
smaller trees.
Janice explained that when the Dene Tha’ take medicinal plants from the land they give
something back in the form of an offering such as tobacco. She explained “that if you
take something you have to pay it… but you have to believe in it”.
Sacred Sites
Janice noted that she had observed graves near Amber River when she was completing
a survival camp. The graves were marked with pink survey ribbons from previous
community research.
Travel Routes
Janice travels with her father or other family members to BC via the winter access roads
for hunting and trapping. Janice noted that her father prefers the roads going into BC
as they are partially graded and makes it easier to access this area.
Observed Changes
Janice noticed when she was out on the land, that there were more trees cut down
compared with previous years. She explained that it takes between 60-100 years for the
trees to re-establish once they have been cut down and that by cutting the trees
industry is reducing the overall oxygen. Janice feels that it is not good to clear cut the
Plant site; she stated that everywhere she goes there is clear cutting and trees being
knocked down.
Janice pointed out that, in certain areas of BC and Alberta, there are now more buffalo
than there are moose. She explained that buffalo has a strongly scented urine and most
Dene Tha’ do not eat them. She stated that the urine scent if very strong and the smell
can flavour the meat. She also noted that where the buffalo are plentiful, there are
holes in the ground from their hooves. This limits camping locations and makes
travelling in those areas difficult.
Transcript 10
 Concerns
Janice is concerned with the increase in tree clearing she has observed in recent years.
She stated that when the forest is full of trees, there are lots of animals but when “you
cut down trees, where will the animals go”?
She is also concerned that the Plant will affect the things the Dene Tha’ eat. She
explained that the Dene Tha’ eat ducks and fish from the lakes and rivers near the Plant
and is concerned that these animals may be affected, in turn affect the Dene Tha’. She
feels that if the animals become contaminated that this will result in cancers in the
community. She feels frustrated that the Dene Tha’ have to “wait and see” what the
effects from the Plant will be on their bodies and that no one can provide answers on
what the effects might be.
Janice is also concerned that the contaminants resulting from the Plant could spread to
the community through the creeks and rivers even though Hay-Zama is not
geographically close to the actual Plant site.
Janice stated that she would not hunt, trap, fish or gather where she could hear or see
a Plant. She would be concerned about the chemicals and contaminants that may have
affected the animals and vegetation.
Janice explained that a lot of Dene Tha’ community members and elders are concerned
because Dene Tha’ rely on wild meat and they feel that industry is affecting this. They
want the moose meat to be healthy so that they are healthy. Most Dene Tha’ families
store moose meat and depend on this for their diet throughout the winter months. The
majority of all Dene Tha’ diet is wild meat and they only use store bought meat on
special occasions such as Christmas. Janice is concerned about how industry will affect
this way of life.
Transcript 10
                                   Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Jessie Providence
Date:                 November 3, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers:         Kathrin Janssen, Adena Dinn
Hunting and Trapping
Jessie hunts for moose and uses her truck as the means to get to the area. She hunts
with her sister Jane, but they travel in separate vehicles.
During her hunting trips in BC, Jessie has observed caribou throughout the area.
Recently she noted three caribou in BC.
Additionally she saw fourteen moose and dozens of elk on a trip to the Liard Hot
Springs in August of 2009. Jessie notes that there are lots of elk, moose and caribou
along the Alaska Highway.
Jessie explains that the last time her husband went trapping in BC was over 20 years
ago before his father passed away. Now he has a full-time job and does not have time
to go out on the land. She notes that he always talks about going back out on the land
“some winter”.
Fishing
Jessie does most of her fishing in Habay for northern pike. Her children love dried pike
and they eat it frequently.
Travel Routes
Jessie hunts in British Columbia (BC) using the winter access roads. She generally uses
one of two routes to get there, either the road originating in Rainbow Lake that follows
the Hay River or the road originating in the Zama area that crosses the Shekilie. She
goes to this area because, with the winter access roads, BC is much closer for hunting
than Manning (Alberta).
Medicines and Berries
Jessie noted that because she only travels to BC in the winter, she does not collect
medicines or berries in the region. She does note that the Plant site has an abundance
of black spruce and the berries from these trees can be used as medicine. These trees
often grow in areas where there is muskeg.
Transcript 11
 Concerns
Jessie feels that a Plant will affect everything in the area, especially the moose. She
feels that once the plant goes in there will no longer be moose in that area as animals
tend to stay away from Plant sites.
She is concerned that the Plant site will affect the vegetation surrounding it and could
lead to contamination of the medicines and berries that grow there.
Transcript 11
                                 Interview Summary
Interviewee:          Thomas Ahkimnachie and Ricky Pastion
Date:                 November 2, 2009
Location:             Chateh Administration Office
Interviewer:          Tracy Campbell, Adena Dinn, Kathrin Janssen
Hunting and Trapping
Ricky explained that people will often hunt while they are out on the land trapping. He
noted that Dene Tha’ hunters rarely set a date to go out hunting, rather, when they see
an animal while out trapping they kill it.
He further stated that the Dene Tha’ all help each other and share the food they hunt
just as they did in the past.
Thomas explained that he does not hunt in Alberta near Zama City because there are
too many buffalo. Instead, he hunts and traps in Alberta on trapline #88 and in BC on
traplines #756T015 and #756T016.
Ricky explained that he goes hunting whenever he can; on long weekends, weekends
and holidays. Most Dene Tha’ go all the time if they do not have to work.
Fishing
Thomas explained that the area surrounding the proposed Plant is mostly muskeg.
Ricky noted that beaver dams usually flood the area surrounding the proposed Plant
and small fish can be found in these flooded areas when the water is high enough to
have sufficient oxygen supply.
Ricky emphasized the importance of fish to the Dene Tha’ because they require fish to
survive. Ricky stated that he does not know what people would do if there was no
longer fish available because people depend on this, along with hunting and trapping,
as their source of food.
Medicine and Berries
Ricky and Thomas noted the types of berries they eat from the land which include
chokecherries, cranberries, strawberries, blueberries, raspberries and wild rhubarb.
Transcript 12
 They specified that rat root is often used as medicine.
Thomas also explained that the root or stem of raspberry can be eaten if the outer part
is peeled off. It does not need to be cooked or boiled and it tastes like carrots.
Ricky indicated that the roots of many plants are edible.
Concerns
Ricky is concerned that the proposed Plant will push the animals away. He explained
that in Alberta he has observed that cutlines, roads and the sound of vehicles push the
animals away.
Thomas explained that animals would either go further west or north to avoid the Plant
site.
Ricky is also concerned that more facilities or roads that are associated with the Plant
will push away animals. He already sees this occurring in the area around Rainbow
Lake, where moose and other animals are killed by traffic.
Transcript 12
ZwiﬁWeﬁ’lwm“ Mg
Why» . .. .: .. . ..,. . . .. . _ .._ . .‘ . . M
$$$$$eﬁﬁvis’i‘3 3” "g“? "‘3 "E ”Q “t" f“? - “¥-
&%ﬁﬁw”m3§“ﬁgﬁ~§$§Lrﬂ ‘ ~ i :1. E; : i xza' 13’. ‘ f? ‘ 3 ‘2; .~ ~-‘ 2 2 ”L i =
ﬁ’égﬁggigﬁgw’éﬂﬁﬁt .5; 4i. . 5 $6.. ‘ .3: . .--~ 66, "6.. :1 -. _. ,_ ML. M6
ﬁwfefwhgt W

Suite 340 — l 122 Mainland Street

Vancouver, BC V613 5L1

Phone: 604.687.0549 Fax: 604.687.2696

www.jﬂiawea
4 10 Rosanne M. Kyie
February 1’ 20 Direct Line: 604.687.0549,ext. 107

E-mail: rkyie@jfklaw.ca
Delivered by Courier ‘

File No. 1003-041

Natural Resources Canada

Maj or Projects Management Ofﬁce

Rm. 237, 2"6 Floor — 155 Queen Street

Ottawa, ON KIA 0134

Attention: Scott Clausen, Senior Policy Adviser

Dear Sir/Mesdames:

Re: Consultation with Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN”) on Westcoast Energy 1:19., carrying
on business as Spectra Energy Transmission (“Spectra”) Fort Nelson North Processing
Facility Applicatitm to NEB (“the Application” or “the Proj act”)

Hearing Order GH~1~2010 and File 0F—Fax-Gas-W102-2009-04 01

We are legal counsel to the DTFN in relation to the above-noted matter. We understand from
correspondence from the National Energy Board (“NEE”) dated January 26, 2010 that Natural
Resources Canada (“NRCan”) will be responsible for undertaking Crown consultation With First Nations
in relation to the proposed Proj ect. We are uncertain Whether you are the individual Within NRCan with
carriage of this matter, or what if any role the Major Projects Management Ofﬁce (“MPMO”) Will have
in relation to this Application. If you do not have carriage of the matter, we ask that you fbrward this
letter and enclosures to the appropriate people within NRCan and/or the MPMO, and identify that
individual(s) to us.

The proposed Project is located in DTFN’S Traditional Territory. As we have previously advised both

Spectra and NEB, the proposed Proj cat has the potential to adversely impact DTF-N’s Aboriginal and

Treaty rights. As a result, a duty to consult is triggered. We have provided the proponent and NEB With

a Traditional Land Use Study that identiﬁes some of the historical and current uses of the Proj ect area by

DTFN members as well as an historical report dated July .14, 2009 _ we enclose copies of those reports

for your information. We are also enclosing a copy of a report entitled “An Integrated Assessment of

Potential Impacts to Dene Tha’ First Nation Treaty Rights” dated November 4, 2009 which was

prepared for the Government of. British Columbia to compile Traditional Land Use information collected

for the proposed EnCana Cabin Gas Plant (regulated by the BC. Environmental Assessment Ofﬁce) and
the proposed TransCanada Horn River Mainline Proj ect (regulated by the NEB). This report also needs

2
to be considered in the consultation process given the cumulative impacts to DTFN’S constitutionally»
protected rights from these, and other, proj cats in its Traditional Territory.

We are also enclosing copies of our letters dated August 26, 2009 and October 28, 2009 to the NEB,
tegether With enclosures. As you. will see, our previous letters raise a number of issues and pose a
number of questions in relation. to the Application, potential impacts from the Proj ect, and the
consultation. process.

To date= no Crown consultation has occurred with DTFN in relation to the proposed Project. As we
stated in our October 28th letter, “The lack of adequate consultation With DTFN is a major deﬁciency of
the Application which must be addressed before the NEB should consider the Application.” As set out
expressly in the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of
Forests), it is government that has the constitutional duty to consult, not proj ect proponents.

In addition, we have received only partial responses from NEB to our information requests and
questions. Accordingly, we retiterate the following requests and ask that NRCan and/or the MPMO
address these issues:

1. Please advise What federal and provincial regulatory authorizations Spectra is required to obtain
in relation to the Proj eet and how consultation With DTF N will be undertaken by the various

. regulatory agencies.

2. How Will Traditional Use/Traditional Ecological Knowledge of DTFN be factored into the
Crown’s consultation process?

3. Will the Crown obtain and consider the information requirements needed to assess impacts, as
referenced in Appendix “A” to our October 28, 2009 letter to the NEB (enclosed)?

4. What funding will be provided to DTFN to carry out consultation With the F ederal Crown? We
note that the NEB has asked us to direct this question to the MPMO so we ask both. NRCan and
MPMO to respond to this question.

5. Will the MPMO be giving notice to DTFN under the Federal Authorizations Consultation
Protocol (the “Protocol”), as indicated by the NEB? We ask that the notice be provided to our
law ﬁrm, as solicitors for the DTFN.

6. What permits, decisions 01* authorizations are required Which trigger operation of the Protocol
and What are the processes and time lines for any such decisions?

7. Will DTFN be consulted in respect of any decision by a federal department as to whether or not
provisions of CEAA are triggered, pursuant to the deﬁnition of “Federal Authorization” in s. 1.3
of the Protocol? If not, why not?

8. Given that the NEB has decided to proceed to an oral hearing, we understand from Ms. Clayton
that the MPMO has the ability to engage in an enhanced process with DTFN in advance of the
hearing and DTFN could put forward topics to be included in the public hearing w please advise
if this is going to occur. Given that the hearing is in April of this year, steps need to be taken in
relation to this matter as soon as possible.

We also ask that answers to the following additional questions be provided:
1. Will the DTFN have any input into the consultation process that the Crown intends to
carry out in reSpect 0f the Application?

3

2. What steps have you taken to make a preliminary assessment of the strength of the
DTFN’S claims in the vicinity of the Project?

3. Will the Crown consult with DTFN in relation to the NEB’S Filing Guidelines? We have
raised concerns with the NEB about the adequacy and appropriateness of the Guidelines
to deal with Crown consultation.

4. How will any Crown consultation in relation to the Proj ect be integrated into the EA and
NEB processes for the Application? In particular, What are the legislative or regulatory
means by which the results of any such consultation would be integrated into the BA and
NEB processes?

5. What steps will your department take to analyze the potential direct, indirect and
cumulative impacts of the Project on the DTFN’S section 35 rights and what speciﬁc
criteria will you use to assess such impacts? Are those criteria different from the criteria
that may be used by the N138 in conducting the EA and N138 hearing? Again, we
reference Schedule “A” to our October 28, 2009 letter and advise that these are the types
of information requirements that are needed to assess potential impacts to DTFN’S
constitutionally protected rights.

6. Are you prepared to consult With the DTFN on the potential direct, indirect and
cumulative impacts of the Project on DTFN’S section 35 rights prior to any approval of
the Proj ect?

7. Are you. prepared to work With the DTFN to design criteria and/or thresholds that are
necessary to assess the cumulative impacts of all existing and reasonably foreseeable
development in the vicinity of the Project speciﬁcally as they affect the section 35 rights
of the DTFN?

8. Are you prepared to consult with the DTFN to implement rigorous monitoring and
assessment programs, on a local and regional basis, to ensure that the key resources and
lands relied on by the DTFN to exercise its section 35 rights do not fall below the levels
required to sustain those rights?

9. What steps has your government taken to determine the extent to which industrial
development Which. has already been authorized by the Crown has already deprived the
DTFN of a meaningﬁll opportunity to exercise their rights, particularly in the Vicinity of
the Project?

10. Is your government prepared to consult with the DTFN, prior to any approval of the
Proj ect, 0n the impacts of the grants of tenure to Spectra and to other companies on
DTFN’S ability to exercise its rights in the Vicinity of the Proj ect and in other parts of its
Traditional Territory?

11. Are you prepared to work with the DTFN, prior to any approval of the Project, to
determine how the grants of tenure in their Traditional Territory and the existing, planned
and reasonably foreseeable development that has been approved, or is being prOposed to
be carried out, pursuant to those tenures, can be done in a way so as to ensure that the
DTFN has a meaningﬁll opportunity to exercise its rights, particularly in the vicinity of
the Project? 011 this issue, we enclose a report by MSES dated October 31, 2009 that was

4
previously provided to the NEB. This report shows the current and anticipated rates of
disturbance within DTFN’s Traditional Territory.

12. Are you prepared to work With the DTFN on the development and ﬁmding of a
Traditional Resource Use Plan to detennine the resources on which the DTF N relies, and
will rely in the future, to exercise its rights, prior to any approval of the Project?

13. Are you prepared to consult With the DTFN, prior to any approval of the Project, on the
development of apprOpriate baseline data, benchmarks/thresholds or related measures for
wildlife, ﬁsh, associated habitat, air, water and other resources on Which DTFN members
rely to carry out their rights, prior to any approval of the Proj ect, to ensure that potential
direct, indirect and cumulative impacts on their rights are properly and fully assessed and
accommodated and to ensure that there are sufﬁcient quantities/eonditions for same to
ensure that the DTFN can meaningfully exercise its rights now and into the future?

14. Are you prepared to consult with the DTFN prior to any approval of the Proj ect, to
implement regional targets for the DTFN’S key resources/resources on which their
members rely to preserve their rights in the face of ongoing development within their
Traditional Territory?

15. Are you prepared to consult With the DTFN, prior to any approval of the Proj ect, to
identify critical lands and waters that should. be protected from further development,
including areas within the Vicinity of the Project, to ensure that the DTFN retains a
meaningful opportunity to exercise its rights?

16. By What process, and upon what criteria, will your governments determine the adequacy
(or lack thereof) of Spectra’s consultation with the DTFN on the Project? On this point
in particular, can you please provide us With cepies of all consultation records exchanged
between your Government and Spectra so that we can verify the accuracy of same.
Please also provide copies of same to us on an ongoing basis.

We look forward to hearing from you on. these matters, at your earliest opportunity.
Yours truly,
J anes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
elf} 5K rt“
per: A we t
t i» it stilt
Rosanne M. Kyle
RMK/ejr
Enclosures
cc: DTFN Chief and Couneit (without enclosures)
Valerie Bonnes, Manager, DTFN Lands Department (without enclosures)
Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group (without enclosures)
Robert Freedman, lanes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation (without enciosures)
Westcoast Energy Inc, Attm Peter Spicker (via courier)
National Energy Board, Attn.: Anne-M‘arie Erickson (via courier)
MacKenzie Gas Project Ofﬁce, Attn: Lorraine Ciayton (via courier)

       BOUCHARD & KENNEDY RESEARCH CONSULTANTS
DENE THA’ PRESENCE IN
   NORTHEASTERN BC
Prepared for: Calliou Group, Calgary, Alberta
   on Behalf of the Dene Tha’ First Nation
                    Randy Bouchard
                      14 July 2009
 Table of Contents
1.0    INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 1
   1.1   Linguistic and Ethnic Affiliations of the Dene Tha’ ........................................................ 1
2.0    SOME DOCUMENTARY REFERENCES TO THE DENE THA’ PRESENCE IN
NORTHEASTERN BC .................................................................................................................. 4
3.0    PROPOSED DENE THA’ TRANSBOUNDARY HUNTING RESERVE ........................ 7
   3.1   Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC, As Documented in the Early 1930s ............... 7
   3.2   The Proposed 1934 Dene Tha’ Transboundary Hunting Reserve.................................. 14
4.0    CONTINUED DOCUMENTATION OF DENE THA’ TRAPPING AND HUNTING IN
NORTHEASTERN BC ................................................................................................................ 21
5.0     CONCLUSIONS............................................................................................................... 23
6.0     FIGURES ..........................................................................................................................24
 1.0       INTRODUCTION
This overview report of the Dene Tha presence in northeastern British Columbia is based on
Randy Bouchard’s literature review undertaken over a four-year period between June 2005 and
June 2009. While this review of known and available ethnohistoric, ethnographic and linguistic
source materials has been wide-ranging and thorough, it is not exhaustive. A number of sources
remain to be reviewed.
1.1       Linguistic and Ethnic Affiliations of the Dene Tha’
The Dene Tha’ have been referred to in the literature by a number of names, including: “Upper
Hay River Band of Slaves”; “Hay River Indians”; “Hay Lakes Indians”; “Chateh/Assumption
Indians”; “Slavey Indians at Hay Lake(s)”; “Upper Hay River Post Indians”; and “Bistcho Lake
Tribe.”
In 1978 the name of the “Slaves of the Upper Hay River Band” was officially changed to “Dene
Tha’.” As stated in an April 1978 Band Council Resolution, “Dene Tha’ . . .is a name which the
people have been using to address themselves for Centuries.” 1 This change of Band name was
made because the terms “Slave” or “Slavey” are derogatory and offensive to modern generations
of the Dene Tha’. According to present-day Dene Tha’, the terms “Slave” or “Slavey” came
about not because of Native terms used by neighbouring tribes to refer to the Dene Tha’, 2 but
through a series of mis-understandings by early explorers and other non-Aboriginals as to who
the Dene Tha’ really are. 3
“Dene Tha’,” the preferred ethnonym, 4 will be used wherever possible in the present overview,
together with another preferred term, “Dene” 5 —referring to single groups of Northern
1
  Band Council Resolution 1978/79 – 06, 14 April 1978, of the Slaves of the Upper Hay River Band, together with
letter of 29 June 1978 confirming this BCR, from H.H. Chapman, Registrar of Indian Land Registry, Indian and
Northern Affairs Headquarters, Ottawa. Instrument No. 59565, Indian Land Registry, Indian and Northern Affairs
Headquarters, Ottawa.
2
  See: Michael Asch (1981). Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic. Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. Pp. 347-348
3
  Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 11-12 July
2009.
4
  An ethnonym is the name used by a group of people for self-identification.
5
  A number of tribal groups speaking Athapaskan languages (see the footnote that follows) use variations of the
Native term anglicized as “Dene”—meaning ‘man’ or ‘person’—to identify themselves. See Beryl C. Gillespie
(1981). Territorial Groups Before 1821: Athapaskans of the Shield and the Mackenzie Drainage, Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 6: Subarctic. Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 168. “Dene”
also means ‘people,’ as well as ‘man’ or ‘person’ (Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to
Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
                                                        1
 Athapaskans, 6 several Northern Athapaskan peoples collectively, or to Northern Athapaskans in
general—although it will also be necessary to use the term “Slavey” (“Slave”) when citing the
literature.
The term “Slavey” (“Slave”) has commonly been used by anthropologists and linguists to refer
to the larger entity of which the Dene Tha’ are a component group. 7 Linguists Michael Krauss
and Victor Golla in 1980 referred to this larger entity as “Slavey-Hare” because their research
indicated that the groups known as Slavey, Mountain, Bear Lake and Hare all speak closely-
related dialects of the same language. Krauss and Golla classified the “Slavey-Hare” language, a
dialect of which is spoken by the Dene Tha’, as one of 23 languages comprising “Northern
Athapaskan,” a recognized geographical subdivision of the Athapaskan Language Family. 8
Anthropologist Jean-Guy Goulet, who undertook extensive research among the Dene Tha’ over a
six-year period beginning in 1979, pointed out in a recent publication that when anthropologists
adopted “Slavey” as the English term to refer to all the “Slavey proper” populations, “they
collapsed into one general category various groups dispersed over a wide area.” 9
As Krauss and Golla have pointed out, the most widely spoken of the modern dialects of the
“Slavey-Hare” language is “Slavey proper” which is the dominant dialect not only of the Dene
Tha’ communities in Alberta but also of other Dene communities in the southern North West
Territories at lower Hay River (now known as “Katlodeeche Dene”), Fort Providence (now
known as “Deh Hah Gotie Dene”), Kakisa Lake (now known as “Ka’agee Tu Dene”), Trout
Lake (now known as “Sambaa K’e Dene”), Fort Liard (now known as “Acho Dene Koe”), Jean
Marie River (now known as “Tthe’K’ehdeli Dene”), Nahanni Butte (now known as “N’ah adehe
Dene”) and Fort Simpson (now known as “Liidli Keu Dene”), and in British Columbia at Fort
6
  “Athapaskan” is an arbitrary designation introduced in the 1830’s-1840’s to denote “linguistically related Indian
groups in the interior of northwestern North America beyond the Churchill River”; see Gillespie 1981, p. 168.
7
  Asch 1981, pp. 338-339.
8
  Michael Krauss and Victor Golla (1981). Northern Athapaskan Languages. Handbook of North American Indians,
Vol. 6, Subarctic, Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., pp. 67, 79-80. In 1995, linguist
Keren Rice proposed a slightly different sub-classification in which the “Slavey-Hare” language was classified as
part of what she called the “Mackenzie” grouping in “Northwestern Canada” within the overall Athapaskan
Language Family. See Ives Goddard (1996). Introduction. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 17,
Languages. Published by the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. Pp. 4-5.
9
  Jean-Guy Goulet (2004). The Dene Tha of Chateh: Continuities and Transformation. Native Peoples: The
Canadian Experience. Ed. by R. Bruce Morrison and C. Roderick Wilson. Published by Oxford University Press,
Toronto and Oxford. P. 160.
                                                          2
 Nelson; there are also significant numbers of Slavey speakers in Fort Wrigley (now known as
“Pehdzeh Ki Dene”) and Fort Norman. 10
While the Dene Tha’ speak one of the dialects of the “Slavey proper” division of the “Slavey-
Hare” language, they also recognize sub-dialects within their own speech area. The Dene Tha’—
sometimes written as “Dene Dháa”—refer to their speech as “Dene Dháh.” Thus, “Dene Tha’”
(“Dene Dháa”) means ‘ordinary people’ and “Dene Dháh” means ‘ordinary people’s language.’
Linguist Patrick Moore identifies three “Dene Dháh” dialects: Kegúnht’u, the Bistcho Lake
Dialect; Xewόnht’e, the Assumption/ Habay Dialect; and, Xewόnst’e, the Fort Vermilion/ Eleske
Dialect. 11 The Beaver people, who speak a different but closely-related language to the Dene
Tha’, . 12 refer to themselves as “Dene Dzaa,” 13 which is said to mean ‘real people.’ 14
10
   Krauss and Golla 1981, pp. 79-80. For the contemporary names of Slavey-speaking groups, see Michael Asch
and Robert Wishart (2004). The Slavey Indians: The Relevance of Ethnohistory to Development. Native Peoples:
The Canadian Experience. Ed. by R. Bruce Morrison and C. Roderick Wilson. Published by Oxford University
Press, Toronto and Oxford. P. 196. See also: http://www.dehchofirstnations.com/members/fort_providence.htm,
accessed on 9 May 2006.
11
    Patrick Moore and Angela Wheelock (editors) (1990). Wolverine Myths and Visions: Dene Traditions from
Northern Alberta. Compiled by the Dene Wodih Society. Published by the University of Alberta Press, Edmonton,
Alberta and the University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska. Pp. xi, 94-96. Additional clarification is provided
by Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay, who points out that “Dene Tha’” means ‘regular; normal; common’ and that
“Dene Dhah” means ‘people’s language’ (Personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James Ahnassay to Tracy
Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
12
   Krauss and Golla 1981, p. 81.
13
   Robin Ridington (1981). Beaver. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic, Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., p. 350; also, personal communication of Dene Tha’ Chief James
Ahnassay to Tracy Campbell and Randy Bouchard, 14 July 2009).
14
   Ridington 1981, p. 350.
                                                        3
 2.0       SOME DOCUMENTARY REFERENCES TO THE DENE THA’
          PRESENCE IN NORTHEASTERN BC
A map of the Hay River valley and surrounding areas appears as Figure 1 in the present
overview report. 15
Maps of overall “Slavey” territory circa 1725 and circa 1850 appear here respectively as Figures
2 16 and 3, 17 and a map showing the approximate twentieth-century boundary of the area used
by the Dene Tha’ appears as Figure 4. 18
A map illustrating Aboriginal occupation of the Hay River area circa 1870-1875 appears in the
present overview report as Figure 5. 19
Despite the wealth of existing documents from the North West Company’s and Hudson’s Bay
Company’s Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District fur trade, there is little in this early
historical material that distinguishes the Dene Tha’ from other “Slavey-speaking” groups.
Occasionally, groups were distinguished on the basis of clothing, such as the Hare Athapaskan
being known for their use of rabbit skin, or the group who called themselves “Embayo dinnah”
being known to the traders as the “Gens de Mouten” on account of their use of sheep skin for
clothing. 20 Sometimes linguistic distinctions came to the fore when translators’ abilities were
found lacking, but culturally-similar subgroups of Athapaskan peoples remained largely
undefined until the mid-19th century. Moreover, nomenclature used during the 18th and early 19th
century fur trade was not consistently applied, a situation that researchers have acknowledged
throughout the region. 21 Traders seldom attempted to seek out knowledge of ethnonyms—the
names by which groups of people self-identified—and instead applied murky generic terms such
as “Slave” or ‘Slavey” to people of the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District; sometimes this
15
   David A. Ian Harrison (1984). Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of Site and Situation.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Alberta, Edmonton. P. 28.
16
   Diamond Jenness (1932). Tribes of the Mackenzie and Yukon Basins. In, The Indians of Canada (Sixth Edition).
National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 65, Anthropological Series No. 15. Reprinted in 1963 by the Queen’s
Printer, Ottawa. P. 378.
17
   Michael J. Asch (1981). Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6, Subarctic. Published by the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 338.
18
   Moore and Wheelock 1990, p. xv.
19
   Harrison 1984, p. 101.
20
   Lloyd Keith (2001). North of Athabasca: Slave Lake and Mackenzie River Documents of the North West
Company, 1800-1821. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. Pp. 237, 333.
21
   Gillespie 1981. Pp. 161-168.
                                                      4
 identity included people known otherwise as “Beaver.” Similarly, the term “Beaver”
occasionally included groups more often identified as “Slavey” and very likely included in some
instances the ancestors of those identified today as Dene Tha’.
Not even documents remaining from fur trade activities located in the area used by the Dene
Tha’ provide acknowledgement of the Aboriginal people’s own form of identification. Instead,
semi-nomadic groups of people, when distinguished at all, were sometimes associated with a
general geographical area. An example of such a practice can be seen in the records of the North
West Company, compiled for publication by historian Lloyd Keith. Historical accounts indicate
that as early as the fall of 1806 the North West Company established a trading post on the Hay
River, at a site subsequently identified as being within the general area where ancestors of the
Dene Tha’ commonly travelled for resource harvesting. Summarizing documents of the
Company’s activities in the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River regions, historian Lloyd Keith
wrote:
                  As early as the fall of 1806, the Nor’Westers established a post on
                  Hay River, a stream that empties into Great Slave Lake near the
                  head of the Mackenzie River. Although provisioned from Fort
                  Vermilion on Peace River, Hay River Post received peltry from the
                  Slaveys of the upper Mackenzie and Liard Rivers and was intended
                  to serve as a buffer to deter any Hudson’s Bay Company expansion
                  in the direction of Mackenzie River. 22
Geographer David Harrison concluded, on the basis of his review of the documentation, that this
trading post was situated at some point upstream, on the bank of the Hay River near the junction
with the Meander River. 23 A site up the Hay River in this same area—the confluence of the Hay
and Meander Rivers—is clearly identified on Murdoch McPherson’s 1824 map as an abandoned
post. 24 McPherson had knowledge of the country, for in 1822 the HBC had ordered him to
construct a post at the confluence of the Liard and Black (Petitot) Rivers that would become
known as Fort Liard. 25
Natives identified as “Slavey,” as well as Beaver, Chipewyans and possibly an occasional
Iroquois traded at Hay River Post, although Harrison notes that the Chipewyan had to be
persuaded and induced with presents to stay in the region. Hay River became the depot for those
“Slavey” who had traded at Fort Nelson and the Mackenzie River outposts prior to the closure of
these establishments. 26 Harrison concluded that at the time the North West Company operated
22
   Keith 2001, p. 70.
23
   Harrison 1984, pp. 74-75.
24
   Keith 2001, p. 45.
25
   Keith 2001, p. 70.
26
   Harrison 1984, p.77.
                                                    5
 the Hay River Post (1806-1820), “the Slaveys inhabited the area between the western edge of the
Hay River basin and both the Liard and Mackenzie River Valleys.” 27
Oblate Missionary Émile F.S. Petitot’s toponymic work among the Aboriginal peoples of the
Athabasca-Mackenzie region from approximately 1862-1883 has been inventoried and analyzed
by Donat Savoie who provided Petitot’s classification of the “Slaves” as follows, to include the
Hay River people and the Horn Mountain people:
                  . . . The Slaves properly speaking, who are divided into People of
                  the rivière au Foin [Hay River], of lac de Truite [Trout Lake], of
                  the montagne la Corne [Horn Mountain], of the Fourche du
                  Mackenzie [Fork of the Mackenzie] and of Fort Norman . . . 28
Geographer David Harrison’s map depicting the period circa 1870-1875 shows the “Hay River
Indians” [Dene Tha’] occupying the upper reaches of the Hay River drainage in British
Columbia (see Figure 5). 29
Government records for the general region of northeastern BC are very meagre until
approximately 1930. Very little information is provided in the Treaty 8 records from 1899-1900.
As well, the subsequent records of this region in the Annual Reports of the Department of Indian
Affairs are cursory. While brief comments on this region were made every year after 1900 by
H.A. Conroy in the report of the Treaty 8 Commissioner, these are lacking in useful detail.
Because of this region’s Treaty status, it was not administered through the British Columbia
Indian Inspectorate. Instead, the area became an adjunct of the Lesser Slave Agency, in Alberta.
Since the Indian Agent was based far from the region, and generally only came to visit only once
a year, in the summer when treaty payments were made, comments about the area in the Alberta
Agency's reports in the published Annual Reports are brief and generally unhelpful. The Royal
Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia which conducted relatively
detailed investigations between 1913-1916, kept detailed records, and is generally a major source
of information on Natives throughout British Columbia, is of minimal use here. Members of the
Royal Commission did not go to this region, stating in 1916 that the region's remoteness, and the
lack of dependable information about the local Native peoples’s requirements, made a visitation
pointless until basic preliminaries like a census were undertaken. The Sessional Papers of the
Department of Indian Affairs for British Columbia contain nothing of value about the region
until about 1930; these documents indicated that northeastern BC’s Aboriginal inhabitants were
"nomads" about whom little was known. It was not until 1934 that a Sub-Agency was established
at Fort St.John within the British Columbia Inspectorate.
27
   Harrison 1984, p.77.
28
   Donat Savoie, editor 2001. Land Occupancy by the Amerindians of the Canadian Northwest in the 19th Century,
as reported by Émile Petitot: Toponymic Inventory, Data Analyses, Legal Implications. CCI Press, Occasional
Publication No. 49. Ottawa: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. P. 17.
29
   Harrison 1984, p. 101.
                                                        6
 3.0       PROPOSED DENE THA’ TRANSBOUNDARY HUNTING RESERVE
The 1934 plan to set aside a very large transboundary “hunting reserve” for the exclusive use of
the Dene Tha’—encompassing the northwestern corner of Alberta, the northeastern corner of
British Columbia, and portions of the southern North West Territories—came about, in part,
because of concerns raised in the early 1930s when it was realized by government officials that
Dene Tha’ people had been trapping in northeastern BC “for generations.”
3.1       Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC, As Documented in the Early 1930s
One of the first government documents that refers to the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC
in the early 1930s is a radiogram of 5 March 1932 from the Commissioner of the BC Police to
his Commanding Officer in Prince George. The Commissioner stated he had been contacted that
same day by the Indian Commissioner for BC who complained that “some Hay Lake Indians”
[Dene Tha’] who had been trapping in northeastern BC “had been sent out of the Province,” even
though, he added, these same Native people, by Treaty, “are allowed to trap in British
Columbia.” 30
Further details about this incident were provided on 7 March 1932 by W.E. Ditchburn, the Indian
Commissioner for BC, who wrote to BC Provincial Game Commissioner Bryan Williams.
Ditchburn and said that it was reported in a 4 March 1932 telegram from Indian Affairs
Headquarters in Ottawa that a telegram had been received that same day from “Chief Tallay
Slave Band Haylakes, B.C.” complaining that:
                  ‘Police at Haylakes has ordered immediate vacation of Haylake
                  Indians from British Columbia who have trapped district for
                  generations.’ [underlining added]. This means added privation.
                  Please endeavour to have this order cancelled and wire reply. These
                  Indians have no reserve if chased from hunting grounds this winter
                  means hardship . . . 31
This same incident was also noted in Lesser Slave Lake Indian agent Napoleon L’Heureux’s
diary entry for 4 March 1932 where he wrote that the “Hay Lakes Chief” had wired him that
same day, “stating that the B.C. Police had ordered immediate evacuation of Indians from B.C.
and requesting the Dept. to endeavour to cancelle [sic] this order.” 32
30
   Radiogram of 5 March 1932 from the Commissioner of the BC Police, Victoria, to the Officer Commanding F
Division, Prince George. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
31
   Letter of 7 March 1932 from W.E. Ditchburn, Indian Commissioner for BC, Victoria, to A. Bryan Williams, BC
Provincial Game Commissioner, Victoria. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
32
   Glenbow Museum and Archives, Calgary, Alberta. M2216, Accession No. 35, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agency
Papers. Daily Journals kept by the Indian Agents, 1911-1937. Box 2, Journal entry for 4 March 1932 by Indian
                                                       7
 It was Ditchburn’s opinion, as expressed in his 7 March 1932 letter to BC Game Commissioner
Williams, that evicting these Hay Lakes [Dene Tha’] Alberta people from BC was wrong
because “the Indians in the western part of Alberta have by Treaty the right to trap in that part of
the Province of British Columbia west of the central range of the Rocky Mountains, as this right
is given to them under the conditions of Treaty No. 8 . . .”. Ditchburn concluded that in light of
the Game Wardens’ “misunderstanding on this point,” Williams should:
                  take such action as will permit of the full terms of this Treaty,
                  particularly with regard to the matter of hunting, trapping and
                  fishing, being carried out to the fullest extent by notifying your
                  Game Wardens to permit of the Indians coming under Treaty No. 8
                  continuing their trapping, hunting and fishing in that part of British
                  Columbia lying west of the central range of the Rocky Mountains. 33
Williams’ initial response to this 7 March 1932 letter of Ditchburn’s was firm. On 10 March
1932 Williams wrote that he was “very much inclined to think that we have every right to
prevent these Indians [the Dene Tha’] coming here.” He cited Section 6 of the Game Act which
at that time, he noted, specified “no Indian who is not a resident shall hunt of kill game in the
Province [of BC] at any time.” Thus Williams concluded “my Wardens who are enforcing the
Game Act are perfectly right in turning these Indians back.” While he acknowledged Treaty
rights to hunt, trap and fish, Williams pointed out that “such rights are subject to such
Regulations as my from time to time be made by the Government of the country.” Williams
concluded his letter by stating that he would seek the views of District Game Warden T. Van
Dyk on this same matter. 34
Also on 10 March 1932, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agent Napoleon L’Heureux wrote in his
journal:
                  Received reply from Ottawa re telegram of the 4th inst. stating that
                  the Province [BC] had been requested to allow Slave [Dene Tha’]
                  Indians to continue to trap in B.C. as formerly, as provided with
Agent Napoleon L’Heureux.
33
   Ditchburn to Williams, 7 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
34
   Williams to Ditchburn, 10 March 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                      8
                   treaty. Wired H.B. [Hudson’s Bay Company] Manager to notify
                  Indians. 35
Van Dyk was quick to respond to Williams’ request for his views on the subject of the Dene
Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC. On 15 March 1932 he sent a brief report to Williams that was
entitled “Alberta Indians (Hay Lakes) [Dene Tha’] trapping in British Columbia.” According to
Van Dyk, it had been the Game Department’s custom to enforce the Game Act in its entirety. He
also pointed out that “special instructions have been issued from time to time regarding Section
6, to the Constables and Game Wardens in the Peace River and Fort Nelson Districts.” Van Dyk
added that during the last two years he had given “special instructions to enforce Section 6” to
the Fort Nelson Game Warden, in response to complaints about “Alberta Indians” trapping in
northeastern BC. It was Van Dyk’s position that Section 6 of the Game Act should be
“maintained and enforced.” 36
Acknowledging Van Dyk’s report on 18 March, 1932, Williams commented that “what you have
written is almost identical with my answer [of 10 March 1932] to Mr. Ditchburn on the subject.”
Williams instructed Van Dyk “to continue to keep these Indians [Dene Tha’] out [of BC] until it
is absolutely proved that we have not the power to do so.” 37
Meanwhile Ditchburn, who was not satisfied with Williams’ response of 10 March 1932, wrote
directly to R.H. Pooley, the BC Attorney-General. In a 15 March 1932 letter to Pooley,
Ditchburn described the situation of the “Hay Lakes Indians” trapping in northeastern BC,
referenced Williams’ views on this as set out in his 10 March 1932 letter, and asked for Pooley’s
views “as to whether Section 6 of the British Columbia Game Act overrides the conditions
mentioned in Treaty No. 8.” Ditchburn concluded his letter by stating:
                  If I am right in my contention then I would strongly recommend
                  that Section 6 of the British Columbia Game Act be so amended at
                  the present Session by making provision that the Indians under
                  Treaty No. 8 will in future be permitted to enjoy the privileges
                  guaranteed to them when they surrendered their interest in the
                  territory covered by the Treaty mentioned. 38
35
   Glenbow Museum and Archives, Calgary, Alberta. M2216, Accession No. 35, Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agency
Papers. Daily Journals kept by the Indian Agents, 1911-1937. Box 2, Journal entry for 10 March 1932 by Indian
Agent Napoleon L”Heureux.
36
   Report of Van Dyk to Williams, 15 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
37
   Williams to Van Dyk, 18 March 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
38
   Ditchburn to Pooley, 15 March 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                       9
 However, the views of the BC Game Department would soon change, as a result of a remarkable
“patrol report” dated 20 April 1932 by J.S. Clark, the Fort Nelson Game Warden. 39 This report
is discussed below.
Game Warden Clark, assisted by his colleague, Special Game Warden B. Villeneuve and using
two trains of sled dogs and toboggans, undertook a 90-day patrol between 21 January and 19
April 1932, covering a total distance of 1,430 miles between Fort Nelson and Hay Lakes,
Alberta, via the Shikillie, Hay, Black [Petitot] and Fontas Rivers. The primary object of this
patrol, according to Clark, was “to see that there were no infractions of the B.C. Game Laws by
the Alberta trappers.” Clark described the patrol as one of the most difficult ever undertaken
from the Fort Nelson detachment. The patrol was made during one of the worst winters in 20
years, with temperatures ranging from 10 to 60 degrees below zero, almost continuous winds,
and deep snow. And to make matters even worse, there were no accurate maps of this entire
region, and no boundaries had been demarcated on the ground between northeastern BC and
northwestern Alberta. 40 As Clark described the situation:
                  . . . The rivers and lakes that are on our maps are nothing like what
                  is actually in the country. You could never travel by any of the
                  maps or you would be sure to be lost. There has been no survey of
                  this country made, the outline of lakes and drainage is more or less
                  heresay. I could have got twenty convictions had there been a
                  boundary line cut . . .The B.C. Government is losing every year
                  about two thousand dollars in revenues, by not having this line [the
                  BC/Alberta boundary] cut out. . . 41
Clark pointed out that there was much more game in northeastern BC than in northwestern
Alberta:
                  The country between N.W.T. line and Kotcho Lake and thence to
                  the Alberta line is one of the very best Fur countrys in Western
                  Canada. While I was in the Shikillie River country I never seen
                  better fur signs and Beaver dams to e found all over the country,
                  and Big Game such as Moose and Caribou can be found all the way
39
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934. . Extracts from this same report are found in: LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
40
   It was not until the early 1950s that the Alberta–British Columbia Boundary Commission arranged for the
northern portion (i.e., north of approximately 57 degrees 30 minutes latitude) of their common boundary to be
surveyed and marked. See: Report of the Commission Appointed to Delimit the Boundary between the Provinces of
Alberta and British Columbia, Part IV, 1950-1953. Published by the Office of the Surveyor General, Ottawa, 1955.
41
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                          10
                   up and down the Shikilie River, and the same on the Black [Petitot]
                  River, and the Hay River. 42
When Clark was in the Hay Lakes area of Alberta in early April 1932 as part of this patrol, he
said that the “Hay Lakes Indians” [Dene Tha’] told him that “there has never been an Alberta
Game Warden at Hay Lakes or any where in that country” and that he (Clark) was “the first
Game Warden or Policeman to see Hay Lakes.” According to Clark, there was at this time at
Hay Lakes, Alberta “an Indian settlement with 29 hunters and 3 Fur-trading posts.” He noted
also that “20 of these Indians [from Hay Lakes] have trap-lines running into B.C.” Some of these
traplines, Clark added, “come within a short distance of Hay River, others West of the Shikilie
River [underlining added]. 43
The situation of the Dene Tha’ people at Hay Lakes, Alberta, as Clark described it in the winter
of 1932, was rather difficult, to say the least. Indeed, this situation moved Clark profoundly, as
indicated in the following observations he made in his report:
                  There was nothing I could do with these Indians even if I had
                  caught them on their lines, because these Indians are absolutely
                  destitute and starving . . .During the war [World War I] I seen lots
                  of poor people in Germany and France but I never seen anything
                  like what we have on the Boundary at Hay Lakes. I never had such
                  a pitiful job in my life when I advised these Indians, that only B.C.
                  Indians are given trapping privileges in B.C. The old people sat
                  there and cried, they told me I could not find enough food in any
                  one of their camps to feed one of my dogs for one night, which I
                  am sure was the truth, they told me that they had trapped towards
                  Hay River and the Shikilie River for generations [underlining
                  added] . . .The agent has never been to Hay Lakes, nor has any
                  Game Warden or Policemen been to see them . . .These Indians
                  informed me that, their agent told the chiefs at the Upper Hay River
                  last summer [1931] at treaty time that, the Indians could trap any
                  where, meaning Alberta, B.C. and N.W.T. as provided by their
                  treaty. [underlining added] 44
Clark was faced with a serious problem. As he put it, “There’s no question in my mind but
something has got to be done for these Hay Lake Indians trapping into B.C. ” He felt there were
3 options for these Aboriginal people: 1) give them special privileges to “trap into B.C. as they
42
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
43
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
44
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                     11
 have been doing”; 2) or, the Indian Department “will have to make them take up residence in
B.C.”; 3) or, “they will have to be kept out of B.C.” 45
Clark recommended the first of these three options. He envisaged a situation that would work
along the same lines as one already in place, in which “The N.W.T. Dept allow[s] the Alberta
and B.C. Indians to trap into the N.W.T. and Royaltys [sic] are taken care of by the Traders [fur-
traders] and paid to an agent the Postmaster at Fort Vermilion.” In recommending this plan,
Clark noted again that these Hay Lakes people [the Dene Tha’] “made their living in the Hay
River and Shikilie country for generations.” [underlining added]. To this he added:
                  I am sure it would be very much to the advantage of our dept to
                  allows these Indians to trap there [in northeast BC] providing they
                  register their trap-lines and royaltys paid on their Furs. I can attend
                  to their applications for registration. The Fur-traders at Hay Lakes
                  informed me that they would be only to[o] glad to pay the Province
                  from which the Furs are trapped in. 46
Divisional Game Supervisor T. Van Dyk forwarded Clark’s 20 April 1932 report to the BC
Game Commissioner, Bryan Williams, with a note that stated:
                  The work of our Game Wardens J.S. Clark and B. Villeneuve is
                  worthy of comment and I respectfully suggest that same be brought
                  to the attention of the Honorable the Attorney-General. 47
It is clear that Clark’s April 1932 report strongly influenced Williams’ previously-stated views
concerning the Dene Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC. In a 28 June 1932 letter to W.E.
Ditchburn, Indian Commissioner for BC, Williams stated the Clark report put this matter “in an
entirely different light.” Because of Clark’s report, Williams now said there was “no cause for
my fears.” Consequently Williams stated that:
                  . . . with the sanction of the Attorney General, I propose giving
                  serious consideration to the question of allowing these Indians to
                  register their trap lines exactly as our own Indians [of BC] do, in
                  accordance with the suggestion made by Game Warden Clark. 48
45
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
46
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
47
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
48
   Williams to Ditchburn, 28 June 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
                                                     12
                     Williams concluded his letter by drawing Ditchburn’s attention to
                    the plight of the Hay Lakes Indians, as set out in the Clark report.
                    As well, Williams said he would be writing to Clark and
                    “sanctioning his action in this matter.” 49
One day later, on 29 June 1932, Williams wrote a similar letter to Van Dyk. He
referred to the Clark report as “extremely interesting” and again noted that this
report “places the matter of the Hay Lake Indians in an entirely different light.” 50
Williams advised Van Dyk by letter of 30 July 1932 that “after consulting the
Attorney-General in regard to this matter, it has been decided that you may
instruct Game Warden Clark to carry out his suggestion with regard to registering
these Indians [Hay Lake, i.e. Dene Tha’], and getting royalty collected by their
agent.” 51
Documents in this same file suggest the system of registration and royalty
collection that Clark suggested in April 1932 was in place by December 1932, and
that Dene Tha’ trappers began registering their trapping areas in northeastern BC
that same month (December). Clark stated in a letter/report of 18 January 1935
that when he was on patrol in this region in December 1932, he “received Ten
applications from the Hay Lake Indian’s [Dene Tha’] for registration of trap-
lines”. 52 This number of registrations is put into context by Clark’s statement that
when he was at Hay Lakes in the winter of 1932, there were 20 Hay Lakes
Aboriginal people [Dene Tha’] who were trapping in British Columbia. 53 By
1938, there were approximately 23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC Game
Department as trapping in the Fort Nelson District. 54
49
   Williams to Ditchburn, 28 June 1932. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6735, File 420 – 3B.
50
   Williams to Van Dyk, 29 June 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
51
   Williams to Van Dyk, 30 July 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
52
   Letter/report of Clark to Williams, 18 January 1935, re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s in British
Columbia.. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934. In another GR 1085 document, Clark
stated that he was again in Hay Lakes, Alberta in December 1932, so presumably it was at this time he made these
initial ten trapline registrations for the Dene Tha’. See Clark to Van Dyk, 21 April 1933. BCA, GR 1085, Box 24,
File 9.
53
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
54
   BCA, GR 1085, Box 39, File 5.
                                                          13
 3.2       The Proposed 1934 Dene Tha’ Transboundary Hunting Reserve
Section 3.1 of the present overview report discusses the documentary record leading up to
December 1932 when the Dene Tha’ began to register their traplines in northeastern BC.
While historical documents from the early 1930s that have been reviewed to date give only a
general indication as to how far westward into BC the Dene Tha’ trapping activities extended at
that time—i.e.“West of the Shikilie River” [underlining added] 55 —a document from the late
1940s suggests that Fort Nelson was within the overall region used by the Dene Tha’ during the
course of their annual round of sustenance activities in former times. This document is a
December 1948 Indian Affairs report by Fort Vermilion Indian Agency Superintendent Neil
Walker in which he mentions that the “Hay Lakes Indians” [the Dene Tha’] “moved around” as
far west as Fort Nelson “in the olden days”:
          These people in the olden days were free to move around from Hay Lake to Fort
          Nelson in northern British Columbia, the Lower Hay River [in the NWT] and
          Great Slave Lake [in the NWT]. [underlining added] They would winter wherever
          winter caught up with them and they lived mainly off the country . . . 56
Another document from the late 1940s stated that “a large block in British Columbia” had been
registered in the name of the Hay Lake [Dene Tha’] people; this “large block,” the boundaries of
which were not provided in this particular document, was said to be “the ancestral trapping
grounds of the people of the Hay Lake area” [underlining added]. 57
This issue of the westward extent of the Dene Tha’ into British Columbia was taken into
consideration in 1934 when a transboundary Hunting Reserve for the Dene Tha’ was proposed,
as will be discussed below.
Lesser Slave Lake Indian Agent Napoleon L’Heureux indicated in a 12 September 1934 letter to
the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs (DSGIA) in Ottawa that he and the DSGIA
had “recently” discussed the establishment of a transboundary Hunting Reserve “exclusively for
the use of Treaty Indians of the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta who were so
unfortunate as to be deprived of their traplines where their registration has been made
compulsory.” In this same letter, L’Heureux proposed that a large tract of land be set aside for
this purpose, whose boundaries he recommended as follows:
55
   Patrol Report of Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, 20 April 1932. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes
Indians, 1932-1934.
56
   Neil Walker, 3 December 1948. Extract of letter from the Superintendent of the Fort Vermilion Indian Agency,
Neil Walker, to the Superintendent of Welfare. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6734, File 420 – 2 – 2 – 1 1.
57
   Report, Fort Vermilion (From Autumn of 1947 to the last day of March, 1951). Pp. 1 and 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol.
8444, File 775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02426A; Dene Tha’
document No. 2-5613A].
                                                         14
                     The South boundary to be a line running from East to West by 58
                    degrees 30 minutes latitude, the West boundary by 122 degrees
                    longitude, the North boundary to be as far North in the North-West
                    Territories as the Administration may grant and the East boundary
                    by 118 degrees longitude. 58
L’Heureux ended this letter by requesting that Ottawa advise him if the Department found such a
proposal to have practical value. A minute on the letter indicates that it was sent on for comment
to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for Alberta. 59
According to L’Heureux’s figures, this proposed Hunting Reserve would extend approximately
75 miles westward into BC from the BC/Alberta border, and about 105 miles southward into BC
from the BC/North West Territories border.
While L’Heureux, as stated above, had suggested the proposed Hunting Reserve was to be set
aside “exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians of the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta
who were so unfortunate as to be deprived of their traplines where their registration has been
made compulsory,” other more senior officials clearly understood it was for the exclusive use of
the Dene Tha’. For example, the Inspector of Indian Agencies for the Alberta Inspectorate, M.
Christianson, referring to L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter in his own letter of 27
September 1934 to the Secretary of Indian Affairs in Ottawa, referred to this as “a hunting
reserve exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River, which
location is in the Northwest corner of the Province of Alberta.” 60 There is no doubt whatsoever
that this is a reference to the Dene Tha’.
Christianson’s 27 September 1934 response to L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 proposal was not
encouraging. He stated it was “questionable whether the area mentioned in the Agent’s letter
could be set aside, being approximately 140 miles in breadth and 227 miles in length . . .making
it necessary for us to deal with three different governments.” As well, Christianson pointed out
that on the basis of information he had gathered, the Dene Tha’ “hunt mostly along the border of
Alberta and go into British Columbia, and some of them may, at times, go into the North West
Territories.” It was Christianson’s recommendation that the Indian Department take up the
matter individually with the three governments in question, but that it might be first of all
58
   Letter of Indian Agent N.P. L'Heureux to Dr. H.W. McGill, Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 12
September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02233; Dene Tha’ document No. 4024].
59
   L'Heureux to McGill, 12 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 6733, File 420-2X.
60
   Letter of M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta Inspectorate, to the Secretary [A.F. MacKenzie],
Department of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 27 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X. A copy of this
letter also exists in: BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                         15
 prudent for someone to visit the people at Hay Lakes and determine “the exact location as to
where these Indians have hunted in the past and wish to hunt in the future.” 61
It should be noted, however, that the known and available materials reviewed to date do not
indicate whether or not this very sensible suggestion of Christianson’s—to visit the Dene Tha’
and determine from them exactly where they have hunted in the past and wish to hunt in the
future—was ever followed up.
Having received Christianson’s 27 September 1934 letter, the Secretary of Indian Affairs, A.F.
MacKenzie on 6 October 1934 forwarded it to C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian Commissioner for
BC, in Victoria, and requested that Perry give it his attention and prepare a report on this matter.
MacKenzie also referred in his letter to this proposed Hunting Reserve as being set aside
“exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [Dene Tha’]. 62
When Christianson had first met the Dene Tha’ the previous year, 1933, he reported that the 460
Band members “live here and there throughout that part of the country and I understand that
quite a number of them live at Hay Lakes.” 63 The Acting Secretary of Indian Affairs used the
figure of 500 when he advised R.A. Gibson, Acting Deputy Minister of the Department of the
Interior, how many people would be affected by the reservation of the proposed lands. The plan,
in his view, would protect not only the interests of the Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River people
[the Dene Tha’], but would be in the interests of game conservation, as well. 64
The area proposed for the Dene Tha’ Hunting Reserve, almost 32,000 square miles in size, was
marked on a sketch map and blueprint, a copy of which was forwarded to various government
representatives, along with the request that they confer with their respective governments as to
the proposal’s viability. The map, itself, which followed the boundaries set out by Indian Agent
L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter (as discussed above), appears in the present report as
Figure 6. 65 The letter transmitting this map was written on 23 October 1934 by Indian Affairs
Secretary A.F. MacKenzie to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta
61
   Christianson to the Secretary of Indian Affairs, 27 September 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X.
62
   Letter of the Secretary of Indian Affairs, A.F. MacKenzie to C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian Commissioner for
BC, 6 October 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
63
   Memorandum of M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies, Alberta, to Dr. H. McGill, Indian Affairs,
Ottawa, 24 July 1933. INAC Headquarters, Ottawa. Copy on file 775/30-3-212, Vol. 1. Surveys and Reserves,
Upper Hay River Reserve No. 212, Fort Vermilion Agency.
64
   Acting Secretary, Indian Affairs, to R.A. Gibson, Acting Deputy Minister of the Department of the Interior, 27
October 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X. [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02238; Dene Tha’ document No. 4029].
65
   The source of this map is: LAC, RG 10, Volume 11947, File 147/30-1, FA 10-105 [entered into Federal Court
Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02237A; Dene Tha’ document No. 4301A].
                                                          16
 Inspectorate, in response to Christianson’s letter to MacKenzie of 27 September 1934.
MacKenzie in this 23 October 1934 letter referred to the area in question as a “hunting reserve
exclusively for the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [i.e. Dene Tha’]. 66
Responding to MacKenzie’s 23 October 1934 letter, Christianson on 9 November 1934 said that
he expected to meet with Alberta officials within several days concerning the proposed Hunting
Reserve for the “Indians of Upper Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River” [Dene Tha’]. He also noted
that MacKenzie was himself going to take up this matter with BC Government officials and with
the North West Territories Commission. And Christianson again referred to the position he had
taken, as set out in his 27 September 1934 letter, that is, the territory being requested “was
excessive to the requirements of these bands of Indians.” He ended his letter by stating: “I
believe we should go thoroughly into the matter of what these Indians [the Dene Tha’] actually
need, before this vast territory is set aside . . .”. 67
C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, responding to MacKenzie’s 6 October 1934
request to investigate the matter of this proposed Hunting Reserve with BC officials, reported on
23 November 1934 that he had travelled to Vancouver on 19 November. There Perry met with
Provincial Game Commissioner Cunningham and Inspector Butler of the Game Department to
seek their views. They decided to obtain additional input from the Fort Nelson Game Warden,
J.S. Clark, which would supplement his 1932 report, especially since the Commissioner thought
that there may be irregularities in the trapline records. Hence, Perry decided to wait for a
supplemental report from the Fort Nelson office, acknowledging that this might take some time
due to the remoteness of this area. 68 MacKenzie wrote to Christianson in Alberta on 28
November 1934 to advise him that the BC Game Department in consultation with Mr. Perry was
investigating the situation of the Hay Lake and Upper Hay River Indians’ [Dene Tha’] hunting
and that the results of this “will be communicated to the department at an early date.” 69
On 23 November 1934, Inspector F.R. Butler of the BC Game Department transmitted to the
Commanding Officer of the Game Department in Prince George, a copy of a letter dated 22
66
   Letter from A.F. Mackenzie, Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian
Agencies, Calgary, Alberta, 23 October 1934. LAC, RG 10, Volume 11947, File 147/30-1, FA 10-105 [entered into
Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02237; Dene Tha’ document No. 4301].
67
   M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for Alberta, to Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 9
November 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 02241; Dene Tha’ document No. 4033].
68
   C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, to the Secretary of Indian Affairs, Ottawa, 23 November
1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No.
02243; Dene Tha’ document No. 4034].
69
   A. Mackenzie, Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs to M. Christianson, Inspector of Indian Agencies for
Alberta, 28 November 1934. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6733, File 420-2X [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as
Crown document No. 02244; Dene Tha’ document No. 4035].
                                                        17
 Novermber 1934 that he (Butler) had received from C.C. Perry, the Assistant Indian
Commissioner for BC. Butler noted that Perry’s 22 November letter contained Indian Affairs’
correspondence relating to the proposed “exclusive hunting territory” for the “Treaty Indians at
Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River [Dene Tha’], in British Columbia and elsewhere.” As well,
Butler acknowledged Perry’s understanding that he (Butler) was awaiting a report from Game
Warden J.S. Clark of Fort Nelson. 70
Butler also stated in his 23 November 1934 letter to the Commanding Office of the Game
Department in Prince George that he was transmitting “a copy of the Game Regulations on
which I have marked the territory which the Indian Department desires set aside as an exclusive
hunting area for the Indians mentioned [the Dene Tha’].” He ended his letter by stating that he
wanted to have a “full and complete report” from Fort Nelson Game Warden Clark, together
with this Prince George Officer’s recommendations, “as soon as possible.” 71
The hand-drawn sketch map that Butler transmitted to Perry on 23 November 1934 appears in
the present overview report as Figure 7. 72 It differs in several ways from the map which has been
discussed above (and appears here as Figure 6) and which follows the geographical boundaries
set out in Indian Agent L’Heureux’s 12 September 1934 letter. To begin with, Butler delineated
only the proposed boundaries in BC. He did not indicate the proposed boundaries in Alberta or in
the NWT, as L’Heureux had done. While Butler’s western boundary of the proposed Dene Tha’
Hunting Reserve in BC was the same as L’Heureux’s (122 degrees of longitude, which extends
about 75 miles west of the BC/Alberta border), Butler’s southern boundary extended about 32
miles further south to 58 degrees latitude, which is about 137 miles southward into BC from the
BC/North West Territories border.
Inspector T. Van Dyk, the officer in charge of “D” Division of the Game Department in Prince
George, to whom Butler’s 23 November 1934 letter and its enclosures had been sent, transmitted
these materials to the Fort Nelson Detachment of the Game Department [to the attention of
Game Warden Clark] on 27 November 1934. Van Dyk’s instructions and observations, as set out
in this letter, were as follows:
                  In reporting on this matter it would be advisable to show all Indians
                  registerd in the area claimed for the Hay Lake Indians, shown on
70
   The source of Butler’s letter is: F. R. Butler, BC Game Department Inspector, to the Commanding Officer of the
Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-
1934. The source of Perry’s letter is: C.C. Perry, Assistant Indian Commissioner for BC, to F.R. Butler, BC Game
Department Inspector, 22 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
71
   Butler to the Commanding Officer of the Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085,
Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
72
   Map entitled “area claimed for Hay Lake Indians,” accompanying Butler’s letter to the Commanding Officer of
the Game Department, Prince George, 23 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-
1934.
                                                         18
                   the enclosed Map, and in order to cover the subject in its entirety
                  make a copy of the Map of N.B.C. [northern BC] and show all
                  Indian trap-lines entered on your map.
                  I am positive that it will be impossible to give the Hay Lake
                  Indians the area claimed, as it comes very close to Fort Nelson, and
                  the Fort Nelson Indians must be given consideration. The white
                  trappers in the area must also be protected in so far as their
                  registered trap-lines are concerned. 73
Van Dyk ended his letter by requesting that Clark give this matter his very close
attention and report back on this matter “as quickly as possible.” 74
 It was almost two months later that Van Dyk received the report he had requested. This was in
the form of a two-page report by Fort Nelson Game Warden J.S. Clark, dated 18 January 1935
and entitled “Re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s [sic] in British Columbia.” Clark began
his report by saying that while he had “every respect and sympathy” for these Aboriginal people
[the Dene Tha’] and thoroughly understood “the condition they are living under,” he could see
“no justified reason why a game reserve should be made in the area in question, that is the
British Columbia area . . .”. Clark added the following concerning his views on this situation:
                  The Game Commissioner [of BC] has given permission for these
                  Indian’s of Hay Lakes to be properly registered in British
                  Columbia, which entitles them to the same privileges as other
                  British Columbia trappers. During my patrold to that district in
                  December 1932, I received Ten applications from the Hay Lake
                  Indian’s for registration of trap-lines in British Columbia under
                  most advantageous conditions and I am doing by best to give the
                  protecton from poachers . . . 75
Clark then went on to say that when he took over the Fort Nelson detachment in 1928, “not one
of the Nelson [Fort Nelson] Indian’s had made application for registration of trap-lines, and were
determined not to register.” He said that he managed, however, to explain the meaning of
registration to them and that now [1935] the Fort Nelson Aboriginals were “all well satisfied”
with their registered traplines. Clark also said that he was enclosing a copy of a map of northern
BC “showing the Fort Liard, Franceways, Nelson Forks, Snake River, Fort Nelson, Fontas,
Indian trap-lines running into the territory claimed for the Hay lakes Indian’s.” (This map does
73
   T. Van Dyk, Inspector in Charge of “D” Division Game Department, Prince George, to the Fort Nelson
Detachment of the Game Department [to the attention of J.S. Clark, Game Warden], 27 November 1934. BCA, GR
1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
74
   Van Dyk to the Fort Nelson Detachment of the Game Department, 27 November 1934. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
75
   “Re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indian’s [sic] in British Columbia.” Report by Game Warden J.S. Clark to the
Officer [T. Van Dyk] Commanding “D” Game Division, Prince George, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
                                                      19
 not accompany this letter in the file and has not been found in the materials reviewed to date). He
continued:
                    If the territory is given to the Hay Lakes, our [Fort Nelson] Indian’s
                    that are trying to conserve their lines will not want Hay Lakes
                    Indian’s taking their territory over. There are also about Twenty
                    white trappers that have registered trap-lines, and some have had
                    them for the last ten years . . .they will have to be taken into
                    consideration. 76
                    Clark ended his report by stating: “I would respectfully ask that
                    instead of a Game reserve being made, that registered trap-lines in
                    British Columbia be given the Hay Lakes Indian’s.” 77
There is one other letter/report concerning this proposed Hunting Reserve for the Dene Tha’ that
exists from this same approximate time period. It is from T. Van Dyk, Inspector in charge of the
“D” Division Game Department Office in Prince George, is dated 19 February 1935 and
addressed to the BC Game Commissioner, and is found in the same file as the 18 January 1935
report by J.S. Clark. But it is incomplete. Only the last page exists, and it is not known how
many pages preceded it. In the first paragraph of the final page of Van Dyk’s report, he states:
                    From the enclosed sketch it is evident that the setting aside of a
                    trapping area for the Hay Lake Indians in British Columbia is out
                    of the question, as it will be impossible to dispossess the trappers,
                    whites and Indians alike, registered in the area. 78
                    Van Dyk then goes on to say that the BC Game Department is
                    accepting applications “from Hay Lakes Indians [Dene Tha’] who
                    can prove that they have trapped in B .C. over a period of years”
                    and points out a number of such applications have already been
                    registered, with others pending. In the last paragraph of his
                    letter/report, Van Dyk states:
                    I recommend that we continue to register the Hay Lake Indians
                    [Dene Tha’] who have proof that they trapped in B.C. over a period
                    of years, but the wholesale registration of all Hay Lake Indians in
                    B.C. will be impossible and not quite fair to our own Indians and
                    white trappers. 79
76
   J.S. Clark to T. Van Dyk, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
77
   J.S. Clark to T. Van Dyk, 18 January 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
78
   [Incomplete] letter/report to the BC Game Commissioner re: Game Reserve for Hay Lake Indians in BC by T.
Van Dyk, Inspector in charge of “D” Game Division, Prince George, 19 February 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2,
File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934.
79
   [Incomplete] letter/report by T. Van Dyk, 19 February 1935. BCA, GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians,
1932-1934.
                                                       20
 4.0      CONTINUED DOCUMENTATION OF DENE THA’ TRAPPING
         AND HUNTING IN NORTHEASTERN BC
Situated in the remote northwest of Alberta, the bands of the Fort Vermilion Agency, which had
until 1947 been part of the Lesser Slave Lake Agency that included northeastern British
Columbia, seldom received a visit from an Indian Affairs’ representative, and then it was
generally only at the time the assembled members received their Treaty annuity payment. The
known and available records that have been reviewed to date indicate little knowledge of these
Aboriginal people had been recorded prior to about 1930.
As noted also in Section 3.1 of the present report, the documentary record shows
that by 1938 there were approximately 23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC
Game Department as trapping in the Fort Nelson District, 80 and an August 1943
report stated there were 37 Dene Indians from Hay River [Dene Tha’] who had
registered traplines in northeastern BC. 81
Superintendent S.C. Knapp of the Fort Vermilion Agency compiled a report for the period 1947-
1951 in which he pointed out that the boundaries of the Agency legally stretched to the
Alberta/BC border, although the Aboriginal people in this Agency trapped in Alberta, BC and
the NWT. This report estimated that in the late 1940s, 38 families of the Upper Hay River Band
[Dene Tha’] trapped in BC. 82 This same report stated that “a large block in British Columbia”
had been registered in the name of the Hay Lake [Dene Tha’] people; this “large block,” the
boundaries of which were not provided in this particular document, was said to be “the ancestral
trapping grounds of the people of the Hay Lake area” [underlining added]. 83
On June 18th, 1952, representatives from Alberta and BC, along with representatives from the
Department of Indian Affairs, met at Hay Lakes to discuss with the Upper Hay River band what
measures could be taken to conserve the trapping resources. 84 Present were 78 Upper Hay River
band trappers with traplines in Alberta and BC,along with the Chief and a Councilor. According
to the Minutes of the meeting, a considerable amount of time was spent finding new lines for
80
   BCA, GR 1085, Box 39, File 5.
81
   “Report on Registered Trap Lines in Alberta and General Trapping Conditions” by Fur Supervisor J.L. Grew, 14
August 1943. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 6743, File 420-2-2- 3.
82
   Report, Fort Vermilion (From Autumn of 1947 to the last day of March, 1951). P. 1. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File
775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 02426A; Dene Tha’ document
No. 2-5613A].
83
   1947-1951 Fort Vermilion report, pp. 1 and 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File 775/23-4, pt. 1.
84
   Fort Vermilion Indian Agency: Quarterly Report Ending 30th June 1952. P. 5. LAC, RG 10, Vol. 8444, File
775/23-4, pt. 1 [entered into Federal Court Action T-300-99 as Crown document No. 2025A; Dene Tha’ document
No. 2-5625A].
                                                        21
 young men without licenses, in addition to locating an area where widows and old men without
traplines might trap to the exclusion of all others. The assembled members agreed that those
found trapping in this reserved area, who held traplines, “would be dealt with similarly to the
Alberta Game Act, under the poaching clause.” 85 For the convenience of the BC game officials at
Fort Nelson, it was also agreed that the Upper Hay River Ranger would handle beaver permits
for trappers using the BC block.
Surveyors with the Alberta – British Columbia Boundary Commission in 1951-1952 observed
that trappers using the area north of the Petitot River were “from the Upper Hay River and Hay
Lake, belonging to the Slavey tribe.” 86 Hence, the surveyors recognized the trappers as Dene
Tha’. Several years later, it was discovered that the cleared Alberta – BC boundary transected at
least two traplines, that of Paul Metchooyeah and Alexis Seniantha, both members of the Upper
Hay River Band. The problem was resolved by separating the blocks and restricting them to a
single province, so that Paul Metchooyeah and his sons would be registered in Alberta and use
portions of both traplines that were in Alberta, and Alexis Seniantha and his son would stay in
BC and use portions of both traplines that were in BC. 87 Additional meetings were held in 1955
with BC and Alberta game wardens to clarify the location of traplines with the intention of
reducing overcrowding in certain areas. 88 It was resolved that certain Dene Tha’ trappers would
be registered on a BC block, if the government was successful in purchasing the line from its
current holder. 89
85
   Minutes of Band Meeting, Records of Council Talks and Conference of Game Officials for Hay Lake, of the
Upper Hay River Slave Band, June 15th - 20th, 1952. INAC, HQ CR. File 775/3-6, Volume 1 (7/50 – 3/69), L3-167.
[entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 792].
86
   Report of the Commission Appointed to Delimit the Boundary between the Provinces of Alberta and British
Columbia: Part iv, 1950-1953. Published by the Office of the Surveyor General, Ottawa, 1955. Page 67. Surveyor
C.B.C. Donnelly, in charge of the crew marking the boundary line between Alberta and the NWT in 1951-1952
commented that two trap lines were intersected between Hay River and the BC border. It has not been possible to
determine the location of these two traplines, and Donnelly did not comment on the ethnic identity of the trappers,
but he did note that one of traplines crossed the boundary “near Mon. [survey monument] 375” and “led to a lake 8
miles distant” that was “full of Jumbo White Fish averaging 5 lbs. each.” See C.B.C. Donnelly’s Surveyor’s Reports
for the Alberta/North West Territories Boundary Commission: Phase 2, Winter Season 1951-52. Land Survey
Records, Surveyor General’s Office, Natural Resources Canada, Headquarters, Ottawa. No. 23387, p. 13.
87
   Band Minutes of the Upper Hay River Slave Band Held on the Hay Lake Reserve, June 6th, 1954. INAC, HQ File
775/3-6, Volume 1 (07/50 – 03/69). [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown document No. 827B].
88
   Minutes of Council and Band Meeting Held at Hay Lakes Community Hall by Slave Band Members June 15,
1955. INAC, HQ-CR, File 775/3-6, Volume 1 (07/50 – 03/69). [entered into Federal Court Action T-300-99 as
Crown document No. 4325A; Dene Tha’ document No. 6445A].
89
   Minutes of the Upper Hay River Slave Band. Council Meeting Held March 31st , 1955 in Hay Lake Council Hall.
INAC, HQ-CR. File775/3-6, Volume 1, L3-167 (7/50 – 3/69) [entered into Federal Court Action T-305-99 as Crown
document No. 864A].
                                                         22
 5.0      CONCLUSIONS
This overview report has focused on the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern British Columbia
and has been based on a literature review undertaken over a four-year period between 2005 and
the present date. While this review of known and available ethnohistoric, ethnographic and
linguistic source materials has been wide-ranging and thorough, it has not been exhaustive. A
number of sources remain to be reviewed.
The literature review indicates that northeastern BC was within overall Dene Tha’ traditional
territory, although there is little in the early North West Company and Hudson’s Bay Company
documents to distinguish the Dene Tha’ from other “Slavey-speaking” groups. Moreover,
Government records from northeastern BC are very meagre until approximately 1930.
Beginning in the 1930s, the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC began to be recorded in a
number of documentary sources. Dene Tha’ trapping in northeastern BC caused problems for BC
government officials at this time because these Aboriginals were not registered trapline holders,
and there were calls to evict them from BC. However, a reconnaissance patrol by the Fort Nelson
Game Warden in early 1932 across northeast BC and over to Hay Lakes in northwest Alberta led
to a better understanding of Dene Tha’ patterns of land use. As a result, a decision was taken to
allow those Dene Tha’ who were trapping in northeast BC to register their traplines with the BC
Game Department. The actual registrations began in December 1932. By 1938, there were about
23 Dene Tha’ people identified by the BC Game Department as trapping in northeast BC, and in
1943, a total of 37 Dene Tha’ were said to have registered traplines in this same region.
A number of source documents identify the Dene Tha’ presence in northeast BC. One 1932
document stated that the “Hay Lakes Indians” (Dene Tha’) had trapped in northeastern BC “for
generations”; a late-1940s report described northeast BC as “the ancestral trapping grounds of
the people of the Hay Lake area” (Dene Tha’).
What has not been determined with certainty, on the basis of the historical documents reviewed
to date, is how far westward into northeast BC these trapping and hunting activities of the Dene
Tha’ extended. A 1948 document said that the Dene Tha’ “in the olden days” roamed as far west
as Fort Nelson. A 1932 document stated they trapped “West of the Shikilie River.”
In 1934, Indian Affairs officials proposed the establishment of a large transboundary “Hunting
Reserve” exclusively for the Dene Tha’, encompassing northwestern Alberta, northeastern BC
and portions of the southern North West Territories. As proposed, this Hunting Reserve extended
about 75 miles westward into BC from the Alberta/BC border, and either 105 or 137 miles
southward into BC from the NWT/BC border. However, this proposed Hunting Reserve was
never established.
                                                  23
 Figure 1 : David A. Ian Harrison 1984. Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of Site and Situation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography,
Unviersity of Alberta, Edmonton. P. 28
 Figure 2 : Diamond Jenness 1932. Tribes of the Mackenzie and Yukon Basins. In, The Indians of Canada (Sixth Edition). National Museum of Canada, Bulletin 65, Anthopological Series
No.15. Reprinted in 1963 by the Queen’s Printer, Ottawa. P. 378
 Figure 3: Michael J. Asch 1981. Slavey. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol.6, Subarctic.
Published by the Smithonian Institution, Washington D.C. P. 338.
 Figure 4: Patrick Moore and Angela Wheelock 1990 (editors). Wolverine Myths and Visions:
Dene Traditions from Northern Alberta. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press. P. xv.
 Figure 5: David A. Ian Harrison 1984. Hay River, N.W.T., 1800-1950: A Geographical Study of
Site and Situation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography, University of
Alberta, Edmonton.P.101
 Figure 6: Map of 1934 proposed transboundary “hunting reserve” set aside “exclusively for
the use of Treaty Indians at Hay Lakes and Upper Hay River [Dene Tha’].”
Library and Archives Canada, Ottawa. RG 10,Vol.11, 947, ﬁle 147/30-1
                                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Interim Report
                                                                                             EnCana Cabin Gas Plant
Figure 7: “Area claimed for Hay Lake Indians [Dene Tha’].” British Columbia Archives, Victoria.
GR 1085, Box 2, File 8, Hay Lakes Indians, 1932-1934
Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
Dene Tha’ First Nation
Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Environmental and Socio-Economic Impact Assessment
Final Report
Calliou Group
www.calliougroup.com
(P) 403.453.1405
(F) 403.453.1402
                                                             Final Report
                                            Dene Tha’ First Nation
           Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                           For
Environmental and Socio-Economic Impact Assessment
                        Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
                                                              Prepared For:
   Westcoast Energy Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission
                                                                   Calgary, AB
                                                        National Energy Board
                                                                   Calgary, AB
                                                               Prepared By:
                                                                 Calliou Group
                                                                   Calgary, AB
                                                               On Behalf of:
                                                        Dene Tha’ First Nation
                                                          December 4, 2009
                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
 Information collected for this study remains the sole property of
  the Dene Tha’ First Nation. Citation, use or reproduction of the
information contained in this Final Report is permissible only with
        the written consent of the Dene Tha’ First Nation.
                                  1
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Executive Summary
The following Report, Dene Tha’ First Nation Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study:
Westcoast Energy Fort Nelson North Processing Facility, for the proposed Westcoast
Energy Fort Nelson North gas processing plant (the Project), is intended to identify
Dene Tha’ First Nation (DTFN) Aboriginal knowledge and traditional land use
information in the vicinity of the Project located in northeast British Columbia and within
the western portion of Dene Tha’ First Nation traditional territory. This Report also
outlines Dene Tha’ First Nation concerns with the proposed Project, as expressed by
interview participants.
For the purposes of this Report, the Study Team reviewed 19 interviews conducted with
Dene Tha’ First Nation members. It is assumed that information collected is
representative of the broader Dene Tha’ First Nation population.
Based on the interviews, the Study Team concluded that DTFN members extensively
use north-eastern BC to exercise their Aboriginal and treaty rights, including hunting,
trapping, fishing and gathering. Specifically, study participants described the Project
area as ideal habitat for many of the plants, animals and fish harvested by DTFN.
Numerous environmental changes throughout DTFN traditional territory were reported
by participants. The reported changes include a fragmentation of animal habitat,
increased access to their traditional territory by non-DTFN people, decreased animal
populations, lowered water quality and decrease in vegetation availability and quality.
Most participants attributed these observed changes to an increase in industrial features
including pipelines, cutlines, wells, gas plants and logging.
Based on the amount of Aboriginal use identified, and the environmental changes
observed in areas of their traditional territory, many study participants expressed
concerns about the proposed Project in addition to the several other proposed Projects
in the Horn River Basin. Concerns included: impacts to water, wildlife, fish, vegetation,
human and animal health, increased non-DTFN access, limited DTFN access,
consultation process for the Project, and cumulative effects.
                                              2
                                                                                   DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                   Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                              Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Table 1-1: Potential Impacts to DTFN Treaty Rights
      Treaty                 Category                  Concern                        Interview
       Right                                                                          Reference
Hunting               Wildlife - General      Decreased animal                 D. Ahkimnachie; R.
Trapping                                      populations and/or animal        Pastion; J. Penner; D.
                                              health                           Wasp Colin; R.
                                                                               Metchooyeah; Jane
                                                                               Providence; G.
                                                                               Ahkimnachie; Janice
                                                                               Providence; A. Didzena; S.
                                                                               Tsonchoke
Hunting               Wildlife – Caribou      Avoidance of human               D. Ahkimnachie; R.
                                              activity by caribou; caribou     Metchooyeah; G.
                                              migration route near             Ahkimnachie; A. Didzena
                                              Project
Hunting               Wildlife – Moose        Displacement of moose,           Jessie Providence; D.
                                              decrease in population           Kolay; Jane Providence; R.
                                              from the Project                 Semansha
                                              Contamination of moose           D. Kolay
                                              from the Project
Hunting               Wildlife – Bears        Contamination of bears           R. Semansha
                                              from the Project
Hunting               Wildlife - Furbearers   Effects on beaver                R. Semansha; G.
Trapping                                                                       Ahkimnache
Gathering             Vegetation – General    Contamination of                 Jane Providence; G.
                                              vegetation from the              Ahkimnache; Janice
                                              Project                          Providence
Gathering             Vegetation – Berries    Contamination and/or lack        Jessie Providence; D.
                                              of berries from the Project      Ahkimnachie; D. Kolay; R.
                                                                               Metchooyeah; R.
                                                                               Semansha; G. Ahkimnachie
                                              Increased dust on edible         R. Semansha
                                              berries
Gathering             Vegetation –            Contamination of medicinal       Jessie Providence; D.
                      Medicinal Plants        plants from the Project          Metchooyeah
Hunting               Vegetation – Timber     Fragmentation and                D. Ahkimnachie; R.
Trapping                                      destruction of animal            Pastion; D. Kolay; R.
                                              habitat; clearing of trees       Semansha; Janice
Gathering                                                                      Providence; A. Didzena; S.
                                                                               Tsonchoke
Hunting               Vegetation – Muskeg     Destruction of muskeg &          J. Penner; R. Semansha;
Gathering                                     mosses                           June Providence
All                   Water Quality           Contamination of water           A. Wasp Colin; D. Kolay; J.
                                              from the Project                 Penner; D. Wasp Colin; R.
                                                                               Metchooyeah; R.
                                                                               Semansha; G.
                                                                               Ahkimnachie; Janice
                                                                               Providence; A. Didzena;
                                                                               June Providence
                                            4
                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                      Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
All      Air Quality            Air pollution from the            R. Metchooyeah
                                Project and associated
                                effects on wildlife,
                                vegetation and people
Fishing  Fish                   Effects to fish                   J. Penner; D. Wasp Colin;
                                                                  G. Ahkimnachie; A.
                                                                  Didzena
All      Access                 Inability to access               J. Penner; R. Semansha
                                harvesting locales due to
                                gates from industrial
                                features
All      Access                 Increased access to the           R. Metchooyeah; Jane
                                area by non-DTFN                  Providence
All      Traffic                Increased traffic; traffic        R. Pastion; R.
                                causing animal mortality or       Metchooyeah; E.
                                animal avoidance                  Chonkolay; A. Didzena
All      Safety                 Concerns for safety near          D. Ahkimnachie; D. Wasp
                                Plant sites; fear of H2S          Colin
                                ‘Salt spots’ near industrial      R. Semansha
                                developments (ground that
                                does not freeze and
                                harvesters can get stuck)
Hunting  Noise                  Animals and people avoid          D. Ahkimnachie; G.
Trapping                        areas due to increased            Ahkimnachie; S.
                                industrial noise                  Tsonchoke
All      Health                 Human health issues               D. Kolay; J. Penner; R.
                                resulting from                    Metchooyeah; Jane
                                contamination of water,           Providence; Janice
                                wildlife from the Project         Providence
All      Industrial Activity    People and animals avoid          D. Ahkimnachie; E.
                                areas with increased              Chonkolay; G. Ahkimnachie
                                industrial activity; rate of
                                development
All      Consultation Process   Communication of                  D. Wasp Colin;
                                information to DTFN
                                community
All      Economic               Difficulty exercising treaty      D. Ahkimnachie; Jane
                                rights due to financial           Providence; A. Didzena
                                reasons (travel expenses)
Trapping Economic               Decreased fur prices              D. Wasp Colin
All      Economic               Limitations on DTFN               R. Metchooyeah; Jane
                                exercise of treaty rights         Providence
                                because of government
                                regulations, traplines
         Economic               Lack of benefits and/or           G. Ahkimnache; A. Didzena
                                compensation to DTFN
                                from industrial
                                development
         Social                 Cultural loss                     A. Didzena
                              5
                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Authorship
Study Team
      Report Authors:
      Tracy Campbell, M.A., Senior Review
      Adena Dinn, B.Sc.
      Germaine Conacher, M.A.
      GIS Authors:
      Kathrin Janssen, B.A.
      Adena Dinn, B.Sc., Senior Review
      Interviews & Summaries:
      Adena Dinn
      Tracy Campbell
      Cathy Baldin
      Kathrin Janssen
      Dene Tha’ Translation:
      Thomas Ahkimnachie
      Ricky Pastion
      Robert Tsonchoke
      Ernest Chonkolay
                                          6
                                                                          DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                          Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                      Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Abbreviations and Acronyms
DTFN           Dene Tha’ First Nation
TLUS; TLU      Traditional Land Use Study; Traditional Land Use
AK             Aboriginal Knowledge
The Project    Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
NEB            National Energy Board
ESA            Environmental and Socio-economic Assessment
BC             British Columbia
AB             Alberta
RFMA           Registered Fur Management Areas
HRB            Horn River Basin
GPS            Global Positioning System
GIS            Geographical Information Systems
LAA            Local Assessment Area
RAA            Regional Assessment Area
MEMPR          Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources
Westcoast      Westcoast Energy Inc, operating as Spectra Energy Transmission
                                        7
                                                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                                          Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                                     Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Contents
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. 2
Authorship ........................................................................................................................... 6
Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................................. 7
1   Introduction ................................................................................................................ 10
  1.1    Purpose................................................................................................................ 10
  1.2    Fort Nelson North Processing Facility Project Setting ............................................... 10
  1.3    Traditional Land Use Studies ................................................................................. 11
  1.4    Incorporating TLUS into EA to Determine Effects .................................................... 13
2   Methodology ............................................................................................................... 14
  2.1    Report Design....................................................................................................... 14
  2.2    Interviews ............................................................................................................ 17
  2.3    Site Visits ............................................................................................................. 18
  2.4    TLUS Limitations ................................................................................................... 19
3   Community Information ............................................................................................... 21
  3.1    Introduction to DTFN ............................................................................................ 21
  3.2    DTFN Traditional Territory ..................................................................................... 22
  3.3    Aboriginal Consultation.......................................................................................... 25
  3.4    Historical Documentation of DTFN Land Use in Project Area .................................... 26
  3.5    Previously Collected TLUS Information ................................................................... 30
4   Project-Specific TLUS Information ................................................................................ 33
  4.1    DTFN Knowledge .................................................................................................. 33
  4.2    TLU Information Organization ................................................................................ 33
  4.3    Hunting Areas....................................................................................................... 34
  4.4    Trapping Areas ..................................................................................................... 38
  4.5    Fishing Areas ........................................................................................................ 41
  4.6    Gathering Areas .................................................................................................... 44
  4.7    Travel Routes ....................................................................................................... 49
  4.8    Sacred Sites ......................................................................................................... 52
  4.9    Cabins, Camps and Settlements ............................................................................. 53
                                                                 8
                                                                                                         DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                                        Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                                   Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
5   Changes in Land and Land Use..................................................................................... 55
  5.1   Increased Industrial Activity .................................................................................. 55
  5.2   Harvesting Restrictions .......................................................................................... 57
  5.3   Lack of Financial Resources ................................................................................... 57
6   Project Specific Concerns ............................................................................................. 59
  6.1   Water................................................................................................................... 59
  6.2   Wildlife ................................................................................................................. 59
  6.3   Vegetation ............................................................................................................ 60
  6.4   Access.................................................................................................................. 61
  6.5   Health .................................................................................................................. 61
  6.6   Noise ................................................................................................................... 62
  6.7   Rate of development ............................................................................................. 62
  6.8   Consultation Process ............................................................................................. 62
7 References...................................................................................................................... 64
                                                               9
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.7     Travel Routes
In the past, Dene Tha’ people followed a seasonal migration throughout their territory
in specific patterns to ensure successful hunting (DTFN 1997). While these migration
patterns have evolved with DTFN over time, travel routes and migration patterns are
still an integral part of the exercise of DTFN treaty rights (Figure 4-5). This evolution
was noted by Robert Metchooyeah who explained that dog teams and horse teams of
the past are not widely used anymore and explained that most people currently travel
by quad or skidoo along cutlines, seismic lines, baselines and right-of-ways.
Prior to roads, DTFN participants indicated they travelled throughout much of northeast
BC following trails (horse and dog team), between lakes, and on high ground along
rivers. Steven Tsonchoke, David Wasp Colin and Robert Metchooyeah both pointed out
that the rivers are still used as a means of travelling. This is because northeastern BC is
characterized by muskeg and the rivers are often located along higher ground (D. Wasp
Colin).
Interview participants reported travel throughout much of northeastern BC. For
example, Robert Metchooyeah reported a seasonal travel route between July Lake,
February Lake and Mid-winter Lake. During these migrations, Dene Tha’ people would
also often meet at central locations such as Kotcho Lake and Kwokullie Lake. Gabriel
Ahkimnachie explained that he would often travel to Kotcho Lake on foot in the winter
and construct a birch bark canoe to paddle home in the spring.
Interview participants indicated that they currently travel to northeastern BC via the
winter access roads. Participants also noted that they generally travel with one or more
person by vehicle. David Wasp Colin indicated that the access road that originates in
Rainbow Lake used to be an old horse trail and recalls former Chief Talley using this
trail to travel to BC.
Many participants indicated that they currently use industrial features as means of
travel. For example, Don Metchooyeah and Ernest Chonkolay use cutlines and find it
much easier than making a new trail each trip. Additionally, June Penner explained that
a positive outcome of another plant being built is better quality roads and this makes
access for hunting easier.
                                             49
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Several of these historical seasonal travel routes took DTFN people throughout
northeastern BC. These included:
   o Winter access road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson [Powerline Road] (A.
       Didzena, R. Metchooyeah, A. Wasp Colin, Jane Providence, E. Chonkolay, D.
       Metchooyeah, D. Kolay, D. Wasp Colin, Janice Providence, Jessie Providence,
       June Penner, R. Semansha, S. Tsonchoke)
   o Winter access road from Zama area to BC along the 31st baseline (A. Didzena, R.
       Metchooyeah, D. Metchooyeah, D. Kolay, Janice Providence, Jessie Providence,
       June Penner, R. Semansha)
   o Between Kotcho Lake and the Northwest Territories (A. Didzena)
   o Along the Hay River and Kotcho River to Fort Nelson (A. Didzena, E. Chonkolay,
       S. Tsonchoke)
   o Sierra Yoyo Desan Road (R. Metchooyeah, A. Wasp Colin)
   o Along the Petitot River (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, R. Semansha)
   o Between July, February and Mid-winter Lakes (R. Metchooyeah)
   o Along the Shekilie River (R. Metchooyeah, D. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp-Colin)
   o Southern portion of the Northwest Territories (R. Metchooyeah)
   o Along the Hay River to the confluence of the Shekilie River (D. Ahkimnachie)
   o From Assumption (Chateh) to Kotcho Lake (G. Ahkimnachie)
   o From Assumption (Chateh) to July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie)
   o “Fontas Road”, a winter access road into BC from Manning that heads north to
       Fontas (D. Wasp Colin)
Travel routes that intersected or overlapped the Project RAA include:
    o Travel route from Sierra Yoyo Desan Road around Kotcho Lake to Kwokuille Lake
       (R. Semansha)
                                           50
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.8     Sacred Sites
DTFN interview participants identified numerous instances of burials and ceremonial
sites throughout the BC portion of their traditional territory. Burials and ceremonial
sites can be more broadly identified as sacred sites because of their cultural and
spiritual value to the DTFN community.
Participants noted burials throughout northeast BC. Ronnie Semansha explained that
there are graves “everywhere”, because in the past, there was often no way of
transporting the deceased home. Instead, they were simply buried wherever they
passed away. Due to this practice, many burials are not clearly identifiable and their
exact locations are not known. For example, June Penner stated that her grandfather is
buried in northeast BC but she is unaware of the location. June explained that there are
many burials throughout BC that have not been located. Steven Tsonchoke and Gabriel
Ahkimnachie said that people were often buried along rivers or lakes. Both participants
noted sites around July Lake, Thinahtea Lake and identified six burials at the confluence
of the Shekilie and Hay Rivers. Ernest Chonkolay elaborated that these burials are
situated near a historic settlement.
July Lake was identified as a sacred site. Robert Metchooyeah and David Ahkimnachie
explained that this lake is known as “A Woman’s Place” or “Tsuk-aye” [phonetically].
This name comes from the instance of two young DTFN women surviving at this lake
over a winter season and has since been a sacred place to many Dene Tha’ people.
In northeast BC, interview participants noted sacred sites located at:
           o July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke, R.
               Metchooyeah)
           o On DTFN member-held trapline #755T014 (D. Ahkimnachie)
           o Thinahtea Lake (G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke)
           o Confluence of the Hay and Shekilie Rivers (G. Ahkimnachie, E. Chonkolay,
               S. Tsonchoke)
No sacred sites were identified that overlapped or intersected the Project RAA.
                                            52
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
4.9    Cabins, Camps and Settlements
DTFN interview participants also identified cabin, camp and settlement locations
throughout northeast BC (Figure 4-6).
Often, DTFN community members opted for non-permanent camps that left no
discernable mark on the land. Allen Didzena explained that Pauliss Metchooyeah,
Louison Ahkimnachie and himself would sleep under tarps with blankets by an open fire
leaving very little behind. David Ahkimnachie said he frequently camps with only a
canvas tent and there is very little evidence left on the land when he camps this way.
Cabins and settlements were generally more permanent in nature.
Generally in northeastern BC cabin, camp and settlement locations included:
          o On DTFN member-held traplines #755T014, #756T014 (D. Ahkimnachie,
              G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke)
          o July Lake (D. Ahkimnachie)
          o Kotcho Lake (D. Ahkimnachie, G. Ahkimnachie, D. Wasp Colin, J. Penner)
          o Confluence of the Hay and Shekilie Rivers (G. Ahkimnachie, S. Tsonchoke)
          o Fontas Reserve (D. Wasp Colin)
          o Around Kwokullie Lake (R. Semansha)
There were no cabin, camp or settlement sites identified by participants that intersected
the Project RAA.
                                            53
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
5       Changes in Land and Land Use
DTFN participants noted changes and observations about their traditional territory
during the study interviews. Robert Metchooyeah indicated that these changes are
especially relevant for northeastern BC because the area was relatively pristine and is
being developed more and more in recent years.
5.1     Increased Industrial Activity
Participants frequently noted an increase in industrial activity throughout the BC portion
of their traditional territory. Allen Didzena explained that the most significant change he
has noticed is the impact of this increased activity on wildlife, specifically moose. He
said that while caribou prefer the cleared areas resulting from industrial activity, moose
require “deep bush” and as activity increases, “deep bush” becomes scarcer. Robert
Tsonchoke also agreed that there have been effects to wildlife. He explained that his
trapline is still usable for hunting, but things are changing because of the amount of
development. David Ahkimnachie also felt that prior to development, his trapline was
ideal wildlife habitat consisting of rich boreal forest. Overall, David felt that the habitat
in BC had changed so drastically due to logging and industrial development that the
animals have left. He reminisced that it used to host an abundance of lynx, marten and
mink.
Robert Metchooyeah explained that if the animals are gone there is no longer a reason
for DTFN to frequent this area. He felt that “if the animals are not going to go there,
there is no food for us.” He further stated that “the more people come, the more
disturbances they make” and explained that with this disturbance the animals move
away.
Interviewees also noted that increased industrial activities have an impact on
vegetation. Janice Providence explained that she has noticed an increase in clear
cutting. She explained that once an area is cleared, it can take between sixty and one
hundred years for these areas to reforest naturally, or be reclaimed. Don Metchooyeah
also felt that increased industrial activity would lead to contamination of medicinal
plants. He reported that rat root in Alberta collected near a pipeline was contaminated
and felt that this could occur near the proposed Project, especially since the area is
composed predominately of muskeg, where rat root grows.
                                              55
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                 Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
In addition to impacts on wildlife and vegetation, participants expressed concerns about
potential health risks as a result of industrial activity. Allen Didzena felt that in the past
there was not as much sickness in the community and attributed this to the increase in
development. June Penner also expressed concern about health risks from increased
industrial activity and explained that recently when she dries moose meat there is often
a white residue on the meat. She attributes this residue to an acid or salt from
development. Gabriel Ahkimnachie stated that the food he harvests does not taste the
same and he felt that this is related to industrial development.
An increase in industrial activity has also led to a restriction of DTFN activities. David
Wasp Colin noted that he used to canoe and camp along the Petitot River in the 1970s
and felt that it was “a really nice place to camp.” He also explained there was “not too
much oil and gas and the land was still good”. June Penner also reported that with
increased industrial activity there is restricted access. She noted that some roads in
northeastern BC are now blocked with gates.
Ronnie Semansha explained that near Plants, in particular, there are often “salt spots”
where the ground does not freeze. He explained that these areas are dangerous as they
look like solid snow, but are actually not. Ronnie cautioned that these areas are
dangerous for DTFN Harvesters. June Penner also noted avoiding industrial
developments because of safety concerns about the ground not being frozen.
Additionally, participants noted the level of noise increases with development. Gabriel
Ahkimnachie explained that this increase in noise has led to a decrease in animals and
indicated that now it is difficult to hunt or trap on his trapline. David Ahkimnachie
agreed that where there is too much noise and too many people the animals will stay
away.
While many participants noted several negative instances related to increased industrial
development, there were a few positive outcomes from this increase. Don Metchooyeah
explained that while he does not like the industrial development, he does use the roads
and cutlines that come along with it. He finds they make travelling to his trapline and
hunting areas easier. David Ahkimnachie has noted a significant increase in the number
of seismic and cutlines within DTFN traditional territory. He explained that many DTFN
use these as modes of travel.
                                              56
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
5.2     Harvesting Restrictions
A common misconception among DTFN Harvesters is that they can only harvest within
the boundaries of a provincially regulated trapline. However, many interview
participants noted how DTFN previously utilized the entire traditional territory prior to
the imposition of these restrictions. For example, Jane Providence noted that prior to
the traplines the Dene Tha’ would “go everywhere”. Gabriel Ahkimnachie explained
that before this system was in place, the Dene Tha’ had no boundaries and could hunt
and trap throughout BC. He feels this is no longer possible due to restrictions. Robert
Metchooyeah agreed that many years ago when there were no provincial borders the
Dene people would go “all over” to hunt and often followed animal and fish migrations
cyclically. He explained that if these borders were not in place the Dene Tha’ would still
go everywhere. Robert feels the Dene Tha’ are limited by traplines, borders and
designated areas.
5.3     Lack of Financial Resources
Many interview participants cited a lack of financial resources for a change in their land
use. Often this lack or resources led to a reduction of time on the land or a dependence
on others to travel. Jane Providence noted that without a vehicle it is very difficult to go
out on the land. She explained that if she did not have a vehicle of her own she would
try to find another way but it would take determination to practice her traditional
lifestyle. Jane indicated that a vehicle is necessary because they have to go further and
further away to exercise their treaty rights. This increased distance requires a vehicle
and money to cover the cost of fuel. Jane explained that even with this financial
hardship she would still continue to go out on the land as her family prefers wild meat.
She estimated that a large majority, “90%” of her diet is comprised of wild meat.
In addition, participants reported that the decline in fur prices has reduced DTFN
trapping. David Wasp Colin stated that trapping is a lot of work for very little money.
Ronnie Semansha echoed this sentiment and specified that he finds it too far to go and
does not have the time required to trap regularly.
5.4     General Wildlife and Vegetation Changes
Interview participants also noted general changes to wildlife and vegetation that they
have observed over time throughout the traditional territory. David Wasp Colin reported
                                              57
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
that in the 1970s he would often canoe along the Petitot River and that there were
more bears than currently.
Allen Didzena also indicated that in the past there were moose everywhere but now
notices the population has reduced. He attributed this to more hunting and an increase
in predators, such as wolves.
Ronnie Semansha also noted a change in wildlife numbers, indicating that there has
been a drop in caribou in recent years. He explained that there used to be a significant
amount of caribou in BC but now there are hardly any left.
Janice Providence and Diana Kolay also felt there were changes in the wildlife
population and noted that in certain parts of BC and Alberta buffalo are more plentiful
than moose. They thought that the level of buffalo was related to government
conservation of the species and felt there should be better management.
In addition to changes to wildlife, June Penner reported a change in vegetation. She
explained that in recent years, the berries available in BC appear smaller and are more
widely scattered.
                                            58
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
6 Project Specific Concerns
During the conduct of interviews, DTFN participants expressed concerns directly related
to the proposed Project. These concerns focused on how the Project would impact the
environment and how these perceived impacts would impact DTFN. Participants also
identified broad regional concerns and related these to the proposed Project.
During the site assessment, representatives also expressed concerns that the Project
would negatively impact DTFN Aboriginal and treaty rights.
6.1     Water
Interview participants were especially concerned with the location of the Project and its
impact on water. Numerous participants explained that the water from higher ground
flows to the lower lying areas and eventually flows into Kotcho Lake. The water from
Kotcho Lake, in turn, flows south into the Hay River which is used routinely by DTFN (E.
Chonkolay, R. Metchooyeah, June Providence, G. Ahkimnachie).                          Due to this
connection, participants expressed concern that chemicals from the Plant may have the
potential to contaminate the water (A. Wasp Colin, R. Metchooyeah, A. Didzena, R.
Semansha, Janice Providence, June Providence, Diana Kolay, G. Ahkimnachie).
In addition, participants noted that if water courses were contaminated this could lead
to an overall contamination of DTFN food sources, such as fish and wildlife (A. Wasp
Colin, R. Metchooyeah, D. Wasp Colin, R. Semansha). Ronnie Semansha noted that the
creeks and lakes in the vicinity of the Project are often used for fish spawning.
Robert Metchooyeah felt that DTFN concerns about water are not given enough
consideration and these questions are often left unanswered by industry. Robert said he
wished that industry and government would “look after” water. He said that no matter
how close or far DTFN is from the Project, they are closely connected to any impacts
through water. Robert also attended a one day site assessment with Baptiste
Metchooyeah and expressed concern about the destruction of water resources present
in the Project vicinity.
6.2     Wildlife
Interview participants expressed concern that the Project would cause wildlife to move
away. Ricky Pastion explained that they see this occurring in Alberta near industrial
developments and noted that cutlines, roads and the sounds of vehicles act together to
                                             59
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
push the animals away. Other participants agreed that once the Project was
constructed and/or cleared, the wildlife would be forced further away (Jessie
Providence, E. Chonkolay, R. Metchooyeah, R. Semansha, Janice Providence, Thomas
Ahkimnachie).
In addition to the Project, Ricky Pastion was also concerned that the ancillary features,
such as roads, will act cumulatively to push the animals away. Ricky explained that he
has observed this occurring in the area around Rainbow Lake.
Participants also expressed concern about contamination of wildlife from consumption
of industrial by-products either via water or by consuming vegetation near the Project
(D. Wasp Colin, A. Didzena, Jane Providence, June Providence, D. Kolay). Robert
Metchooyeah noted that DTFN consume many of the animals found in northeastern BC
and if the wildlife were to become contaminated, so would DTFN community members.
During the site assessment Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah noted
Project construction would result in the destruction of woodland caribou migration trails
and wolverine habitat. They noted that both these species are currently classified as ‘at
risk’ and are concerned that Project construction will negatively impact those species.
6.3     Vegetation
The proposed Project area was noted by numerous participants as being rich in both
medicinal plants and berries. These participants expressed concern that the Project
could lead to contamination of those resources (Jessie Providence, R. Metchooyeah,
Jane Providence, G. Ahkimnachie).
In addition, Ronnie Semansha expressed concern with berries near the Project
becoming too dusty to be consumed. He has previously noted berries near other project
sites being covered in dust from the nearby roads.
Janice Providence also indicated she was concerned about an increase in tree clearing
that she has observed in northeastern BC. She feels that clearing the Project footprint
will contribute to this problem. She explained that cutting down trees does not only
affect vegetation but wildlife as well, stating “you cut down trees, where will the
animals go?” This concern was echoed by Diana Kolay who felt that moose would no
longer frequent the Project area once it was cleared because they prefer treed areas.
She also noted that clearing of the site would destroy berries.
                                            60
                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                           Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                       Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
June Providence expressed concern that the Project will damage the muskeg and
mosses in the area; she explained that both are found in the Project vicinity.
During the Project site assessment, Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah
expressed concern about the destruction of medicinal and edible plants. They also felt
that the vegetation on the Project footprint was suitable for wildlife habitat and this
habitat would also be destroyed.
6.4     Access
Participants reported that increased access to the area would facilitate DTFN hunting;
however, they also noted concerns related to increased access. For example, Allen
Didzena indicated that with increased road developments, predators, such as wolves,
experience an increased advantage to hunting moose as well. He felt this applied to
roads, and cleared areas such as cutlines/seismic. Jane Providence also expressed
concerns about increased access and an increase in non-Aboriginal hunters frequenting
the region.
Participants also reported concerns related to restricted access to the area. Ronnie
Semansha noted that there are already many signs that restrict access in BC. While he
noted that he understands the need for safety, DTFN also requires access to their
traditional territory: “There needs to be balance.”
6.5     Health
Interview participants also expressed concerns about perceived effects of the Project on
the health of the community. Robert Metchooyeah reported there are numerous
community members with cancer and attributed this to contaminants from industrial
development.
Janice Providence explained that if animals become contaminated it will affect the Dene
Tha’, leading to increased cancer. Janice expressed frustration because the Dene Tha’
have to “wait and see” what the effects from the proposed Project will be on their
health and no one can provide answers on what the long term effects might be.
June Providence expressed concern about chemicals, such as mercury, affecting the
community health. She felt she needed more information about the by-products of the
Project to ensure that dangerous chemicals such as this would not be produced.
                                            61
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
6.6     Noise
Several participants had concerns with noise. They felt that increased noise directly
related to a decrease in wildlife (S. Tsonchoke). Gabriel Ahkimnachie was concerned
that the noise from the Project will affect the wildlife, noting that this had occurred on
his trapline.
6.7     Rate of development
DTFN participants also expressed a general concern about the rate of development in
northeastern BC. Ernest Chonkolay reported seeing drilling rigs in many places. David
Ahkimnachie was concerned that if the rate of development continues unchecked there
will be no wildlife left in the area. Participants felt that if development continued, the
overall area surrounding the Project footprint will become damaged (A. Didzena).
Steven Tsonchoke also expressed concern that the development of the Project would
act as a catalyst for increased drilling in the area, as more wells will be required to meet
the capacity of the Plant.
During the site assessment Baptiste Metchooyeah and Robert Metchooyeah expressed
concern about the cumulative impact the Plant could potentially have on the area. They
felt that gas plant proliferation in the area was a major DTFN concern.
6.8     Consultation Process
Participants in the study and the field assessment also expressed concern related to the
consultation process. David Ahkimnachie expressed concern that companies conduct
development before the community is properly informed. He explained that many Elders
lack the technical knowledge to understand information from companies. David said
that more time should be spent in the community explaining projects to the Elders.
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah noted that an archaeological
assessment had already been submitted in July 2009 and did not include DTFN
participation or input. They felt this was deficient and noted that the singular site visit
they participated in was insufficient to assess DTFN concerns related to heritage and
traditional resources. The site visit was conducted in November 2009 and the site was
covered by approximately 1 foot of snow. This made it extremely difficult for DTFN
representatives to properly assess the previously located archaeological site or identify
any traditional uses that may have been present.
                                               62
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah also noted that construction on the
Project site appeared to be underway prior to Project approval. They noted equipment
tracks on the ground and trees felled. They felt that this was inappropriate activity as
the ground was not yet fully frozen.
Overall, DTFN site visit participants felt that DTFN should return to assess the site when
there is no snow on the ground.
                                              63
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
7 References
Bouchard and Kennedy Research Consultants. Dene Tha’ Presence in Northeastern BC.
Prepared for Calliou Group, Calgary Alberta on behalf of Dene Tha’ First Nation, 2009.
Dene Tha’ First Nation. Dene Tha’ Traditional Land-Use and Occupancy Study, The Arctic
Institute of North America, © The Dene Tha’ First Nation, 1997.
TERA Environmental Consultants. Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment for the
Proposed Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility. Prepared for Westcoast Energy Inc.
Calgary, Alberta, 2009
Goulet, Jean-Guy. Ways of Knowing: Experience, Knowledge and Power Among the Dene
Tha’. © Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1998.
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. First Nation Profiles, Dene Tha’ First Nation, General
Information, Registered Population, 2009
http://pse5esd5.aincinac.gc.ca/fnp/Main/Search/FNRegPopulation.aspx?BAND_NUMBER=448&l
ang=eng
Robinson, Michael, Terry Garvin and Gordon Hodgson. Mapping How We Use Our Land.
Calgary: Arctic Institute of North America, 1994.
Tobias, Terry. Chief Kerry’s Moose: A Guidebook to Land Use and Occupancy Mapping. Joint
Publication, Union of BC Indian Chiefs and Eco Trust, 2000.
Garvin, Terry and Northern Forestry Centre Staff. A Guide to Conducting Traditional
Knowledge and Land Use Study. Northern Forestry Centre, 2001.
Roberts, John and Pamela Williamson. First Nations People, Second Edition. Toronto:
Emond Montgomery Publications, 2004.
Valaskakis, Gail Guthrie. Indian Country: Essays on Contemporary Native Culture. Wilfred
Laurier University Press, 2005.
                                               64
                                                                            DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
1 Introduction
1.1    Purpose
The following Report, Dene Tha’ First Nation Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
for the proposed Westcoast Energy Inc. operating as Spectra Energy Transmission
(Westcoast) Fort Nelson North Processing Facility (the Project), was commissioned by
the Dene Tha’ First Nation in order to provide representative information on historic and
current use by the DTFN in the vicinity of the Project. This study is intended to collect
and document information for consideration in the regulatory review process for the
Project.
1.2    Fort Nelson North Processing Facility Project Setting
The Fort Nelson North Processing Facility is proposed to process gas from the Horn
River Basin area of northeast BC and will have the capacity to process approximately
7,043,000 m3/day of sour natural gas. The project will be located approximately 75km
northwest of Fort Nelson in the Northern Rockies Regional Municipality. The purpose of
the Project is stated by the proponent as enabling “the timely processing of incremental
raw gas production from the eastern side of the HRB in accordance with the needs of
Westcoast’s customers” (TERA 2009).
       1.2.1 Environmental Setting
       The Plant will be located in the Northern Alberta Ecoregion of the Taiga Plains
       Ecozone (TERA 2009). Approximately 50 – 70% of this eco-region is
       characterized by wetlands/muskeg, with low lying areas supporting black spruce
       and upland slopes supporting white spruce, balsam fir, aspen and mixwood
       forest (TERA 2009). The most common trees found throughout this area are
       black spruce and tamarack. The wetlands in the project area are labelled
       peatland, which is a generic term including all types of peat-covered terrain. This
       area is characterized by long, cold winters and a short growing season.
       The Ecoregion is characterized by various wildlife including: woodland caribou,
       moose, black bear, wolf, beaver, snowshoe hare, red squirrel, raven and
       waterfowl.
                                            10
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
       The project also lies within the Sahtaneh River watershed and falls within the
       Snake-Sahtaneh Caribou Range.
       1.2.2 Land Use Planning and Regulatory Framework
       The proposed Project is located within the Etsho Enhanced Resource
       Development Resource Management Zone (RMZ) of the Fort Nelson Land and
       Resource Management Plan (BC ILMB 1997). The identified objectives of the
       RMZ are to maintain and enhance opportunities and access for oil and gas
       exploration, development and transportation.
       The Project proponent is applying to the National Energy Board (NEB) under
       section 58 of the NEB Act for authorization to construct and operate the Project.
       In recent months, this area, known as the Horn River Basin, has seen a marked
       increase in industry activity based on previously unrecoverable natural gas
       reserves. There are currently several major projects proposed for the immediate
       area, including two gas plants (including Fort Nelson North and EnCana Cabin
       Gas Plant), a large-scale pipeline (TCPL Horn River Mainline), exploration and
       production wells, booster stations, associated pipelines and all-weather road
       upgrades.
       The above-mentioned projects proposed for this area are currently under
       consideration by different regulatory authorities including the National Energy
       Board (NEB), British Columbia Environmental Assessment Office (BC EAO) and
       the BC Oil and Gas Commission (BC OGC).
1.3    Traditional Land Use Studies
Traditional Land Use Study (TLUS) information collection and documentation can be
described as the formal exercise of supporting anecdotal testimony of Aboriginal people
to “prove” or demonstrate use of land to support the exercise of Aboriginal and treaty
rights over time.
              “Despite the tremendous diversity among First Nations, they
              all share one thing — the harvesting of fish, wildlife, and
              plant materials has been the historical basis of economic life.
                                            11
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
              In pursuit of the resources that continue to be the
              foundation of their cultures, people leave traces over the
              landscape, evidence that they have been there.
              “Aboriginal peoples in Canada have been mapping aspects of
              their cultures for more than a generation. Think of it as the
              geography of oral tradition, or as the mapping of cultural
              and resource geography.” (Tobias 2000)
There are two types of Traditional Land Use studies: project-specific and
comprehensive. Project-specific TLUS collect and document Aboriginal knowledge in
the context of single application or project-specific regulatory processes. These studies
generally focus on the narrow spatial and temporal parameters dictated by the
proposed project in question. Documented TLUS information arising out of project-
specific studies tends to broadly focus on the question, “what Aboriginal knowledge of
use exists in the area potentially impacted by the project?” Project-specific TLUS, by
design, do not attempt to identify on their own (either qualitatively or quantitatively)
project effects on the TLUS information collected. This is a separate process facilitated
by the larger Environmental and Socio-economic assessment (ESA) process, and results
from the integration of the collected information into that larger environmental
assessment.
The process of identifying potential effects to traditional or Aboriginal use of the land
within the project area requires integration of Aboriginal people at several points
throughout the environmental assessment. First, Aboriginal people should be consulted
to ensure the design of bio-physical studies includes parameters which reflect their use
of specific species and habitat. Second, Aboriginal people should be involved in the
execution of bio-physical studies to ensure field or place-specific information is
incorporated and reflected by each discipline study. Third, a project-specific Traditional
Land Use Study is completed using temporal and spatial parameters specific to the
project in question. Finally, the integration of the project-specific TLU study findings
into each bio-physical discipline assessment of effects is required to identify what
potential effects may result from the project on Traditional Land Use information.
Without specific and quantitative measurements, facilitated by integrating TLUS
information into the conduct of an environmental assessment, a TLUS on its own does
not analyze or identify to what extent the proposed project potentially impacts the
exercise of Aboriginal and treaty rights. This is due to the lack of connection and
                                            12
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
incorporation of TLUS information in the analysis of the environmental assessment,
which is meant to identify overall effects. Without integration of TLUS into the design
and execution of the environmental assessment, and into the determination of
significance of effects, a project-specific TLU study is limited in its applications.
Comprehensive TLUS are primarily community or Nation-driven studies meant to collect
and document comprehensive land use information throughout a Nation’s traditional
territory. These studies are not project-specific, and do not identify potential impacts
from any specific or individual projects. They are useful in documenting cumulative
knowledge on a larger-scale and preserving that information as part of the Nation’s
heritage. However the ability to quantitatively measure the extent of effects to
traditional use is absent. Comprehensive TLUS are extremely useful in establishing the
trigger for Aboriginal consultation, by documenting general TLUS information
unrelated to any specific projected project effects.
Oftentimes, the collection and documentation of TLUS information and the identification
of potential project effects related to that information is grossly incomplete. As a result,
the known (either qualitative or quantitative) impacts of industrial development on the
exercise of Aboriginal and treaty rights are largely undocumented.
1.4     Incorporating TLUS into EA to Determine Effects
It is assumed that the DTFN Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study will be
incorporated into the broader environmental assessment of the Westcoast Fort Nelson
North Processing Facility conducted by Westcoast and TERA Environmental to identify
the extent the proposed Project will specifically impact the exercise of DTFN Aboriginal
and treaty rights within the project area.
                                              13
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                              Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                          Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
2       Methodology
2.1     Report Design
The execution of this TLUS follows methodology outlined in several documents
describing best practices for the conduct of Traditional Land Use studies, including:
    •   Chief Kerry’s Moose: A Guidebook to Land Use and Occupancy Mapping. Terry
        Tobias. Joint Publication, Union of BC Indian Chiefs and Eco Trust, 2000
    •   A Guide to Conducting Traditional Knowledge and Land Use Study. Terry Garvin,
        Northern Forestry Centre Staff. Northern Forestry Centre, 2001
    •   Mapping How We Use Our Land. Mike Robinson, Terry Garvin and Gordon
        Hodgson. Arctic Institute of North America, 1994
The Study Team also used their collective experience in conducting previous TLU
studies, and their knowledge of the DTFN community to guide the execution and
development of this Report.
The spatial boundary that was used to identify DTFN TLU information potentially
affected by the Project is the Regional Assessment Area (RAA) defined in the ESA as a
10km buffer around the Project footprint (See Figure 2-1). TLU information collected
during this study that intersected or overlapped the RAA was included in this Report.
Nineteen (19) TLU interviews were conducted with DTFN Harvesters from November 2 -
4, 2009. Although TLUS are usually conducted in an atmosphere of insufficient time
and resources to gather information, the scheduling and completion of the interviews
for this Report occurred under an extremely compressed and aggressive timeline. This
was due to lack of DTFN involvement in the development of the Project application
submitted to the NEB.
The Study Team endeavored find a representative sample (or subset) of the DTFN
population that would broadly represent the DTFN knowledge and information about
the study area.
The interview protocol for this study was developed by the Study Team. This protocol
outlined themes for the conduct of interviews, as opposed to formulated or rigid
questions, which are sometimes used for the conduct of TLUS. This was consciously
done to ensure DTFN participants were more comfortable and allow for better flow of
                                            14
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
information, as stories or topics often lead to different areas for discussion. Many of the
DTFN participants adapt more readily to this style of interview as it reflects their normal
conversational manner.
Following the completion of the Report, a community verification meeting is generally
held to verify contents of this Report. However, due to time constraints, a community
verification meeting was not held prior to submission of this Report. If substantive
changes to the TLU report are required as a result of the community verification or
meeting with Project representatives, the results of these will be submitted as a
supplementary report to the NEB and Westcoast Energy.
In addition, a meeting is anticipated with Westcoast representatives, NEB
representatives and DTFN participants to discuss specific project effects, which are
identified through Westcoast’s Environmental and Socio-economic Assessment process.
A group discussion will be conducted and possible suggestions for mitigation to those
impacts will be identified.
                                             15
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
    2.2    Interviews
As previously stated, nineteen (19) interviews were conducted with DTFN members by
the Study Team from November 2 to November 4, 2009. Interviews were conducted at
the Chateh Administration offices. Interviews were primarily conducted as group
sessions where 2 - 3 DTFN Harvesters were interviewed together, with the exception of
one individual interview. DTFN Harvesters include Elders, trappers, hunters, gatherers
or other land users.
The following individuals were interviewed for the study: Allen Didzena, David Wasp
Colin, David Ahkimnache, Helen Ahkimnachie, Ernest Chonkolay, Jessie Providence,
Jane Providence, Robert Metchooyeah, Diana Kolay, Don Metchooyeah, Janice
Providence, Robert Tsonchoke, Steven Tsonchoke, Gabriel Ahkimnachie, June Penner,
Alex Wasp Colin, Thomas Ahkimnache, Ricky Pastion and Ronnie Semansha. Individual
summaries and maps from the interviews can be found in Appendix A.
Each interview was an average of two hours and was voice recorded, video recorded
(where permission was granted) and noted by the Study Team. The interviews were
conducted in both English and Dene. Where necessary or preferred by the participant,
a Dene translator was provided by the DTFN Lands Department.
The discussion themes for interviews included:
           •  Specific-use sites (including locations of camps, cabins,                       graves,
              trails/travel routes, birth places, Dene place names, etc.);
           •  Areas where participants have historically practiced or currently practice
              their Aboriginal and treaty rights, including hunting, trapping, fishing and
              gathering; and
           •  Project Specific/General Concerns.
If there was an identified or discernable change in the areas of use, participants were
asked to provide an explanation for that change. If the participants had not been to
the area in question, they were asked to elaborate on this theme.
Mark-up maps were created by the Study Team for use in the interview process; one
overview map (1:569,186) and one focused Project map (1:250,000).
Coordinates for the overview map boundaries are:
                                               17
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
           •  North: within the North West Territories; mid-way through Greater Slave
              Lake (NTS Reference point 085B)
           •  East: within Alberta, including Wood Buffalo National Park and the Caribou
              Mountains; encompassing the Peace River (NTS Reference point 084J)
           •  West: within British Columbia, west of Fort Nelson and Maxhamish Lake
              (NTS Reference point 094J)
           •  South: Within British Columbia and Alberta, including Fort St. John and
              Peace river (NTS Reference point 084D)
Coordinates for the focused Project map are:
           •  NTS Map sheet 94P, with the Project RAA as the central point of the map
Mark-up maps are used to document traditional land use sites (e.g. cabins, graves,
birthplaces, trails/travel routes, camps, etc.) as well as areas where DTFN members
practice their treaty rights (either in the past or currently) as discussed during study
interviews. Areas identified by participants are given a corresponding numerical code
on the map, and assigned to a number in the interview notes. If the participant or
interviewer was unsure of locations, those sites were given an asterisk and verified at a
later date.
    2.3    Site Visits
DTFN representatives, Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah, attended a one
day site assessment of the proposed Project on November 18th, 2009.
Robert Metchooyeah and Baptiste Metchooyeah accompanied Landsong Heritage
Consulting Ltd. staff during the site assessment. Notes from this site visit can be found
in Appendix A.
                                             18
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                 Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
2.4     TLUS Limitations
The unique culture of the Dene Tha’ First Nation provides challenges for the
interpretation and representation of information gathered during TLUS interviews. This
challenge also includes information not gathered or represented during TLUS.
Numerous anthropologists have documented that the Dene Tha’ manner of imparting
knowledge is primarily through observation and first-hand experience. Termed “non-
interference,” knowledge is generally not shared through questioning or direct
instruction. As TLUS are based on the premise of interviewing Aboriginal people on
their land use practices and underpinned by the concept of voluntary imparting of
knowledge, it is often difficult to overcome the Dene Tha’ tendency of “allowing you to
find out for yourself” (Goulet, 1998).
        “Given the Dene [Tha’] approach to communication, it is clear that interviews are
        a poor means of investigation among the Dene (Goulet, 1998).”
DTFN participants were also reluctant to identify areas used for the exercise of treaty
rights (either historically or currently) outside of the provincially-regulated trap lines in
British Columbia (held by DTFN members) for fear of perceived government
repercussions. Many interview participants expressed to the Study Team outside of the
interview process for other traditional land use studies that ‘it was against the law’ for
DTFN to travel outside of DTFN provincially-regulated trap lines.
An additional limitation to a TLUS is the inability to spatially represent many aspects of
information collected during interviews with a sufficient degree of accuracy (i.e. through
two dimensional mapping). Representative scales on maps used during interviews are
often too large to ensure ‘pin-point’ accuracy necessary in a project-specific study.
Further, two-dimensional maps pose challenges for some Elders or persons unfamiliar
with cartographic interpretation. To fully and accurately represent collected TLUS
information in the interview process, a full and robust field component to verify and
locate specific sites is required. This is usually not permitted by either time or resource
constraints on a project-specific study.
The Aboriginal connection to traditional territory lies at the foundation of Aboriginal
culture, language and way of life (Roberts & Williamson, 2004). Centuries of nomadic
travel throughout a land base, over time translates into an inter-woven fabric of land
and resources, species and habitat, activity and travel. Site-specific places should not
be divorced from the context of the broader environment (Valaskakis, 2005). The
                                              19
                                                                           DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                           Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                       Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
specificity of TLUS mapping often over-shadows the broader environmental context with
“specific” sites that can be singularly represented on a map. As a result, a common
response for many interview queries of ‘where do you hunt?’ is met with a somewhat
bewildered response of, ‘we go everywhere!’
As mentioned, this particular study was also limited by time and resources, which in
turn impacts the size and scope, and accuracy of the study. There is no practical way
to gather complete TLUS information from the entire DTFN community for the purposes
of a project-specific TLUS. Therefore, gaps in study information may result, as only a
representative number of DTFN interviews are permitted. Therefore, the selection of
interviews can only be seen as a broad sampling of the use and issues the community
as a whole may or may not have.
                                            20
                                                                                DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3       Community Information
3.1     Introduction to DTFN
There are currently two thousand, six hundred and sixty-four (2,664) registered DTFN
members (Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, 2009). The Dene Tha’ First Nation have
three separate main communities located on reserves: Meander River, Bushe River and
Chateh located in northeastern Alberta (Figure 3-1). DTFN is governed by a Chief and
an eight (8) member council that are elected in a custom electoral process.
Since the early-to-mid 1960’s the Dene Tha’ have had to rapidly adapt to the
conventions of western society. Prior to that time, DTFN lived a primarily nomadic
lifestyle, travelling throughout large tracts of Alberta, British Columbia and Northwest
Territories. People travelled in seasonal rounds, following available resources, including
fur resources, which was the primary source of income for the majority of families.
DTFN speak of familial ties with surrounding Nations, including those located in
northeast BC, southern NWT and throughout northern Alberta. Those ties remain
strong today.
Since the establishment of the main communities of Chateh, Meander River and Bushe
River, DTFN now hold permanent homes as a primary residence and children attend
local schools. Essential services such as nursing stations, gas stations and police
stations have been instituted in/around the three DTFN communities.
However, even with this acclimatization to western culture, DTFN still maintain their
strong ties to the traditional lifestyle of their ancestors. The Dene language is still
spoken by the majority of community members and is taught in the community schools.
A large portion of the DTFN diet is obtained from wild foods such as moose, ducks,
eggs and berries. Traditional artwork is widely created by many different age groups
throughout the community. Most importantly, travel outside their reserves throughout
their traditional territory to obtain resources is the centerpiece of the DTFN lifestyle that
remains strong today.
Although there is recognition within the community that their way of life is changing
rapidly for the DTFN youth, there is a strong desire to maintain a connection to their
ancestry and pass that along to the future generations.
                                              21
                                                                                     DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                     Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                                 Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3.2     DTFN Traditional Territory
As mentioned, Dene Tha’ First Nation is a signatory to Treaty 8. Treaty 8 encompasses
northwestern Saskatchewan, northern and central Alberta, northeastern BC and a
southern portion of the North West Territories. In 1899, the Government of Canada
began the negotiation of Treaty 8 with the final text of the Treaty drafted that year.
The following summer, in 1900, a smaller Commissioner’s delegation travelled to the
remaining Nations who could not be reached in the first year and negotiated with those
Nations to sign adhesions to the treaty. Dene Tha’ signed an adhesion to Treaty 8 in
1900 (DTFN, 1997).
DTFN present-day leadership characterizes the signing of Treaty 8 as one that promised
peace and friendship with the incoming non-Aboriginal people to the region (Goulet,
1998). Discussions held at the time of treaty making with DTFN leadership included the
outline of DTFN territory encompassing “the Four Hills” – including, Cameron Hills
(north), Caribou Mountains (east), Clear Hills (south) and the Etsho Plateau (west). 1
The description of the “Four Hills,” including Etsho Plateau is important for several
reasons. DTFN leadership at the time of treaty making with the Crown understood their
territory for the purposes of exercising their traditional lifestyle extended far beyond the
boundaries of their assigned reserves. This identified area was based on natural
landforms that were, and still are, well known to DTFN. Also, this area was understood
and identified by DTFN prior to the establishment of provincial and territorial political
jurisdictions.
DTFN’s present-day traditional territory is approximately 176,000 square kilometers
spanning Alberta, BC and the NWT (Figure 3-1). In BC, the territory ranges as far
south as Fort St. John, west to Fort Nelson and Maxhamish Lake and North to Trout
Lake in the NWT. In Alberta the territory ranges south of Manning and north of
Grimshaw and follows the Peace River north to High Level where it extends east,
bisecting Caribou Mountain. The territory continues north into the NWT as far as
Tathlina Lake.
1
  These are the present-day names and do not reflect Dene Tha’ place names.
                                                  22
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
The boundaries of the DTFN traditional territory was compiled by DTFN based on
meticulous historical research and traditional land use information collected from DTFN
members. The boundaries of the territory are not fixed, and are subject to change as
DTFN collects additional historical information and traditional land use and Aboriginal
knowledge from the DTFN community. In fact, some DTFN members and political
leaders believe that DTFN territory should be delineated only by the boundaries of
Treaty 8 to reflect the areas in which they have the right to exercise their Aboriginal
and treaty rights.
DTFN leadership does not consider the DTFN traditional territory as “exclusive use” by
only DTFN members, or claim proprietary ownership to the land contained with those
boundaries. DTFN recognizes that many portions of that land were, are and will be used
by other Nations in the exercise of their Aboriginal and treaty rights. As Chief James
Ahnassay explained to the Study Team, the land is “shared.”
                                            23
                                                                                 DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                            Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3.3     Aboriginal Consultation
Aboriginal consultation is largely triggered by the need for a regulatory approval by the
Crown for activities occurring within the boundary of a Nations’ asserted traditional
territory. Over the past five years, there has been a conscious effort by DTFN
leadership to accurately document the extent of the DTFN traditional territory. This
strive for accuracy is based on the premise that negative environmental effects will in
turn affect the DTFN ability to exercise their treaty and Aboriginal rights. Protecting
that ability for future generations of Dene Tha’ is one of the priorities for DTFN
leadership.
Correct documentation was necessitated because of confusion resulting from
consultation efforts of provincial and federal Crown regulatory authorities in the past,
where DTFN traditional territory was confused with provincially-regulated trap lines held
by band members. There is a lack of understanding regarding the distinction between
traditional territories, provincially-regulated trapping areas, treaty lands and reserves.
Traditional territory refers to the land that was and still may be used by the Aboriginal
community to practice a subsistence way of life. Each Aboriginal community travelled
and lived in its own traditional territory, delineated most often on a self-regulated basis.
As mentioned, boundaries of traditional territories of neighbouring communities often
overlapped one another. Boundaries changed over time, as availability of resources
changed, or as a result of the effects of government policy.
Provincially-regulated areas for the purposes of commercial harvesting of fur resources
by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people are often called ‘trap lines’. The use of
trap lines (or fur management areas) requires an annual license from the provincial
regulator. Trapping licenses can be held by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people.
Licenses can be transferred, bought and sold by the license holder or recalled by the
regulator. Licenses are held individually.
Treaty lands are identified within the terms of a treaty agreement with the Crown,
promised to Aboriginal Nations for the purposes of hunting, trapping, fishing and other
traditional activities.     In British Columbia, Treaty 8 rights include the right to
commercially trap. Members of signatory Treaty 8 Nations do not require provincial
licenses for the exercise of the treaty right to trap, including for commercial purposes in
British Columbia. Treaty rights to hunt, trap and fish are held collectively by the entire
Nation.
                                               25
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
At the time of treaty making, the provision of reserve lands was identified within the
written terms of the Treaties. Reserves were intended as training grounds for
agricultural pursuits, where Aboriginal people would be provided farm implements,
financial resources and land to ‘settle’ as other non-Aboriginal people were doing
throughout Western Canada. Even though the promises made at treaty-making by
Crown representatives that traditional vocations of hunting, trapping and fishing could
continue throughout the treaty territory, it was anticipated by the Crown that the
Aboriginal lifestyle would eventually stop. For many years, Aboriginal people were also
confined to reserves and could not leave without a pass or permission from Federal
Indian Agents assigned to manage them. This effectively curtailed the use of traditional
lands for the purposes of the exercise of treaty rights. However, despite these
attempts by the government, this transformation (or assimilation) from nomadic hunter
to farmer did not occur.
3.4     Historical Documentation of DTFN Land Use in Project Area
Corroborating Aboriginal oral accounts of historical use of land in the non-Aboriginal
archival record is an unfortunate, but required, component in the conduct of Traditional
Land Use studies. This Report summarizes and draws from conclusions contained
within a historical report prepared for the study area by Bouchard and Kennedy, entitled
“Dene Tha’ Presence in North Eastern BC.” This historical report corroborates study
participants oral accounts of DTFN historic use of the Project area. This report has
been previously provided to both Westcoast Energy and the National Energy Board.
Historically, Dene Tha’ use of the land extended far from their present-day
communities. For example, DTFN interview participants describe DTFN historical travel
from Great Slave Lake to Lesser Slave Lake and beyond. Centuries of Dene people
utilized the boreal forest, unbounded by non-Aboriginal political jurisdictions. Those
travels are well documented in the oral traditions of the Dene Tha’. However, those
oral traditions are not given the same credibility that historical references are.
It is often difficult to identify accurate and precise historical and ethnographical
references specifically for the Dene Tha’ First Nation in the written historical record,
because outside of a few select sources, written information about the Dene Tha’ is
virtually non-existent. Different non-Aboriginal travelers used different names for the
Dene Tha’, often misidentifying them, or generalizing them with other surrounding
                                             26
                                                                                  DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                                  Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                              Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Aboriginal groups. As a result, DTFN use of the land captured in the historical record
may be incomplete.
For example, early North West Company and Hudson’s Bay Company sources reference
“Slavey-speaking” Aboriginal peoples in northeastern BC; however, there is little in
these documents that distinguish Dene Tha’ and other Aboriginal groups that spoke a
Slavey-Hare language. By the 1930’s, the Dene Tha’ presence in northeastern BC is
recorded in several sources; the Dene Tha’ have been referred to by a number of
names, including: “Upper Hay River Band of Slaves”; “Hay River Indians”; “Hay Lakes
Indians”; “Chateh/Assumption Indians”; “Slavey Indians at Hay Lake(s)”; “Upper Hay
River Post Indians”; and “Bistcho Lake Tribe” (Bouchard and Kennedy, 2009).
Specifically:
        Traders seldom attempted to seek out knowledge of ethnonyms—the names by which
        groups of people self-identified—and instead applied murky generic terms such as
        “Slave” or ‘Slavey” to people of the Slave Lake and Mackenzie River District; sometimes
        this identity included people known otherwise as “Beaver.” Similarly, the term “Beaver”
        occasionally included groups more often identified as “Slavey” and very likely included in
        some instances the ancestors of those identified today as Dene Tha’ (Bouchard and
        Kennedy, 2009).
Notwithstanding the difficultly of identifying specific references to Dene Tha’ in the
historical record, the Bouchard and Kennedy Report concluded a strong historical
presence of DTFN in northeast BC exists in the historical record. Further the Report
goes on to describe a heart-breaking account of DTFN use of north-east BC restricted
by government policy.
According to DTFN interview participants and supported by the historical record, DTFN
land use in northeastern British Columbia was largely undisturbed by non-Aboriginal
presence in the area until 20 to 30 years after treaty making. It was only after
competition for fur by non-Aboriginal people prompted the governments of Alberta and
British Columbia to institute restrictions on trapping that DTFN land use fundamentally
changed (Bouchard and Kennedy 2009).
        Williams instructed Van Dyk “to keep these Indians [Dene Tha’] out [of BC] until it is
        absolutely proved that we have not the power to do so.” (Emphasis added,
        Bouchard and Kennedy 2009).
                                                27
                                                                             DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
Provincial and federal government officials understood that DTFN use of northeast
British Columbia for hunting and trapping purposes was extensive. At one point in
1934, government representatives outlined a trans-boundary hunting reserve for the
“Hay Lakes Treaty Indians”. Unfortunately, that option was not executed, and the trap
line registration system was instead chosen and implemented (Bouchard and Kennedy
2009).
This proposed hunting reserve was recognition by the federal and provincial Crown that
DTFN historically (pre-1930) used northeastern British Columbia to exercise their treaty
and Aboriginal rights (Figure 3-2).
The imposition of provincially regulated fur management areas was pivotal in the
evolution of how DTFN used their land. DTFN use of land in northeastern British
Columbia and Alberta was curtailed. Entire generations of DTFN Harvesters were
brought up to believe that activity outside the regulated areas was ‘against the law’ and
not allowed. DTFN interview participants tell of sanctions on Dene Tha’ imposed by
Game Wardens or RCMP that included imprisonment, hard labour or warnings if they
were caught ‘breaking the law’ by using land outside of their assigned trapping areas.
DTFN who were caught outside their assigned areas had fur confiscated, which at the
time could mean extreme financial hardship for the offender. With no access to legal
representation, there was no recourse open to those caught. The resulting impact on
the treaty right to trap (including the commercial right) within northeast BC resulting
from those actions was never analyzed.
As a result, DTFN use of areas outside of DTFN registered trap lines was done outside
of existing regulations. The perception that this situation still exists today is so strong,
that several DTFN interview participants were reluctant to admit continued land use in
BC outside of the regulated trapping areas for fear of legal repercussions.
However, even with the imposition of government restrictions on DTFN movement on
the land outside of DTFN registered trap lines, DTFN continued to use northeast British
Columbia for traditional use purposes, including hunting, gathering and fishing.
                                            28
                                                                              DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                             Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                         Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
3.5    Previously Collected TLUS Information
In recent years, Dene Tha’ First Nation has completed a number of project-specific and
comprehensive studies which documented their Aboriginal Knowledge and Traditional
Land Use. These studies were most often executed in response to government or
industry proposed initiatives and generally reflects the area specifically related to that
project/decision. Additionally, these undertakings often were limited by their budget
that restricted the study to the immediate area of interest.
       Dene Tha’ Traditional Land Use and Occupancy Study (1997)
       This study was undertaken to record and illustrate the presence DTFN had, and
       continues to have on the land in their traditional territory (DTFN, 1997). The
       study was not intended as a comprehensive documentation of all DTFN
       traditional land use, but primarily as an educational tool for both internal and
       external audiences.
       The methodology used for this study, although contemporary at the time, was
       one of the first of several studies to be completed in Alberta. This study area
       used as the focus for this report included land use within Alberta and a small
       portion of north-east British Columbia. This report is not considered an
       exhaustive inventory of DTFN use of their traditional territory.
       Mackenzie Gas Pipeline (2005/2006)
       This study was an undertaking by DTFN to illustrate past and current use within
       the specific project area for the Mackenzie Gas Pipeline. The report focused on
       the Bistcho Plateau and the southern portion of the NWT. DTFN compiled this
       report in hopes that it would facilitate open and productive discussions with the
       project proponent regarding their Aboriginal and treaty rights and how the
       project may affect them and the resultant accommodation from potential
       impacts.
       DTFN faced significant financial and time constraints throughout this project and
       these limitations are noted in the original document. This report also noted that
       the interviews and maps did not represent the entirety of DTFN use within their
       traditional territory.
                                             30
                                                                               DENE THA’ FIRST NATION
                                                               Aboriginal Knowledge and Land Use Study
                                                           Westcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility
       BC MEMPR Land Sales Interviews (2008)
       Crown reserve petroleum and natural gas rights are disposed of under section 71
       of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Act. Dispositions, by public tender, are made
       once each month (Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources, 2009).
       The BC Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources (MEMPR) sends out
       public notice to interested parties prior to those postings.
       As a response to these notices, DTFN has prepared a number of interviews and
       maps to assert their rights and interests in the area of a number of the land
       sales. DTFN hopes to engage in further consultation with MEMPR about DTFN
       rights and interests.
       EnCana Cabin Gas Plant TLUS (2009)
       This project-specific TLUS was conducted concurrently with the TCPL Horn River
       Mainline Pipeline Project study during the Spring and Summer 2009. The
       completed report was submitted to the BC EAO for consideration in the
       environmental assessment process.
       TCPL Horn River Mainline Pipeline TLUS (2009)
       This project-specific TLUS was conducted concurrently with the EnCana Cabin
       Gas Plant study during the Spring and Summer 2009. The completed report was
       submitted to the NEB for consideration in the environmental assessment process.
For a composite map with DTFN TLU information collected for this Project and other
Projects, see Figure 3-3. This composite map focused on north-eastern BC and
demonstrates added DTFN traditional land use in the Project area in addition to the
information collected for this Project and represented in this Report.
                                             31
 Interview Summam
interviewees: Stephen Lefou
Date: May 14, 2009
f; Location: Chateh Administration Office
: 7 Interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Cathy Baidin
: ~ *lnterviewed with his brother Aibert Lefou
'2 ' Background
Stephen was born November 14, 1960. He was born in Fort Vermilion and has eieven brothers
7~-' and sisters.
Nine of his sibiings live in Chateh, one in Red Deer and another one in Rocky Mountain House.
Hunting and Tagging ‘
._ Stephen’s parents trapped in an area that ranged from Kwokuilie Lake (BC) north to July Lake
(BC) and from Kwokuliie Lake east to Dickens Lake [Aiberta).
His mother still snares rabbits in the Chateh areas
' Stephen started trapping in 1976. Him and his brother Aibert both stiii trap and hunt today.
' '~ The trapiine they use is #104 in Alberta, where their father, Chariie Lefou, used to trap as well.
Stephen and his brother also hunt on the trapiine, though there are some disputes in regards to
: who owns the trapiine at present.
The brothers both trap for all kinds of fur bearing animals including beaver, marten, lynx, otter
and mink. .
5 Their preferred method of traveliing to the trapiine now is by snow machine though Stephen
remembers using both dogs and horses in the past.
: The trapiine is too far away to hunt moose, so Stephen and his brother hunt. moose fifteen to
twenty kiiometers on either side of the border, west of Zama Lake. They access this area via a
‘ winter road from Rainbow Lake to Fort Nelson in the winter.

Medicine and Berries
David’s wife picks raspberries, saskatoons, chokecherries, blueberries, strawberries and
cranberries. His wife often travels along the road to pick strawberries and up on the top of i “
Zama Hill for raspberries.
In July at the Steen River airport, there are strawberries all over and there are blueberries ‘ ‘
around indian Cabins (Alberta). David explains that there are berries all over the place and that ;”
he and his wife pick them. i ;
David explains that muskrat root and spruce berries can be used to remedy colds and cough.
The spruce berries grow in the muskeg. There are many different kinds of muskrat root. For '3
example, in the vicinity of Assumption [Chateh] they have thick roots but around Meander you L. '.
can get narrow roots with a strong and bitter flavor. David points out that these remedies are l .
most often collected in the summer. '.
David also mentions spruce gum, which he explains is also good for colds. it must be boiled and i
then cooled as preper preparation. .
David’s uncle taught him to use bear gall for colds, however, it is very bitter. This remedy is
prepared by putting a small portion on a knife and then adding it to hot water while stirring. ~
The liquid turns a greenish color, but ifdrank, the liquid will cure a cold as it is very powerful;
Shes f
David explains that there are many burial sites throughout the Dene Tha’ traditional territory.
in the old days people moved around and they would often bury people where they passed on If
using the implements from the land to perform the burial. For example, if a baby died the 4.13
family would cut a piece out of a tree and make it hollow. They would place the child inside, .. ~
close up the wood and put it back in the tree because “those kind of trees never break”. One of

these trees can be found around indian Cabins with a gravesite still up in the tree.
David’s father told him, that there are burial grounds all over and he points out the Caribou
Hills area, the area between Whitesand River and Buffalo Lake as well as the Peace River area. '

in Meander River, near the southern end of David’s trapiine, there is a burial site as well. '5
tn Dene, indian Cabins is called “Tzahn-Tsu” [phonetically], which means ”Rat Lake”. It was i
renamed indian Cabins by white people. 5
Most people did not have permanent cabins in the past, rather they would just erect a teepee.
People would dismantle everything, pack it and move all over the territory. There are 5 "

campsites throughout the traditional territory as well and people are still very mobile today.
.. Sometimes people go to another community for 2—3 years and then move back home.
; ~ Travet Routes
‘ David says that there are trails all over the Dene Tha’ traditional territory. For example, there
‘ ‘ used to be a trail from Meander River to Habay which was often travelled by horse wagon.
. There are also trails going to Buffalo Lake (NWT) from Hay River (NWT) and Indian Cabins (AB).
David’s uncle lives in Steen River (AB) and he uses a trail that goes between Steen River and
. Caribou Hills (AB).
David’s grandfather told David’s father of a trail from Meander River to Bistcho Lake (AB).
There is also a trail connecting his trapline with Bassett Lake (AB) further south.
~ David’s grandmother used to also travel back and forth from the Hay—Zama area (A8) to Fort
Nebon(8CL
David also knows of a caribou migration trail that goes from east of Cameron Hills, up to the
- NWT. The trail runs between the Cameron Hills and Caribou Hills where there is a lot of
. muskeg, which the caribou prefer.
in the past there were caribou scattered around Bistcho Lake, lndian Cabins and both Cameron
. and Caribou Hills. in some cases they were even visible on Zama road.
in the past, caribou were quite plentiful. However, David has noticed that there are not many
left. He believes there are some, but since Fish and Wildlife advised them not to shoot any
caribou as they are protected, most people do not bother hunting them anymore.
Observed Changes
in the past, there were no roads and people travelled on trails by horse wagons. David
. remembers a time when 3 or 4 wagons went down to Habay for the summer. The people
travelling in the wagons took everything with them and lived in a tent.
: David remembers that they would hunt geese in September. At this time of year there were so
many geese that they could not hear anything once they started flying. Today, there is just a
i few left.

David has also observed that other animals have decreased in numbers. He explains that if you
listen to stories that are told by Elders, the current number of animals is much less compared to
when the Elders were young.
Areas to Protect 4
David would like the area around Bistcho Lake protected as well as along the Petitot River.
Right now the river is all logged out but David would like it to be protected nevertheless.
He also identified the Caribou Mountains as an area he would like to see protected. '
David said: ; . .I.
”Once I grew, I went to work for seismic until 1974. In 1976 I went to work for the Alberta
Forest Service In forestry. I stayed there untII1991. In 1992 I went to workfor the bond, driving .
vehIcIes. I’m still there. It’s too bad I didn’t spend too much time with my family as they grew ~~
up. It’s a sad thing, but If! stayed with them I’d probably be on welfare. That Is the lost thihg '
that I wanted In my life. If I stayed with them, I could have supported my family, with food, by 4%
hunting and trapping but that doesn’t bring In much money. You either starve or go on weIfare. ' '
Like a lot of people say, In the old days It was good but It was hard work. You could feed your f
family and you didn’t need much money. Now It Is different. We don’t move around and we ~ 5
have houses. Who’s going to pay the power bill? Who’s going to pay the electric bill? Today, .'
everything Is at your fingertips. You can buy anything you want, but, If you don’t have money, .
It’s not at your fingertips. $0, In order to get it, you have to work. But work Is not on the land. ..
That Is the sad part. We all have to work or we starve and go hungry. ” is:

l 7 J .17. #3; ”If: g 7' > W “T“, x awry 21$—1ﬁrY—qu‘r . J _ ‘5‘? LF-‘vj‘ygif’ % ?Y'nl' J. ‘ 1.2514 ‘. i“ Y;?Z‘TJ 5'1 j Mw‘ggmm
] , g? 5' . ‘1 ; «Joé‘QJ-fbw— — ‘ . ""‘ J .5‘ L " l» J l ' 5‘ /Hf '2" A flt t f!
r; . - i f : ~ ‘f'w’q‘? -J'; 3.: Jg. 5:3 911‘ V J r 'i J; 3 JJ . + y H . - ' - i .jg' r93 0 n ereS {J
. $ J x n , :,_?-:—::/ :J-l Iﬁs" ?\‘h—IAMu I ,. _ v ,5 J I t: I; i . -. ' J. . , . f» h") ‘L i 1 f4 17" ‘
. ‘ * *J a .J; .JJJ'ii 2&3" J--- f ’ d- ‘ - r. g i ' 7""! Jn F
; J J 4/ J )1 rs xv jg! J J J“; J s .h r: : J :2. re
A ,, , J J . - _ ' . ,AJ ., .,.‘ ‘- ﬂ ‘ o J ' J ”.2? ' ,
l .( 1/1} , 7M1}? E‘chl‘ ' ,_ _- Jgr ﬂ Eﬁ‘f 7.3% 5:. . ﬁﬁg: : ll , . Y | 3‘. \ 51%; "l'.. E!
1 r “m:*- -‘~ ‘ ’ '~' ‘ v . "J4?!- '«JJs-Le-ulru-‘Wtb J ' a uh : J . J_‘ 'i‘JKg" ' . 4‘:
x ‘; . »:-’J/ .‘J Jf‘ﬁ' ' . u‘ 'tJ'JyJJ H.733; . ' Mk 5:. ‘Z'BJA‘J: i " J a " , ." 'J"
, 4f , J—JiJ. . g' ,~ , . *k ‘3, 241‘» '- .. ' " s ‘ ,_ :3 3 “J .
J ..J _-' . , . n) . a, z \:9\‘ ‘ “—1.; 1‘5 V, J A '91-, _
"‘.- ‘/ V ‘ﬁ ‘ ‘3‘? JJ' :‘f'lj; '7 . I . U r f 4J3. J'.’ , a ~J‘. (. '3' _-' , ‘ ﬂ>.¢?‘; . . V \\ E]
J _ 'Jygtrzf" f 1V1 ""3 N; 7 V - ' ; :7 . L5, 7” 17‘ 1:5) ‘ “'5 7 ﬁg; ‘ .' ?;Z'If " ‘53- I», H
i '5 .ri‘J‘J I "" - -: " 2’ - J 2”! " ,7 ""147" 'J 3974 VF? — , -— '7 ' ' x" ' ’ 4? 3 T .J
r . J . ‘ ” , n' g. V _. '. _ . ‘ ‘ - - , 4 Ir - ._ . A. .
l ' SJU’UW“ ' 4 ' ? T‘q‘.‘ 7‘ | «K? 9' V" 3/. - ¥ 7 'I ...-“f: 9‘ A — '.' 'V .‘ ﬁ' . .
...t , . 1’ d‘ ' : _- M~j = u } ~~‘t1‘f‘ 1,! " i ' ’ 4‘: - I f .1 (‘4 iv 57' q .. 13:23. I;,\ Ef¢§$ R‘. a
r'lﬂﬁ ,. J .'*~ —_> J; " —.=_,-:-:~:h., J; ,‘4 , . ‘ . n ...... yb 2.71,}, f "‘3'” i1; . t 1 - J
‘5’ "R¥w‘v{-'3jiﬁizm\% ‘— —> .‘~' . :=—.~.J:=JJL "‘ J r La 3 .f l" fr? ”-3," ’:‘£-"' ’5’: ; 9"- TJ ‘ ‘ V ‘1‘ >
t - v ‘ . *X'x‘ “-5. . L'f‘J-r J J JJ u-n 9:4") I? ., , 20:9 .J u' .- J . '
. 3 ft . "K“: .,—7& Or;- ."‘~. / ‘J V v ..- ‘TI'T' ‘ \hf ,' é a - Jo V 7‘ S
1 I 'Q _ -’. s “-4”: s : ,J fa 3 .1. ~31“ _ 1,- J J. J J 2.. ,
5 :J‘ J" .K}? ‘ 3;. ~7~“ E , , I”; i {:9/ 4. , . 1.. L J,
3 '~ " ',‘V—'r-" ‘ ﬁ Q~,\-s.‘ ‘ “' ‘ " ' J 4‘ ’ -. l J r. :‘rJ '4'2'”"" — , . .. J H
:«s ,l l ;.y:,"_. -J’ ,F \F? .J - L -;\ . , ‘sz-{J' J 7‘ 'J. [£19. ,, , ' J . J ’ v “' JJ ‘ . 7‘
l 2 ~: (,cimg,‘ -..: l 3:». ‘. J” 7:71:3-"2-1“ .2 a - i" g ‘ 4, ‘ J - J‘ .- *
‘ f naawv 5:th .Jrf: J-‘Jgs-‘sr w ’ f" m M . w - . “ J J, J J ,.
”ﬁﬁ-F“ .1...» r" ‘ 4‘3; c -J,. '4: , - ' 7?: Jr“ 3-. J“ .~ _ , ~ ~ ‘
'3 f” ‘ELDE? |&‘JJ \ : _. _.—’o-'_-.;; 'O!' Q r W (1, ‘J :‘t’t-‘Lﬁ.§ ‘5 . ‘___ L ,_ I V ' j V‘
; ‘ '- 3 ":3" x ‘ ‘ ‘3 "1:4 . </ JJ:"::~. J. _ 4;; 3&4} 5] 8:15:47"? ‘ ’ ‘ ‘ x
i [f .. _ -35951'2"? . J“ ptx;«“ ' 9' " ‘71:“) ' "jfy, " P‘é'g’v .3 ' ' _ _ '
J ,« ~‘ﬁzp-rﬁ f ‘ “* E: .J — J. —‘ x .-. 3 J 74‘ r". x .~ . J J;
. x1 _ "bJ ){W 5139'”; ‘- ‘1 ' 4“ J5" -‘-‘:":“J ‘_ “J ' A- V. ,5. .. - K h” \‘ . -. .- . J- > r
!_ .‘ '-“‘"-‘.‘-J ‘ “La . ‘zJ - -; n *1 n; "4 u" ‘. - J' x L" -' ‘b , ‘
' ﬂag" \L,‘~—J- - £\ '1’ *-‘:;J.J;JT:'~;'JI:?3 0 9‘- 3 Fl. ‘ 7 _' . :54“ ; J
[ ~?.ﬁ:<1’"=’*.-"§E.J.J~‘-. .- J.JJJJ: Jazz??? " v‘ " ‘9' J Juan??? ‘- “ ‘ ‘v‘; --. ‘
1 . ‘1‘ ‘c rT’J , {‘35:}: Dr 5 L'- F “1‘11 ’ - L! _ 9 . ‘ ‘ _ V ,7 J J
25% m J - ,3- . J ,J . _ J. - _
,- ,_l .- -.- D W‘ ‘l .3“ ’ E”, ‘ ‘ . ”a!“ .“ 7V, - ‘ J ‘ . I ~. . ‘
V w‘g“ . \‘w W . -7" ~.‘ ' , ‘ 7 f. -- ‘ k" < .I*‘\ J‘.‘ '," . " 4"’_go“'.-t.:"s:,“ 5: v '_ -' ' _ , ; _ _ ﬂ
J ‘ k r f- 5 :2. , ' 1‘. ‘V 1. .I.':I’) ;' 7“". L'/ ,4" "J vg’ N... VS‘.:3 2:: ﬁvv< . Z} \ 3» --' f, . \ w it .
l J I ‘. ‘5' i” .2. a - ‘ ' - d x-auJ-xv 3.4 J. ~ 1'
‘ 1‘. E'tlk\ 7‘45]: ».‘: ﬂ \_~ ‘3'} ./ ’ ’ a. ' t . R‘ Eﬁ" "~ KIM,- . ~ -- , , f M A.
5., _,,, A. 1 m. ‘T‘ L. .y-—.. J .«ﬁa J.J- .‘ J _ , J_qu 3,.- . "J J. ,
s.,"—‘.:vj- we...‘ J .. ._ 3?; f a_ / ‘v‘ J _\ ”a 7 ,1”; J J _- J « wt _J
. £~dt\9 I 3- .../V! ’ H v I ' . 377 " * ‘55-! ' . JP, ‘ ' -
['9' 1 %- ""'~_“-JJ,J-_J‘3.2 ‘ 4. r g' ' 1 ,m ‘ , 3‘ ' 5‘ J- J ’ I‘
‘ «1*;- ~ '— J‘ ‘ 5-... .J '.‘ x_- ..J -‘ 1:; " J ..5 ‘ " '- “.~ _ '
"*1; ““23!!! .J , ,J. T, ; 9'51. A; 3:; ~ ' . - _ ‘ ‘ ’*
.‘..-.;‘*‘"-‘*~ 1' .44" ,l " '20.! .1 'f .:\ '2" . r'" ‘) ‘7 J" :4 §3- J ‘ V. ' '
1"" .' F . J 1 ' v - _ ‘ .Jﬂl v .o' ' _ _‘ ~. - - - ' ‘ .‘
, rpﬂaﬂr'xcé . 3'5 J ,4 h t - 1,. pm ‘<' r ,J ":5; ‘ w ‘ g
a 7 L '- ‘1‘.“ .: . {f 1‘ _~ I) . L ‘ .. l". i‘ , - ' , I'- , J
1‘ ’ Q ‘ — J . :y‘oi 0 H A i.‘-' I ""M ‘5," ,:V l‘. 3% I I .' " .
t. ,1 l 1‘ J1 :' ~ ~\v . — .
“ ‘1 J' ‘1 -_ v‘ r I ‘ , g L7 A J . Q ‘3 ' ‘ . ,'> I 4
z ’5. - ‘..' ‘J 2'1? J: 1 5 “Jim 3 9" J 3 § ' . . -
\y 1 V r " Wm; 2:,1-‘9‘3’ ”tn ,5 '1 ' _ J.’ ,. a ‘ ' J
‘---' ‘ ‘ \k ' ii 7 ‘ " ' J?” .7“ 1.; A ' ,J I' ‘ , ‘ ~ 1
4 ?k \.H\ L“ ' Y 5‘“; i ....4. 5'": “r: “ 1 u 5‘ f I ‘ . f I
("hlﬂ FL, 1; " "W'M' ' S -J-"->~" x??? “a ' V “‘ ' ‘ ‘
L? J - ._ “ .. 75m 3-5;." T’.’ ' S ‘ ' ~
1“ H T‘:\ C.‘ .J ~ U -- i“ " 5’“ > '1 .‘ Irl- 1"" ."J ‘__ , ' J ‘4 J ’ V ‘
‘194 i. {'{J ‘5'; 3". ‘_.. j-‘ a 7-- "l" r‘" , -' r, - " L, ‘ . .V I. ' ‘ >
’ ‘ ' J J; ' ' J" * J .' ' 'i | ‘ \ 7" 3
J “J5 "**~J - £34“— . 'J “ «...; -,J J ~. — x ’
‘ Abrg-g-f _ . .... a 1 ‘1 v, ' :" TL, ' ":9. .u J:, V ' ' . J l..."
J 3:: 9‘2. , ’:.—- ' *' J r i I a. ' v J . 7 n J
g .L ‘ . ‘ I ‘ , g}. A ‘ .c _J _ .I . I ‘ f 1- ’ ._ ‘l ‘3 ‘3? ...:
J L_V.‘ -~"f‘i§’;’ >_Vq~v?‘?::/- -3' -..- - .— . [I " ',l — .V - b . . .'— ‘ . J
“r J-.. "' J“ - ' _ \ ' ' . . . ~ '
*, “"zﬂ'a ‘ .J-e ‘ J— ' ‘ ' ‘ *- -‘ . ' =“ . ‘ ‘ ‘ ’
‘; ESN I‘:\ , "‘ i: ' '_ ‘1:— ‘ ‘ ’ . .. 1 ‘ ‘_ J'k K- ‘ _' r
. 1 r ‘ _‘ f .5 .. ' J ‘ '4. i- , I.
' s . ' ‘ ' l ‘ ‘ ' ' ' ' " . ~':~ : u
_ ":1 ‘ ' ___ ‘ ' * ,J J .. J ‘ g . _ T»... J .. . J ,
!r a I ~ ’7 33:, ‘_’--Q;‘ 7“¥\ J .. _ - Y J _ 4' J - - -_a z
,1 , ‘ V \V"‘:—‘:Tj\J ~\' 7 _ . . u _ ' ' V t: _‘
...J 5 Q. i , g . ' 7 ~ ‘J,--k , - ‘2‘ 'F‘.’""__-..“';~‘T¥C_‘J:_‘:V -' z _ f ' .. ’ " -- ' ' :~ ' L“ I f:
' ' ’ v ‘ w .- - “-1-" "3"?” "‘=‘J"*--J‘J';-. " “‘ J "b“; ‘L‘M‘J: £524:- M - ' - 4 3. s44?“ J .
’ F-w : ‘2 . a - ’ d} r‘ ‘ '(— 4‘ - ,- ‘ ‘3‘?» -7 “7:27:33? '.rf::':_c‘~;;'\q: ~~‘iﬂ ‘-
. J’ —‘_ L‘ “ E _ {4: 1 ‘ , ‘ 31‘12-‘J‘3Ji3, _\ ‘ ' ‘1
.‘ "- ‘ -. -_Ir-_. .4 ’_- , - , ﬂ” :5' ._ I- —~—\':::‘ _'.:_"——'___ L ' ".V'_jJ:‘ »_A L ._ , 77%
I, ' Jr‘s. . a ’ x ‘ g ‘ ‘ ' f ‘ . 4;, J _, ""‘Ff? '
.. V f. ; . {,1 2" r? .*--—~h “l d «1’ 1-4 '1 -' '1 V : . I J .3 ‘ ’ 5-1 . 4,7 ‘_ . ’1
J J . J a .\ J. . -/J { J, J . _ : ..
" J ('5. " . “ﬁg, 5 L‘ * q "')f " '3 , - ' .‘i‘.’ A ‘- .' ,w J"
- __ lg: n _ I ' ‘ . . " r T ‘ . J . .‘ J ' ‘ '
j u: _ it; _‘~ /_’ 1 ’ "‘ I. ‘ "y; ,3 .3 ‘\ 31 ‘ _ A _.) '1 u \ ‘ i ‘ 'V-"_ x
.5 ‘_ a J1” -' '_ - v .1 .. ... |- o >
ra ;:r-N’-‘»-. 3’ ' J. ‘o n" T4 a 0' :' "'" ' - ,7 '7' d ‘t ' - I ”.4" I \ 1
,_,l 4 1 A_ M 7 l a J "" ._ [5‘ _-—A\ _>,__ - z ’ .' ‘ ‘ _ . 3 v \ \
rr:- '3‘ k ' ' 3‘" -' M ‘ \ .. ‘ ' , - ‘ I I! I I ‘ \ ’ 1 35‘
- O 'u‘ - 1 “ M Q: . _‘-“- . ' \~_‘ _‘ __ ‘ A -4. ‘ 7 7' . V ‘ {~11 '. _ I ’4'] J‘ J: ‘ ,'
FA 1 .“ J ‘- 4 ‘32 .2\ , ..f" I. > \ ‘\ '7’ _ ’ S .I.' ’ ' H A .
_‘ ‘ . I - ‘ ‘ ‘/ ’;. ‘ ...“ '1— t I J, ‘1 .TJ
! y L d 1 .77‘ l n l ‘ <.‘J ’\ 'r ' I > v tr 1‘ ‘
i “ egen 5"?\T.___"=¢ ,. r " ' _ “"Tf ' ‘. f .1 k "‘
: _ . . y 2, J‘ -- ‘ ~ - J: " -. ~ w», a. .
; . g. —— Ekwan(ex15tlng) .5...“ ‘- ., x _ 3:9 :4 a . -. J
Ir” { . iQ.‘ _ ’. ‘1 J; A L" “‘1
' ' ' V g ‘ '1 k I. 1’ y. '— 0 ‘ ’1‘ W J
J _ Horn River Mainline r- * . -, J ., .; :4. F J} i
7‘; " ' ' x J .‘3' y 41' ‘v ‘2 x, 3
L_ --- Travel Route (Historic) J " J; J A; 25- 3 , V, - _, " ‘ _.
C, ‘4 q, )n Kl 'ﬁ'.‘ 3. ' “ V 7‘ 3"“ ‘ 3) 1 ["43 Ihf ’
' m Huntmg & Trapping Area (Current) , ' ‘ ;,_J . .':~' £7ng \,-__ ,9, “h P. ‘ 95? ' 3‘ ,--J'."‘ J
t- ». J — J JrJJJ-JJ“ J
_ VIA Hunting Area(Historic) J 4. , --; 4 ‘. ., ._ g, .9," 7‘! 3- . , t, ,. {Mt—g/ 2f ;‘ , .
‘ l 0 j J J Q” 1 ' ‘-. -. J ‘\ '==\ ‘rd 'h ‘4; ":11" J' 1‘“ 1 ’ J
P l. V i > . . ) .1 A ' ; “. . " ’ -'. ‘x A ‘ \_ C12 A, - ‘ ‘Kt .7; w 'k“ ‘1: h”; J; ‘ 1'} W?“ Aw?)-
i __ Provuncnal Boundary “”4"; * J m ‘4 H ‘ .-' 39' .. u 7 J _ ~ _ y . )3:th 3J3; "'"
i"; x _J.‘ 3 - ' -j gag. “J 3-1.3 g; “:41 "' I ‘, :1 ' —
'A — ‘v-- -‘ - ~ ~ —- an.- , x - ‘ ‘ . V 7" Z‘ ’3‘ ’ ~ ‘ “I 7' ' 7 A M ’—¥ "5: — 7:! i -7.
n-..“ 1., . L_r'. S‘_Smf/2Lé‘. ' ‘ ...‘7; i ' V. 4 d . . .4 . _ 5f: __ , -‘"; . ﬁgﬂﬁ'}. L 13*. ‘x-. -—Lﬂﬁllt:_ .—.. ._J
; MaplD: O13
Trad'tion I Use Areas 'dentified by David Martel
' I t' t th T C d H R' M ' I' P' |'
ALL MAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION \MTHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED.THE INFORMATION
- , _~. CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELIN ES \MTH RESPECT TO THE CABN MAINLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY,
5-3. DELINEATION OR SUWARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION USES AND INTERESTS IN THE AREAS SHOVW ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENETHA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.

interview Summary
interviewee: Gabriel Martel
Date: May 27, 2009 " "
Location: Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Adena Dine
”When everyone was living off the wild meet, there was no such thing as cancer. Everyone was
healthy.” .
~Gabrfel Martel
Background i
Gabriel was born in August of 1946 around the Chateh area. His mother’s name is Helen
Pastion, and his father's name is John Lawrence Martel. John was from the Hay River area and .~
was the second youngest of nine children in his family. Two of his brothers and three sisters are -
still alive today. Gabriel was never married and has no children. Gabriel has been working in a "
- garage and has done an apprenticeship as a mechanic. Gabriel also spent 4 years driving a truck .
between Fort Nelson (BC) and Watson Lake (Yukon). His route also took him through Fort y.
McMurray (AB) and Yellowknife (NWT). Gabriel has also worked around the Habay area (AB),
clear cutting or ’slashing’ for 7 years. ..~
Hunting and Tragging ~~
Gabriel trapped a lot when he was young on his father’s trapline. That trapiine is now worked t.
by his first cousin, Roger Martei. ~
Until recently Gabriel used his nephews’ trapline which borders onto the 29th baseline. Gabriel '
hasn’t been abie to go trapping for the past four years because of his recent hip replacement. i '
When he was able to go out trapping, they would go out in the fell, and then come back at .
Christmas. While they were out they drank snow and rain water.
He mainly hunted and trapped squirrel, marten, and rabbit south of the trapline road (Mobil .
RoadL 3%
He also trapped lynx, marten and fox around Zama. Gabriel enjoys the bush and hunted .
because he wanted to. The only thing he didn’t hunt in the recent past was beaver beca use the ~.
amount of work was not worth the money that he would get for a pelt.
Gabriel used to travel along Hay River to hunt moose, and comments that when the ﬂies are "
bad, the best piece to find moose is in beaver ponds, rivers and lakes. _'

_: Fishing '
:7- Gabriel goes to Rainbow Lake to fish for catfish and to Habay for jackfish.
Medicine and Berries
Gabriel collects wiilow bark, dries it, and says that it is very good against headaches. He also
. gathers mint grass and rat root which can both be bolted and used for tees.
.~' Sites
" Gabriel points out 2 cabins on his nephew’s trapline and another couple cabins around Zama.
Between Rainbow Lake and Fort Nelson there is also a cabin that beiongs to his friend John
. g Capot Blane.
. Gabriel identified a sacred site around Bistcho Lake that is used for tea dances.
' He also recalis a gathering at Hay River (NWT) that was attended by peopie from as far as Fort
. Resoiution (NWT) and Fort Ray (NWT), which is about 150 miles east of Hay River.
" Gabriel had an older brother who was buried on the way to Zama.
' Trove! Routes
7 9 There are 2 industrial plants south of Mobil. Gabriel uses the roads leading to the plants as
traits in the summer.
.. Observed Changes
Gabriel comments on the amount of non-natives that have been on his trapline recently. He is
t concerned that the construction of roads in the area has given access to 3 tot more peopie.
; Every spring, more and more ’Americans’ are coming up to the trapline to hunt bears. They
' have been camping on the iand without permission, but Gabriel went out to talk to them and
3' now they no longer stay there.
The oil workers carry guns, and sometimes shoot beavers which they bring to Gabriei.
Gabriei expiains that a lot has changed over the years. In 1959, Gabriel can remember there
._ ._ being no cut tines, just bush. Lots of industry has deveioped since then and a lot of

underground pipeiines were put in. Since the gas plants are very loud and the animals do not
iike the noise they do not come around as much. Gabriel has noticed that the number of '-

animals has decreased over the years and he thinks that if there is more devefopment, that
there wiH eventuaiiy be a shortage of wildlife.
Gabriel has also observed that the water quality is no ionger any good. He says that you should
not drink lake, pond or river water even if it is boiled. He says that when you boil it, you can see
’0in stuff on the surface.
Gabriei has also observed changes in regards to the vegetation. Plant life grows back around 23'
pumps, but not around the plant sites.
Future Generations
Gabriel says that he is ashamed of the young people. ”Nobody goes out in the bush, Everybody '
just wants to turn up the heat. Nobody wants to cut the wood.” Their way of storytelling is
being lost. Elders teli stories, but the younger people do not listen. They do not know how to go .
out in the bush, and without these skills the traditional way of life will be Eost. . .

' ' W . 5 ‘ . - I , wU—i ' a I»: _ ~ - I- - rI RV V I '——-- ' ' ‘I' .w "' - ’- v‘\ v _ ' ‘ “’. ' ‘ '.' ‘ ' " ,‘1 . ._*-~_._- ____;_,_.___5 , ._.-1 .___A’ " " LEM '— ‘
I > T 74 v. ' 13W; #1 K3 ‘ 773‘ ' ‘ ‘ _' 55/ , ‘f' ‘7 “$.31: I? I “W 5 ~ I I” " 1:3' I
I I' _ l‘ i r; ' ' 3. " 'J " {1’2}?! 6 "J ":5“. 12 " I f ' ' I ' J)? I“ 1 l I ""1 VA <‘“ ' i
‘ "n‘II I'' i; . ‘ ‘11:, -73“ f,%:;;.: '7“. I j} ‘ {g I I I ‘3' FL . I , ' I'.” I?) :3" Area Of InterBSt If
f. 4", . w‘ f—‘-' -” . r I ‘ ' xv“ 1" ‘. "'5' , A t I . I I I. 1' j _' .’ J a ",~' i
I ‘ 5 °‘ w". ._ II I "5]; 5.1? \.—=—‘%"’ ﬂ Ik‘vﬁt ,, .; , - ‘ lg‘ 1'8} I l n’; ‘I ‘ . _r'/‘I’I N7 k v’ i y:
I . ~ 'V a ‘7: v 3/” l .\ —!~’H.;\‘—r ‘ O ‘ I ‘ L$ I I f l J ‘ X‘ J‘lq ‘ .5 i
I 0’ .‘ ”L -- . . I ‘ "‘3'. " ("?'L'.‘ ;~ ‘(7- 5‘“ I“ r. 0 . 3‘ “‘t 'I l : i", ‘, 7', ~--’- .1- ‘ "
. I I! I- '4 . *5 (LWIEE‘ , J ‘ , .r 1‘ . ,“ r ‘L‘ ‘C‘W :7”..— .‘ V. ’1‘ ) n. F . , ‘ ‘ II . I , {-1. f I I 2'
I , -« a z. '- 7 - :55 “I ,Iarsasmay r I Q WI 9 » F
I 2'" I ‘ , -~ ‘ 1' . 413'} " V ‘ ,5 2 369-5 ~3- r..I~k‘1", ‘r ‘5! ‘ u l)": 1 .I
I I III I," _= _ 3,. _ (P_{i I _ , I . I ) III I I 5_ ~ 35‘ I ~19, fig} . ‘1 ‘%'—.:7’f’d'. ' _ I:
I ‘ I ft‘ﬁfrf- . ’I ‘--ﬁll" t- 4‘ ‘ ‘ . o . I " ‘ ll ’L’a I; ‘ “‘"L ' ,8 "IN (‘3 II 0‘” ‘ ' ‘ bh\‘{\:?%. ' .I E . l" s r.
I ‘ "‘w ‘ ’3” "~9‘i-.§“‘ ‘ d ‘ W ,1 I I ' ‘k 5 ‘ 1‘; C“ ‘ $9 1‘ [?\‘ . J ' r‘ “‘1' ’ 3 ~ ‘ I ." ,I 1 .LI 1 L
“ , r795.“ . . 'Z 4:"; ".a i , {Ch . 5;: " 3 12”» 4. ‘ '22 " I“ é‘ﬁ 7"} ,-— "‘W -' 7' .T' ‘3‘ V =
3; 'r _ 1‘11. . I A ‘i'ﬂ' 'q ‘ LI< I‘ I- j. I! .. “i :l‘. q r x -. - ﬂ : Q . .I . .
i I“ II", ’. t A rn“ II {j ’ IIII‘CV“ L 1 I Q‘ _ M II Na” I ~ ~. 8 a -1 “K r
°' ; :13, ,;.‘..:s::.:‘“‘;§,-§. I. I I I‘ I '. I k I $1: 5' -'.-.' ~ " ﬂ 5,. . .. ..
~‘ \y é 512:» W‘Vg‘f5 * ' '4;- ‘ 5:, ‘3 ‘ I ‘ 11' «5 ,. _ ,, 7' ,2: f , .2 ‘ x ‘
'1-—"=‘-’ k."\ “-1—: 7,; ~7“‘—-7" ‘2“»_ . ﬂ «.1255 ~:' ‘1' f)" ‘ ’ I. " .; '/ ' ‘ 7 3 7 \,
. 3 .——‘“ . ‘.I,- I_ j— - , r_. . ’7’ “ _ ?__‘ _ _’ . I "I ‘7 I n.2,).I , 'I .~>,-—.‘ V‘ "-I -5 J I, _ . - ‘5 4‘ . -- l:
' é .AA‘F" - r‘“ ”4‘ . "245’ - ?’— Fx . ’7 3" , .5; ,1 " -:-"I3‘1‘-’—.=L\._-’ .I'I 7 3"“ V,
m ' M. E” I .5“ r’ 5-3;}, ."‘ ‘ I A ’1" .;. ._ f’ .__—. ,r“ 5“ g 4;: y ,
r' I: - Mid“ » . , 1:: r ' ‘ . ~s- I 5y: ' «.5 " I ’1?" » —- ' ‘
L $ '. . .z' or‘;-_JQ ,5?- I' a‘ 552‘ ' - 37- ‘ ‘~-/ "-_. ‘4 I . 7 ‘62". r ,I
' 8‘91 ‘ WW" ”J V.“ ~ 75> vi- a ‘F. " 3?“; “ 1'51 1 79" .:- - ~ ~ 2 -5
“ ~ ‘1' .- . vL' .' “H “ " . _r.«‘ ;‘._ - 5-. _ - "'- \ ~ ~'- “_ t - 74—15,?“
'. 3/.— $4‘ . R“ ‘Q , £1, - -“"'~\.L‘I’.‘9 , ,i ,. (m_‘h-Xf ‘ ,--.\“-$. ‘. ‘ . ‘ . V _ _ d" ' " “J a”
I ma: “*5 3 :5- ‘ .- — 5.54 '~- 3% w. ‘ 5:595: ‘I ~ - W _. '
f . 3‘ N: ”'1‘ J 5.“- ~ 3-3 I" L2 wr‘ ,, » ’2‘.» ' " W _- ‘ - '
. " ., 554271;? I . 535:4“ . ‘ “ix 8' .. M? ' V? ‘ ’7‘” 7r ' ‘» ‘ ‘
‘ 't '" “$4” 9(1ng u} W135" ‘ " I 3“ ﬂ 0”. . _— I :3. ,1 - _ Inf ' ‘. II :3 I‘ ’ :i' - ' ‘4' '
Lab 5%:5’442'; .- ,7 :1 “w W 7,. I I1. w?’ - (3?; ., "" \, W ' L»; _ f
-‘ "-3—5. \ ‘ ,- . -—'=. I ,' , -: _ ' - .- .' \ II .9.“ _. r. , W
E: ‘5} > K‘-;{ ’A‘I ’ t‘. I ' I I " ->~('4‘I.‘,Tuﬂ~v: SJ - O I F) ' ‘m III ., I "L‘ :2) ' 3‘ I b, 4 , ' ' .
? '., ". ‘i-‘i‘? ‘4‘1‘ ‘ 41’ la - ‘mW‘xT‘ ‘ ' ﬂ"‘[‘“t‘1‘y.-5.FI§" - - --. .- . » —- "
\1_ .W _ ,.;-9>- 36““ . {- F%V‘tﬂ - " ' V5.47 .: I d -. - 4.4" ’- “ ’I' ‘; ‘3 ‘,’ ‘ ‘ :- A ‘ “ 7' '
”’ﬁx 4:. \ e- :31! "5 . 325:3”?! . ;. ' 2‘3; ' ‘2‘3‘2‘13‘3; 1“"53‘17- y' ' ‘ ~- ‘ ‘-
‘ '— 3‘ “£253, )0 ‘13:: ~ . Ii.-(/':L’/'.'. I 'fo.':.'L‘ "“ " ~ 55V," 5:3» ,‘SL ‘ J 35:13 ‘~ J -.: ’ ‘ ...'f:—.'._~
’ ' m I 52:61.32, ., '4 '3‘ ‘7‘ . ‘~ “ \ .‘. l. ,9)” 55» =' —~*— ~ ?‘
~:r.TjI‘II I'? . ' «ha v /‘ . ‘4 JP..~ ' — ,I I :II;_>- ‘ ‘I
III] ¢j,:,,;.;;r ( ,- 1%” If .. u»; .... I 4—1:“ %Y" II (w-:‘2=yz2=\, 1:7“ 3 I f . I.§:L:~ I I T I , I
:5 :‘ir - 727‘; ___‘ IR ,7; ,1. 'I; -d I 1-, I,- I? ﬁ I I _ I’ v I 5““; , .‘~‘ 4 - I .
' 3 k.“ ”H ' 17 '1 V I (/3 ‘ ' ' ? 439' -" 1:123... Va . ' ' T ‘ w
‘ 5- —:- , ﬂ: - ""2 " V .‘ ' W . 1 ' E" & ' Y i“; f;f1l:y" , « f- 1 .‘ . - - . - V, V
. _ '~ .‘_‘ 7 ; . _2 I _ . I ;on ’ ’r ‘1‘ ‘ 5 v .4“ , ‘ e, . 3‘. ‘ - . - . . I
I ._. I'u ~'\ :‘r’VL‘L‘ 7/. .I' I “I I .»‘.~ I‘Vw L I‘ “9 . . 5. ,I f . 5 s . ;'
.. w ck ' L I v r. , I I '. ~ ' ' I I - I
""I I was! 4 " v J 5943;! I I ' .2 I 3? _ *-
. _ I I "’"4'kj' ~ : £735le J I38 é-..’ 4 I1 .Il I l } I . I; ~
|' I I I. .‘ I I q ‘I I - g I" ’ ' , .
ﬁx I. 1‘4 II“ ,0; ‘5”‘49 ,’ f“ l .h ‘2.) 31 2/ ) I, I z I I (II
,' I ' k“ V’ 1‘ -V’J' (I; - 'y .._ '2’ ' ,K-‘r'ﬁ' :1: ’-ﬁ‘-— _;( '. 3 f I . l ' (I n I . I —
\\§ "‘ ~ ' " ' i! 5“ g ‘ ,"E‘LS‘ . “ h-I ’2 I '|‘ a1 4’ 1‘ ’ I 1 r ; ‘ ‘
w. G ‘ I .t; "‘4’. l I I. I, I I I
‘1 “’1‘ -c‘ «‘95-; ': . .."' 'fljww“ \L a " I ' -, I' ' . . , '
I.___II. "5 I. ,.; . II _“ ., I' I . I}-.": 42:7;‘1 ; ,I. a \ I . I ‘.
‘I m “7-'"\ K 1- I T .— -\ 7% ‘2 I'II.‘ ”r” .I 'I: . 1 I'r ‘ A“ . J . .
‘ . ' , , , I . ,, J .- I- ,- I I ‘I
j”. JI II KIWI: :_II IIII ( Ir. .. “"~:7.I I, I - . . . !I , . - .
a . :I_ -\ - I I I ~ _ -
. ‘ _ . “-~_.; -«"‘\ .I‘ ! I! "II II, II . 'I I I - I .
"'\ §~h “ \u‘ ‘. I vuA' ~ “ -..‘RV‘ I ‘V ' ‘ V
‘ ‘ " -v ., ‘ ’ ‘l ' u - ~ I — ‘
5 "I g" .. ,_. 1 - , , , 7 .’ _
935-2“ ‘ ', - s“ 3‘ K. ‘ Ir, I .‘t'xm’.’ : ' , , r'
"71‘? .-_ . J a i. 7 11 ‘7- _. ' I ' ..
~ , , 3:.» ,_ , . . I y; *- - . _~ x?
I .. Il. _.“ .' . i I .3 I :I.
1155?»: ,. r- ", ~' .‘,'_.Iv ’ L' ' ’ ” .‘ 3 h .r' "
V‘ 'S\ , ”hi ,‘ r’ —.‘" . < ‘ IA. H - ‘ 7 r — * — n j q” A , I . i ‘—
_ 'y‘r" 7! ' I l . ' I.— ' ‘ L ﬂ .
I “A I . V I _ II—I . - _ I :— .f. ._ H‘ : _. . . ,
- ‘ I l.‘ ‘. ' ‘ . ' I — - ' v - ‘ A b- ‘v . I
‘ ~ h" ‘. ' ‘- .~\ ,;T\\ ‘ " ' ' 'V G! W ”I. ‘ x" ' “'I_';ﬁ W
, ‘ — “‘7‘- " :;*T.:‘ _I I . “ ’ ‘ I - _ 7' 1I " ‘
”‘5‘: : ~‘.I.".I , . r: -— r'F; wa- -‘;~:::“.:\’x;:‘t§_\-\k _ f ‘7 *3) -'
6 ~ 1 ; .‘ - _- . - -_.. —. .-‘=;‘ “‘~—:3-\:‘\53:7;213I“ f. .
I A -' --_..~_, I * ‘~ '3 w. ‘ .3 _.._ - 1:; '::<;::\III;_III
- I I ‘I- 'q' - _ ,- I‘II _ v I, ~ »I 1‘. I; ‘ ‘ 7"“ ‘. ' " ""~I;':-I-‘;_’ ?:._:i1 'l, L:_ :IIQIIIII .
' "“‘7‘; I : ~ 7 I V 7 5‘: ‘ , «77‘ :7 W J
I" ‘~ ‘ . (A u‘ ’A 5' L\ _ A 'l "J ' ‘ - 2“; I , I‘I , n,
a 1 I “L - 3; iv; ' I _ s. -_ , , ‘ _f .
1 .- ‘ r O" ' ' ° I I . 'i ; 1
- xi; ._.51 ‘ w‘i‘f -' _ ” f I . , ~- ' f,
L d‘ I‘ n, I! __"' ' ‘ 1": ‘ L}. . ‘
‘ _‘ . . 4 . . I ’.‘ 7- I I _ ‘I ‘
‘ 5b 2‘" '\\,.“ 9 ~ FY - , 0‘ .‘;‘.L ' , —' r / - . -_— A I ‘ 4 I a! ‘\ I
.A _ ‘7 . L ~ ?‘I ‘ ~ " ‘. , . y: “ ' ' e v r' ' " I ‘ _
3 I: L‘I‘ ‘4'. { , h 17 3 i '3“ am k‘-1II -“_‘»I,I _. -t-, "‘ ‘HI‘ . _ '7 ‘ ' ‘Y L‘ ‘ '57: ‘ '.' ‘ I II ‘ ‘ J“ I
- 5 - - V .‘1 ‘fr'- -- , , ~_ . . ‘ 3 .
- I . n. . - .‘ 7-”!1‘ '3: P- / ‘
" ’L ”5'. - —'—.r'-_.-_. ' .‘t‘ '- ‘ 5‘5 ’ ‘ . “ 'L
I egen "vighlgugq‘! \\ >1.“ ,_ \ .' ‘ _ . t; - ‘ '9 I1 __ t."
I ?".~r.1.¢’:e '7‘ '- - ..»-— ,- . ’ I
7:: I;~ = Ekwan (eXIstIng) ‘ 3'? .;‘_.~*;’. - 7‘ " ‘ ‘~‘ . *‘E s51 I IV ;. "
I’_‘ :I’“ ’3' V 7. "Liz" ._ “- . I ‘ ‘ Ir ‘
. o n ‘ , ’ I .1 , I I ‘l
.. — Horn RIver MaInlIne .. I I I . 2 ‘ _, ~I . gI . I ,. .
‘1 I»:- -- . . I , I ‘ ‘ ‘ . III! 1‘; 1‘ 'a‘} ‘ 1." I ‘I u“ ,
'p. --- Travel Route (Current) m a ' - , . d x J“ Ix—II 2. _. .,. I . I r.
, a I ; \'. " “'l ‘- 3. ‘ ’9 f— .7 ‘7 '-
. '1 _ .n _‘ . . f {ZV‘ ' .I , _ - 5 ‘ 1’ I I ~~.‘ ‘ 1' —
. 1:] CabIn Area (Current) ‘ . , . ,1 ..~ -, '71 v -» \_ 71f. \_ ‘ f 5‘ = _- 7- ’-
' ' ‘l ‘ ‘ . I ‘l ‘V ’. ? * t ' t) - “-—- V , k .'
: F ' :' ’u ‘ \ .I' ‘ ' ‘ - [A ~ H “? \V:> - 5“ ‘ ‘ ‘o ' ‘ :1:- .‘ r
I - Huntmg Area (Current) I . L, - ‘ .. ’ _ ,I ' -. r, ' , _ _ ".2” _ q}: .\
A- '5 . . I ‘ I ‘3‘? ;_. '_ 1" - V ‘ — z". ;' ' 1 .‘t— I71. .- O 1 ; I I ‘\ ,, _ NJ
'QI' :3 . . -‘ I J . ..l f." I Is I _ ‘II;‘ ~. ':‘ . ', 3%.?“ I I. ,I ~\. .I‘;’ ,‘I- .W 7’ I ‘ v \;H W“ I: II I IN.“ ._ 5F
x. a. 1, Provmmal Boundary “Ih-WIIII'II .' h, 9;; - 5; 1 .I-af- :3"; a m 1‘ y I :I Ir » - 5A—
~- I A_-. 1 g. _ -‘~ ,_) - _ I/ — —
2“; K I 4 J,’ 79 . -' > I , a -‘ . ‘1 :‘f ‘ :1 :5 III } II? 7’. ~ , I - IIIIIIIIIIﬂlI .ﬁ 7.
4"": ". .LL: S~yrﬂ’é‘.. ' 75;- ' ' II J . _ 3'7. ‘2 , 7 I 5‘35; 7 5- ; I ; -:./__, _.___Ll‘._,r:a..f
. Map ID: 014
Trad itional Use Areas identified by Gabriel Martel
'n relat'on to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
ALL MAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION \MTHOUT WRITTE‘I PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED.THE INFORMATICN
-;I ; CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPEUNES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MNNLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOTACOMPRB-IENSIVE OR COMPLEI'E INVENTORY.
I“ _I DELINEA'I'ION OR SUMMARY OF DENE THA' FIRST NATION USES AND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOVIN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USE AREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.

interview Summary

Interviewee: Phillip Martel f
Date: May 28, 2009 " '
Location: Chateh Administration Office
Interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Adena Dinn
Background _. .
Philiip was born July 26, 1939. When Philiip was 6 years old, he and his famiiy moved to Habay
by canoe and built a log cabin there.
He quit school at a young age and started working on seismic lines. He moved to Mission in
1950 and stayed there for 4 years. in 1956, he moved to Manning for a job.
Hunting and ”framing i .~
Phillip used to trap on trapline #86 in Alberta with his dad but switched to #1063 in 1962. '
He no longer hunts or traps due to his bad leg. '
He used to trap squirrel, fox, lynx, fisher, otter and sometimes wotverine.
Phiiiip tells us that there are a iot of caribou around his cabin.
He trapped beaver around Bistcho Lake. ~. ..
Before quitting, Phimp mainly hunted around the Manning area for moose. .
When he was traveiiing to Fort Nelson on the winter read he would hunt for moose on the way.
Fishing
Phiiiip fished around Bistcho Lake for jackfish and pickerel.
Medicine and Berries
In the past Philiip picked tots of berries. These included saskatoon berries, chokecherries, :
raspberries and strawberries. ..

513;; .

‘ Phillip knows of two cabins that are located on his trapline and another that is near Keg River,

.. Aiberta.

.. Travei Routes

Phiitip has relatives in Fort Neison that he visits using he winter road. On the way he usuaily

hunts for a moose or two. ‘

There is also a trail from Paddle Prairie to Habay.

" Observed Changes

Phillip says that in the past whatever they caught was theirs. Today they have to register the

' ' animats that they kill. ”If they catch you, they take thefur.” He reports the same situation with

~~ . gun permits. 21‘ you don’t have a gun permit, they take your gun as weIL

' ' Before 1946, there was no reserve. Before this, he says, peopie travelied everywhere

“Before, everybody would go out in the bush all winter, get lots offurs and sell them. Now there ..

is no work.”

Phillip reported there are a lot of oil weiis and pipelines on his trapline which has an effect on
the number of animais.

Stephen remembers that people would go hunting in an area in British Columbia calied Beaver I
Creek-(Shekilie River). '
He also says there are not many caribou east and south of the hills next to Tooga Lake, but 5 i
there are more on the west side of the hills. Both Stephen and his brother say there are lots of
moose though. q
Fishing > . ~;
Stephen and his brother used to fish around Ketcho Lake. .
As well, they report people catching fish, trout and jackfish, in the rivers and how the fish are 5 I
bigger in the summer and smaller in the fall and winter. I "
Medicine and Berries "
Stephen and his brother remember that their mother went with their father, to collect ..
medicines, a number of times to the area he trapped in. They travelled there by snow machine. Z
Sites 5
Stephen and his brother recall there only being one cabin in the area of their parents’ trapline, ; .
as well as many tents.
Stephen says that their grandmother is buried in the area southeast of the hills next to Tooga .
Lake. . .5
Stephen also mentions there is an area with a cabin about 40km south of Tooga Lake and 75km -
west of Zama Lake. C {I
Travel Routes
In the past Stephen and his brother would travel up the Hay River from Zama Lake to their
trapiine area by canoe. They still use the same travel route today though now they use
motorboats.
Stephen goes on further to say there was also a horse traii from Chateh to their trapline, 5..
following the river. .

-3
v ,7, t, ‘ 3" . _r _ ﬂ: , _'__, 7 _ W, F: - -—,~ , t - ~.7 ~—?‘er- r1} 3 ' ,3. 3 -:.3 ,;-.~.£ _ 1, 3 , 15-32:")???
W 'WW“ G33 «3-3 3 3 ' 3J3 3" 3W3 3' 313 ' F , 33-. 33 3 * 3
3.33 ,3,5_::._ ,3 '3 3-- 2" 3
. . ‘ . ‘78,, u.- v u l y. . 3 3 I y E...
E?“ . < 3, 3. ﬂ. ,3 ~ﬁ-_«5 ”£3,314 .g‘ .\=_ . , $7., 3 h ’ 3 k 1 3.. . g . , 3 j 3 _. / $93 '33:; Area of Interest
3‘ f 3 g a I - 3‘ ‘ 7 .J ‘ ~ - 7 —-"--;=-a"7 “, > J} ‘. “ i f 3 A l i 014'?! y u‘ .41 ‘
3 ~ ‘ 3r 72*?) 31‘ __ g. “ 5 7 “'1 " Y “A k ’5 i1 ' .l 3’ L, I ‘ ‘l 7|“ 5.; .l '
.7 A ' : fv; .7 f * " . 9 .. . , , " . . "_ . ‘ 7 ' : . 5- 3 ' , 3 .j '2; ’
- 1 A q‘, (S... ,ﬂ/ _ [3 W ‘ , ' 4’ V_-~‘~.J iFC . ,4 , \ ' \'. J 3 l ' 3 H' J ﬂ - ‘ ?.?:A ‘s’ I ‘
33 - , _7 3. , ‘5 ,, ‘. . .4 _ .. :- v C “v ‘3 d? 5- ., I n t
‘ ‘ VI -' ‘ ‘ J > . ‘—/f‘ ‘ lg}: n |- r‘ - “' ' " 3» - ' ’ “' *ﬂ‘l A n‘r ,- >)’f
\‘ h”: ' u l. f ' . _"' IF; . 1 ”6‘6; r 3 ﬁ\ ‘ ?T‘G‘fji 1’1,h'%§§ ._ h . a?” 4:7,!» > I 3 l
-3. ' 8- ‘ V " “7‘ 3 ‘. "i I A "45 ‘ ‘ '- ' , "‘ . ‘ V ,7 v. r 7 '
, , ,3 _. A 3. 3-.” p 3 3 4?} a 3 :_ .. - 3K? 11 g , ”(2% ‘ 4:735 3 ,
H -/V‘ A. l 2 - 'J '13,” 3 '{| F , "\v- v 0‘ ‘ ‘\ .V‘ V q - ~ ‘ 7 ' ‘ ‘7 ‘ ::< :1 ‘
33F?!“ ‘: 4’53; ' ‘ I 9? 33/ L 33‘“ .51 L'@ ' i 1333. (‘5! "3 Q33? ‘~ f J1]; ’ * \ f i ‘
' 7r .- - -3 3‘3 33 .3 r ' . 3 3’ 3 '3' '3 277:1 r" . 3-- - . .5573 .7' =33
3.3 ‘2 u 77 ,3. 3» ,7 . 3 3 ( 3, -3 :
”:3 ,3 ‘ 7‘7 .3“ ’ . 3 3 v - 3' {I 3' , ill: go] a- . -./ _ 7 l ‘
3 7.37:. * 7:. 7.. ’3 “4: ‘33 53' v.. ”j ‘ “I 33’ 3‘ "5y 9"" ??:??— ‘ “'3 ~ - ; ‘
" '1’ ‘ ~’ ~F 7.... - ‘ * A... - 7 ' 3 V 337-}' 7 '3‘ , . ' l. _' 1 " J .. ,_ I u _' r 3 ‘3' 7 ‘ ‘ 1.1 1
3 3’; :3? $7 Ely " ' :57: " "%‘°TV-T":‘ .3753 3' 5::- 4,_L 7.1513 43 . W » {.57 57—? ,7 "4- ' h
‘ —~. ,24 , ~‘ ..._ , ’ ’ 7 ' - ’5 K1213 “i I .é' I 5". hi“ {51—3. *:..h f 7 , "’ Ii 31‘:? I x .-
3 2* - y- _ ,. .5 ‘__ ,J 5—.“ 3 ~ 3 -T #93? w; - " - :3 5r .1 _. 'e ‘
I 'Ii'ﬁ :7'Jr “ M A‘s _‘ _' . I . (1: ¢ "£ "-'-. 'c,=j.‘- ,_1_”J J ‘, :5; '— ‘ j ‘
{.73 4 5’ ,_ ‘ e; ‘ w - . " ' ' “7‘ ‘ '\ , , ‘- - Ju‘ '3'7—1?
i 3' " :""7'3-:f<73/' ' f +2 ' ‘ "'” "'-"‘5«-' ”?V‘Y‘KJ 3; 75:? 7~-=~ 3 .5- 7 7137:2173 ~ " 3
4.1:. ‘- 3"; 2-. «"- 745. ‘ ' 7-5 —- ' 3 “ '." ' ‘—- r3 a ‘ .1" .: ‘ ‘ ' ‘35 3'“! 5- =1 ‘
ii‘ﬁf a“? ‘33.: 13% "“2""65‘ ‘ 3. .-. - 7‘ i 3 ' ‘ 3 g???" M’\ f ”3-7—3 A ‘5 ‘ 5—???
3.7 3 Kim 3‘ .33 7: —— «5 - 3 3 3 .. 3.77::— 5: .. 3. _. - 3 p3 7.6:”
- 3" '1 '7: 5“ ‘3 1E . - . r - _ ' ; . 70*— tl‘ ‘Y I' 9 ,ﬁWL: P " . , _ _ _ ‘ 3 '7
' :7--'?.¥‘:’~‘ 1 E3 ; : “3,;- 2'; 7 rm ,‘e =3 3 3 7 ‘ (5-5“: 3 .,;-7——- 3. 3 3 3 3
3x _ 5 55:" .5 _. N :3; w ‘ 9:37”: ‘3 3 , ‘r—r _"' - ' , -— -? —— ' . ‘ :
- 3: k333 ., a - :7 . ~55- 33 737237 We- 3:333.» . 3* ,. - 3 3
3" r2 “ -7 “i “~31 ‘ ‘1‘: 7 7 :3 935/ I AF' 1313;? 75:}: «Q 3:): r343. ) «@4 f‘ ‘ ‘1' _ r'j“—"' ’ . 1 :
i 5.\ .‘4—3, .5 '- 3 "3:755'1‘Eg’?’ 0", 1 d r - ' ', , J.)§.-““ “3 ‘ ' ‘ _ 7 1.2-; f? 7 " ' , .3 4
l 5} ‘ﬁ‘l‘hqu’ '3 ‘ ‘ V1 3', ~‘x‘i‘L ' ’5. ‘i’ ' ;¢ “ ' 1 Tili'i'13’.‘ , “ hi , -‘, 3'. q- 4, - ‘a'
3 513‘ - ‘ ri—ﬁﬁ.‘ . 7 " V1 '—‘"» W“ 31“. 3F! 3‘; V_,-' 8’ “a 3‘ a ‘ u.\ 7- '.:" ‘ , ,
L “I I '1‘- F." s‘ﬂ‘ u, g I ‘ -.: “:.‘. 5" I ":3 - |- Ir 5'- ‘h 3' "F' \ ‘ > 3' - ‘ >
,_, 3.3 77, 3m ., 973.7, 3 5 7 373- . 3» 7 -- - .- 3 -. 3 --
~ ‘7‘. - . “f 3 ‘ j' r 33:. ‘ 3" ' . h‘. 3.“ a , '-‘-%r ?.L ‘ J;-'I.‘ \ —.‘ l. ‘3 14" ‘ l:
.- ‘7 -‘ . ¢ \ W ‘ 3 ‘7 . ,-[r‘— . 7. . , I . 3.5.2 7’f"\ ‘ V _ ‘ ‘f-‘v‘y’r a u... ' _. -' - ‘ _ ,. , _,
V3 5-" "'3 ,.3_-_~~ h (Ng‘, {3) , *I."i.L'\/' '5. %:$’/ Kt, ' 4 «7 .- \_ '3- ' f; — ---3 " _7 5 ,; ’1’ 7:;-—~'
”Thy .—a 2. s 3 ‘ 3 '77: v ‘- / ' - ~'o .‘ ‘* '
3 "'73‘53'“, 3.3”“:‘4-7 71”: ﬂ , "w“ “1754-- 1 l. 73375;,“ “‘0 ,l. 335%} H :44: . 7 ' ‘3 3’ 5
.5 ("1? 3‘: ' ‘3' ‘ - 3 3 i ‘- ‘f ’3’ ‘ ,Jﬁ’“ '7’” 5"" i” 51313- ' .. 2-3-33 _ 7 7 73 .3 3'
.4.) :- _ -- ‘ 7“ ' _3 ‘ ’ V 3 ‘ .-‘ 3 a, _ . ‘.‘ v . ¥ k - . f
I "I \F"- «'17:: cm"; "45’ 3 3‘ ‘- J 5‘ l" "‘33) 1' ' ‘ ‘1 "r~- ~77 > ' ‘ ‘ 1
I -— _. , _ , ' ~ . , a , .. ‘ y._ 7 ~’ _
7.. ', ‘ ‘_ V) ,1 1 .3 p f" ' "2 ‘ 7 ~3£J3¥ 3-435625% '__. ﬂ . ' 3 5 . ',,~ .-—' ‘ ‘ 3" 3‘ i
3. . 3 71...“ 3‘ > - '2' 1' I J..:-- A ‘4 . 5“ ;-s . ,‘ "£5 .‘ 3 3'. «‘4‘? +x,_3_\ 3 . . . ‘ j ‘ k3 ‘. , f." ‘2 ‘ 3
b 3“ ‘lx'xﬂ'I-g ~_ ; ‘ ‘1 ' _ 4 . J , - '3,\ & . a it ‘ ~51 a “,7 ' . - ‘ , ~ 51 3_
3'3‘~ 3 — "3—5) ‘ ‘1‘ ‘ ‘33 3' .53; 33 . . . ,. V , - 33,
.3 _—< 3 ;7‘ r‘ 1‘," - _ n, I . 3 \ ‘ ' .7 “_~'
3 ‘ 5—5; 1x 37" ‘ ' 2,1,1. 5 J) 3.4"" 3 a '39 3; 3 33 ‘ k -. .3 1:»
“x ‘ r; «1 ”ax £3" 3’" 1.35 1"{ 3 I .I 3 A ,. 3 ., 3 . ~ 3 --.-
7.5 . . ‘ :, ﬂirt}. J45"? 1. La "1 ' I‘ﬂ', “,5 a 9 ‘ > I '_ 3 ‘ ‘ J 7 3’ ‘ 3
‘ ‘ f .’ r: In L’éﬁ r...) .‘H‘l' 3? f ‘1 F : y . , f ' I i I 5 L , I 1:, I
‘ r\ " ‘ V l ; " «$77., A I 3 “ r 1' , ‘ O. n -. a
'.v;_ ‘ ‘ A 713‘ “?;35' ' \ 5.“ .ﬁ’rd::‘ 3‘ 3 3 I . 1 'L t 3! '|‘
L_, —-. 3‘ 3 .5 . _,'..'3. _ " . _,\3." ' - : ." _ ' 'l
.3721 ~3 - - -~ 3373135,???» 3 *3 ' 3 ,3 ,
“r1 ?‘57 : 3_ 3 . 7 “ .r" ' 3“" ﬁt: '.3, \ '., 3 3 3 ' ' 3 4
3 3 ~ ‘ ' ’l ’7 4r: 0’ 'r'; ‘ ‘ , ‘ - ~ 3 ,
3"”.‘\ 'A 3‘ . ‘3, :l‘" .. {A a; h“ 1’ 7‘ .9 I1 ‘9‘ '_ _. .1, 1 '. . ' - 3 . i ‘
3. s,» . ‘9'." 3' ,— m4" 3}; Tr" ’3 ' 7 .r” 3' "- 1‘3 3. 3 ' ‘ 3
-"‘...~ > ‘_ _‘ 7‘} F‘, 3'“ u g ‘ . " .‘ ‘ . 3 ’3 ' 3» L
:‘n‘ - ~ ; ' -3 , ..:._|I\ ad; 1. 3| "'3 - _ .
.35 ‘ ~53, 3 "5 : ,x 3 . ~ 1‘3" , ‘ ‘ " J? .
“u -- - - . 3 "s W. . E . ?‘_;._ _4-" 1 , . 5 I \ .' 3 .--
‘ 3 ‘55“ _ __ ‘ ‘_-- _‘7 _ ‘ - .3: 7' ; 3 ‘ _ ' 3 |
3: .. v; ,f — ‘ Y ' ‘ ‘ - y s. . ‘7 V',‘-‘-- .... “ -_: I
4%,. f}: - 3. __. ' 3 -_ - __ 5 3‘ Ir _- 37 3‘ 3‘.
r‘ ‘ ‘ _‘ - C y A
' V V ' 7. .C ~ Z‘. :_' ‘ V; ’
_ , . J, ' ‘3 . 3 A ._ ' 3
,_ - 3 . . ,3 _ 7 v " _ " ’ f”- ‘5 - V - 471‘ c. -’ 7-. i
, 75—57. .- - '3‘ 3 V “ " ﬂ ‘ ' 3‘
.H ‘ \: 1"} _,3‘ '- u" git: ;;\ A ‘ . - I ‘ N ' ‘ -’ ‘ - j . 7 r ‘ A -
. ' ' ' 1 A '~ ' ,. . V7,:‘VLZ‘K‘ 9 > ‘ ~ . , " , '7 .' ‘- :1. l 'l‘
‘ ‘ ' "1' I —_" ' — V - 2%;5A—"‘:.:':::~ ' .'H 7 ' ' ’ ﬂ 1 . ‘3 '
1"" 3 ‘ "-35? “ . ' ‘ ‘6. - ‘ 91;": LA j: :' r 13" l — .1- '2 “~"' “37?, _-U}~T?:_‘-q 57:, . '3 , ' ' ', *‘ﬂ 3- _r" ’h'l
#3 , 7. 7 ,4, . ‘._. 5 . ﬂ _ J .5. 7: ~3"-77-:~.737;5_;;\'_»'-' ‘ 3 _ I
‘-“.7 ‘1 '4 '\ ‘ ‘! "(3.15; I V ’ ."W N3 - .: ¢ 2‘3 ‘ - 7‘ 71:71:31.. :3- ' , .: j . V ‘ i
3 . u“ f. ‘ t .5, g 5 -7 _ 3 ._~ .' ,4: ‘ , .5 I - _.:::_*:"7~:_:—_:‘-'; *\: _-“‘ .
‘ - ‘~—--:x '~ ,I ; . 3 3 ' ‘ ff: ~ ..‘-“'3‘ _
33 73 5. 3 c 3 .. —- -3 3. 7 3 :3 3. 3 3
. '3 :3 5 “- 5 ‘- ?:pf"- "3 '— l k » 7- i. ' . I . ~ ’ {. rib 3
Inn : 9 ._ - . 3 ' 3-: _
' .1 3-. ' _ ‘1‘f'. ‘ (Eff. 1: " £9 53‘ - -. - .. .- " 3‘ c I. 1. 5; I
,35. 5 H; -. 3 - ' 3, .- _' j: ‘.. 3 ~ , 7 ;‘~ ' . g ,‘3, 3 3,
3 . ; 7 3 .3 * . g. ~3 ‘ 3' 3 ‘3“ -
‘o' ”; ‘ . .1 \ 1-;v . IR 3".” r1 I) ’ \I '1‘ L.‘*a’|$‘ V . 5‘ /- ' " - _ i [V ‘ .2 . I 1‘ ("A ‘1 S. ‘ 3‘ ﬂ
3. ' F" 3 .7: “ 1'3. '- '52:? ‘52:; ,_.,.g~.-_-,, — _ - ' - ~ 7 / n” . 4‘33” ' 3 ’33 '3 5-5‘3
‘7 “-_.—~- .7 —. .f ”F J‘ ‘2? .3“ '_:.ﬂ' -~ .- _-73 — ‘ \___ ‘7 l \ ‘1‘ ’1‘. I '. ‘ 3‘ 1 ,3 i"?
. ..'*'*__.v.~7_- “.59 ﬁ_ . a ‘34 3 3:; ,. >" ’ 3 A .- 7 , 3 J ‘ / {‘3 ‘ " I) 3/733
1 3 3 ' 3. ~35" - ~ 77x ~~ -. 77- 3 3- 3 ‘3 3
3, .7 2» 7: 7 - A73: *3? .' :33 .7 " ~ >4; ‘3 3’ ,3 ;, 3,: 3 3
h L. _ ‘.n"‘1 , _ '4... - _ 3 o. , _~ 3 Is F-r 1 ‘, L5 ‘ L
3. ,s'- .3 5". a» :5“? ' "' _ , ' _ —‘ , ," " _ 3 ‘
Legend 3'3 a 7. ,- 3 ...3 3. - 3- «"3 3 3 .3
e3 £321,535, 9-: 3 - I 53 ' ‘3 2;: -.~ 3 ‘ .
" "'7 "—»’.',..~3' " A, '3 33
— . . . " ,3 ' _ , ' 3‘ g j 3
=== Ekwan (eXIstmg) ‘ ' y '3 ~ 1' - 3 :3 r :_, 3 3 ;
3" . . . . ' .' :3” 3L 3 ‘9' " ‘ 3. ‘ ‘3" ‘i s L
3'. _ Horn Rwer Mamllne -“ .- . v .7 3 . .. j ,‘ 2 7,‘
3' ‘3 '2 3 3 ~ ‘3 ‘3’ 3 ., * ~ '3 -3 § 33' 3 , 3. . 3 .L- 7,
‘ ,; 7:" I 1' ‘ ',' , L : V . i 7 " 3 . 3“ 3' f 1 t" V: b
3 --- Travel Route (Historic) ._ ”.3 . - 7 3573- .353 “‘7 -3- ‘ " " ' 5'3. * ”3“,,111’733
4' . . . $3 5‘ 3 "3' H ‘1 "“5 ‘ .— "1'7 7 '5 ’6 o-I,‘ 1' " -‘ f l- '5. 7‘»? 'rtr' ' '1
Huntmg Area (Historic) 3 ~ 3 3 ,3 *3 .... - '3 33 : .3 ‘ ,, 5. - ,:,--" 3- 33
{xfff‘f'3 . . .r - ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ F: ‘3 2. 7‘; ‘9 l. ‘ ~::‘.¢l . ,4; A ‘ . 7—7 u “ .3 .7 “V - 4" -p~' ‘1 ”f?fﬂi . ’F V: F\ 33‘ )3 j! " E'
* E ProvmclalBoundary 7 ' ’ 5 S» '2. 3 3:5: 3 ,3 ~- 7—.3 ' '7 ” 3 3
"U‘ ""’ W: 77 ’ ~ 3 7‘ 2.3 '7' " '~ aka .7 3 ‘ 3" '- W‘ ’ {v u ‘ - — ‘
a 3 3. . ' ‘q 3" -' :3 2'; 8 ’3 3-“ 3 —.. ‘ 71'—
_, ,, » - - —» 77 7 .. 7c- 3 3. 3: :, ‘3 3’ -3 ????:V‘ """ 7
s - a L- 5:3."l'lﬁxl 7- — -=_. _ - ' J . _ , .. . . - - A :14. .7 , -f‘y >$.‘réﬁ;’ 1.3)3'. 7 :t: ‘ ‘t‘ _ _-: #mﬁﬁ‘L— 3;- Fr 3 1 3
MaplD: 015 3
Trad't'onal Use Areas ident'f'ed by Phillip Martel .
in relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
ALL MAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION 0R DISTRIBUTION \MTHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED. THE INFORMATION .
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTANED FORTHE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPEUNES \MTH R‘PECT TO THE CABIN MNNLINE PIPELINE AND IS NOTA COMPRB'ENSNE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
DEUNEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA’ FIRST NAT'ON USESAND INTERESTS IN THEAREKS SHOWN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USE AREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. g_:::.
‘3

interviewee: Robert Metchooyeah
? Date: July 21, 2009
Location: Chateh Administration Office
5. Interviewer: Tracy Campbell, Cathy Baldih, Adena Dim
”Dene Tha’ are not only from this land; we are a port of it.”
-~ Robert Metchooyeah
Background
.. Robert was born May 1965 in Fort Vermillion. His father Pauiiss Metchooyeah was from Habay
and his mother Sophie Chambaud was from Meander River. His Grandfather’s name was Paul
: i Metchooyeah, also known as ”Big Paul.”
" Hunting and Tragging
The Metchooyeah trap iine is in British Coiumbia, and was passed down through his father’s
side. Robert’s father had 4 or 5 brothers that still use this line, as well as Robert’s own brothers
and their famiiies who hunt and trap on it. The Zine is used by many families for both hunting
. and trapping. .
' His father used to tell stories of people being able to trap ‘everywhere’ in British Coiumbia and
7 Alberta. This was before the imposition of the provinciai boundaries or trapping regulations
came into effect. From that time on, they were told that no one could go outside the
boundaries to hunt or trap. These boundaries "make their trap fines very crowded, and make it
" less likely for anybody to catch anything”.
. Robert stated Dene Tha’ hunt “all over their territory”. Dene Tha’ iike to hunt on the high
' ground, as higher ground has more ponds, which means more available game. Robert says that
pines generally grow on the higher ground and hunters use high ground to travel through the
l muskeg.
Robert eXpiains that when peopie are hunting for porcupine, they first took for abandoned
beaver dams. Porcupines and bears use the abandoned beaver dams as dens. Porcupine is
used for food, the hide is used for clothing and the quills are used for sewing and arts. People
' eat both porcupine and beaver, and beaver taii is a delicacy. The beaver hide is aiso used for
.. ciothing. Everyone who catches a beaver and sens it must report it to the Alberta Government

(Sustainabie Resource Development) but when it is hunted for personai use then it does not
need to be reported. '
Robert says that the best time to trap is spring and winter. Robert also hunts bear and the meat
can be used for food, the hide for blankets, glands are sometimes used for medicine and the
grease is used for cooking. * 5
Robert has recently travelled to the Cabin Lake area for work. Robert pointed out a traii near
Cabin Lake, where he had found caribou tracks this spring. These caribou or ’Did-ze’ ~.
[phoneticaiiy] tracks near the trait indicates caribou migration through this area. The caribou '
travel north and south through this area.
The Dene Tha’ people hunt ail types of birds for food as weli and though they are mainly hunted : l '
for food, their feathers can be used for biankets. Robert explained that ”if! couidn’t hunt, i
would starve.” Robert obtains most of this food from hunting on the feed. .
Traditional Knowledge
Robert explained that beaver will make a home in many different places and they do not just
stay in one place. If the water is not fresh in one area, then the beaver wilt move to a body of
fresh water, or they make their own. They build dams in areas to trap the water, and in this ..
way, iittie lakes appear where there was none before. They use the spring run-off to make f
ponds that can stay for one or two seasons, or more. These new iittie ponds have little fish and
other animals in them that find their way to the bigger creeks. Robert stressed that fish are not ..
just found in big, running rivers and creeks.
Fishing
Robert generaiiy ﬁshes for suckers (or bottom feeders), perch, stickieback, and trout near Cabin '
Lake. He also catches jackfish around little Hay River, He mentions that there are fish in most
bodies of water, no matter how small the pond. ”Just because we can’t eat [the small fish}
doesn’t mean they are not important. Theyfeed the birds and bears, which we eat. It’s a circle.” '
Medicine and Berries
When Robert is out on the land hunting he always looks for berries. ”You pick berries {f you are .
hungry, anywhere you are.” On his trap line, for example, there are saskatoons, chokecherries,
and strawberries. He says that you can aiso find cranberries on high ground.
Medicines are picked mid to late August.

i Sites
Where ever people ﬁved, is where they were buried and some of these pfaces are very difﬁcuit
2-; to find. People are usuaily buried on high ground and around water. He points out that a lot of
2. A buriais were made around "Thin-ah-tee” [phoneticaﬁy] or Thinahtea Lake. Robert also
i identified a settlement at the confluence of the Hay and Shekilie Rivers.
Travei Routes
; ~. Robert wouid travel with his father ail through their trap fine and they would trave! to
3 :1 Thinahtea and ”Tzuk—aye” [phonetically]. They wouid also ”crave! to Fort Nelson to trade or to
1‘ buy things.

Every town in Alberta and British- Columbia that was preceded by ’Fort,’ was a trading post.
5 When Dene Tha’ people took their furs to one trading post, and if the price for the fur was not
: ;. good, they would take their furs and continue to the next trading post. in this way, Dene Tha’

wouid travel all over northern Alberta and British Coiumbia. ”It’s not right to ask where Dene
' Tha’ have travelied —— they’ve travelled everywhere. Stiﬂ do,”
, Robert explained that before the trap lines were introduced peopie moved to where ever the
resources were. People were moving ail the time.

Observed Changes

With the increase of oil and gas activity in the area, Robert is worried how the activity affects

the wildlife. The clearing of trees ”interrupts life”, takes away the cover, security and food for

the animals.
' He has aiso noticed more cut lines in his trap line and throughout BC.
: Robert showed a recent picture of what iooked iike 0i! slick on one of the littfe ponds near
Cabin Lake and he is unsure to whether or not it is nature! or manmade.

wt"? - ""—— ' ~ ‘— ~ ?.V - * - 7 - . ' '2 ' ‘ . ~' '4‘: - . ,r , ' " * " 'r __;-:.v-- J_:1.' ’L’F‘W ‘ ‘m
. ‘ , «,{7 a y ARK V- 4 w4W4'4'flaw4:.»‘4'4'4Vrvptew 4357.- s « f ft...) J' -' . f
V ’ «'3 .‘f‘ r " ‘ ' " ”£95" 7-6} ‘"w?¢€£z§m¥9¢9¢°¢ﬁo°ﬂﬁ"<9’<"«cf:b°tS¢Q§§i<rY4$€rﬁ<~°45’0’t<. 7‘ ‘4'” «43’ - ‘
k ' ' ' _ » - » 'f. 3:177 a; .‘J 5;»; ﬁogvsﬂy O 0 ¢- 6,0» --,<-.4.: u‘ 4- «NC- 9 s? ¢> «0;»: 0.0.0 v is?) . V .':- A f I 4
’4 v . ‘1 ‘r .4. :.- —-. 4‘4” 91-;- $<_~$‘~t»fr0§é¢¢¢¢%;h , . -";J('y‘.jy. ?{vévb¢é;.93‘<;g~ 6“}1’6604‘5‘433' , , ;~» - '1‘?" rea O nterest . .
.. = 43:43614:,:=fs-4:~<>5~.<=1-;x‘4-«r—w'9Kﬁ-WWW} 9544‘- ¢ WWW» ?’t 'v . '
r 9: 4. . - .. 42. (4,.‘v.~,.$74:gr,u<.~ u; .,-.r.:0«§ 49696.6 .920 (u.- . (304:4 - . *— «
‘_,. 137".“ . , , v.. ~ -,".’V A(J'.". { \). ‘.'- s ‘ .:7.\(\’—(‘ Q’ 0 ¢ ‘" " O-“’\Q. ?.C‘ 6’ ﬂ {' “‘n ,A ‘ —‘ ’
, J .r ' .‘\’1 ¢’ ()’£ ‘\>'4¢,V/V-< ”\V’“- >-' ~' -'\ a ‘1‘ Q \“ 0° 4 ¢ (‘ v Vac 9' <‘ <‘ 0 ‘b ‘4. ' v‘ 1‘
1‘. F 4/ 3 , ' f“ ' ‘-§. ' ‘,"’Q‘"€v‘ Q<~. (w‘J‘v'lﬁ‘y)vf. "a r ‘ , ‘ ' .3 c) QS~¢ {J- véca<,14‘ <6 ‘vt-"-<" 0 0 % ¢'{I{\\ .1 a f ' “
4 . -' - IFTYc ’11:" . ‘-., .. . '1? 4" & f{g:A'§¢f?A¢y\”rA¥Q"7 ‘ On". 0 \ “(0' i “-<' <3 $ 4 ‘r‘\ 0 6 ¢¢¢ V V «77“ ‘9'
-. .«4 '— . ' ~ .. «a , . «1..., ,,,4>-«.<.2;4.£...-.4. 44.124295 ;‘#‘-~ #azﬁﬁﬁafﬁégizﬁzﬁ:z'o‘fééimaﬁrjt «:‘3‘ ,y
I .. f, , a' , ~‘af'r€“(‘.6r " C. < "I. ‘W U 1‘? “15%.?" ‘c‘ ‘ c b t',..‘;} V (}‘0 V.‘.' (f ”-7 ?..“ﬁ’ "3. 9 V 6 6x0 0 "6 ‘3 .<6' fl,“ "
' . r » ‘-‘ :3?14-f’éo‘94‘ﬁﬁ’c54“:»‘*e‘-"<<?2‘-*~‘;7*. ‘~t“42%;1~;*€*;»‘;2~“7~9J’49J’¢ :4'w414444r‘aw 2. . ’
‘ 7' .- , ,4 ‘ 79.; ~‘ ' r «g(z‘ v 6 «.s- 6 {‘ 9'4) 13962414 :48": ~2 $7'fo.‘;*/<.-2<r$<.;.<vgb.¢,‘§ 6 0 0 6.4/20 $ £335.“ ” '
t 71*” , , ,m «‘4’ 16-4 ¢.€".‘,0' 4’_G' < 70-\);\ .‘v’.-‘I’-Q" 1% 4' 'V’AVE V-'\ ,0: v . ”0- ‘s‘ G G <’ ¢ ‘VKV é" OA‘v’ V -! “‘
,s, .4 --__, 4 t) «2.0 v v {g.vA' '0 <§¢.\3"E¢ZVTT' '-..'\.- 2:“ cuismzv o {wrw ¢..€‘r.<h¢,£ﬂ. v <2 0.x .,-.-.< V ..« 4 '
c” . '-" 1 .’ ‘4' “=9 ’3' V“ 0 4 J? * 4 "v .» 0.3. ,w‘w x2«.».v ﬁr é ’/ *3 0/" v v v v 4 032-3443;; .. ‘ :-
4. - ~~ » - », 6.944% 996.04% .cw 4.4;»; 2- .4..- «9 x. 4-,.» o 4» <5 ’ ~ 4» c» c» 0.4» <..-,.~.- - .4
.v’ .2 ' ~‘ £3. r... . ' .rC’._9-&;.<.. ‘1' v.3). ¢m’2.«»~.v«v.¢s .. vscﬂv *3 <4,v.<'.~// 05,3“? O.£-99.<1' v1? .‘-’ 5'2...) ‘ ii I
r:: J W ‘." n ¥~<§ . [LRY§37:“15.V‘\$"‘v: :‘5‘:(}V‘(f ‘ "-9 <.’ .‘l-A.‘v.roav Q“l v‘tt’ {l} bé\V/ ’to 4 ‘v V ",‘\<3,1<:~(.’-" J‘. ‘ ‘1 '
.. 7', 5“; ,. ‘5 , «.43. , .2412 g, ...-.‘v(»q-'<x_,f.:~_‘-y<><;,.;!‘¢f.y‘va¢’¢9K"; 9,"; ‘ f...» .95. €9¢v¢vaq '43». «.r . - -. n. ‘ n ! ,
' 1‘ P- , L ",-‘ ".3, - . ,~‘ ‘~V-\4v~ -~ w. » Aux ’5 ’*.¥' - ,"V "\4 . t .4.‘ . ;
~*~th . 7- - 1' ~ ‘2. ' . ‘- ' " viva? .~ 3.1.4.95.93-‘445444WW 5919?:33'33'» ‘ ' 2, ' ' ﬁ ' ‘
, \e'és’l‘ ' -. v ‘-r¢.-;»7i iO.Cs.'4'.<i '¢;-.¢T<‘Ti>-”K< 6'4 "O 4?: "I’d'913-973-35 'q’ . ‘ \ “‘
- 4 -' , 0.. ..._ 4-,". .-'.--. ’;."\',<.7-..-2-‘;..$‘/'+“':L‘?r',»‘)—,-$‘_J)7l...‘§ av»): 443724., ..
‘ e. , - -. , ~ ~' '11-»‘4‘41Oaxvzr-x 4‘! V';V"v’.~'\ 3353/7"? 4 v' ‘12? 3»! \,“{, ' l
. - .~ . u. -— <- ,. <4" 44w«x'-~-»:«&~:/-:4:«:~z4.». $494144? -- w. v 41* «g *4/- ‘ «
'~ \ u." 1.1 ‘ 'V ' “ . ‘ ’;' .. ‘\V~:- "$"‘»;‘-‘Vi ”a i" ‘ It\’sl:’ v:p\ 7r '."“v.‘:‘. "ll ’ / \ ‘:,‘~.""éﬁvﬁ.:1:’, .7 ?:f .~ “."- .' I." 5:.»3! > ‘ ‘ ’:'< ‘1 ":rr ; ’2‘ "‘ ‘. '
f '1 « v ‘ ~*«, ,. « u. 1.; ;.‘:’\2-,"<i‘.<.-‘ é»: “9.03::{?z».:-x-.'-$°c~"; 4. 't‘422;:<¥:.;-;r< x K .‘<:»;’< so“? i: 74-4 ‘ 4“ gr: - " ' ‘
. ‘JJ'V/ . ' . ' . "6‘ -‘ V : ‘. '0’ 5" 5': “Gt '4‘\"-. ‘~’~r" ~<~.*'1\"'4Q’)‘C-’¢' O .9;<IIVE:V‘ ‘.'l":.r~‘\’h;‘ .4";{‘ Q . 'w'vﬂ‘; .". C ' - V 9" V‘:-I—l‘s~ - :- ‘ ‘
- 4' -1. , . . 1'.‘ ¢ ,'~ ' ' ', . q ' ‘ "-fw' <>,»<~’. (v’ ‘\-' ‘2 V‘ ‘36." VA? ‘13:“. . '3 ‘~ 3) 'v 1" ‘. ' 39." igv‘ ‘ -- . . l. - ' "L " -~» 1”": ‘
‘ 3" ‘. " “‘ _' - * ~ " . . '“xiv?‘78-}i-fwi’ﬁ‘i'sfzi‘2?§€~§i"cf5:96"‘"6‘7 » "-.av' ‘ ' -_ .3. 3?” Ls}:
J » " ‘ '. ‘ . - ' ‘ ’ ' f ' . 294'":F'Q“,3‘C-rl‘.€'s‘é'«(4354::{9 ¢.§‘.’~‘ZC“ l 'fv ‘ 7 A. ’ ‘ " ' J“ 7""
2' ' a " ‘ 4 - . . ‘1 -‘. 1" ‘~;‘t‘.~.'--.\}.VT>br2'°¢i;>¢-‘-:-\F‘.~TV. “a . "i ~ " ‘ Z 4 7- . 4
i j 454‘»- E: . " ‘ ' ".-"O"- *7. j . '53:¥2€‘$"‘;»—"<J‘§L?O‘.<{15313-.“.‘r'a 4:1; X. 'j ‘ ‘ I T
-' k; ‘ :wﬁ‘ « F“ ‘ . . ‘ ' ' " '_ , - - ‘ ’7' V ’ ' f a r; ' ' ‘v';‘V}‘v;«V.-\ct‘i’oO-t’rv KV’I‘IV' Ki . .y( ;‘ ‘7 l > :53 ‘2." — r : }
. 4,. r - ~ -- . . . . . , 2,! 4 D 9 .1.» - v. .--x.‘.*.~.r-c,£ — . -05. 4-; a . .5» .- ,_ ‘ ‘
; 5:- . ; « - _ . - v ‘.~’ I» 0/. e - \4Hx -..v.:..»«.~,<3 v ' ~ .,-- .«4- 4 - ‘ ‘ ~, :
’ ‘L\,\ " . ~ ' ," ' n, ’ O O, 2.0 ‘r’ - ,' ﬁvarnmvw.~.-.V--,‘$t..§.f,._’~".f.' ; -.~ * :44“ - ~. - 4‘ ' ‘ ' . «
“.z ~ - . - ' , ~ - '.‘ ‘ a ‘ .x l, 0 v .cx-‘nrnxv 4;“; v hf .°.r. . ,. , .- \ » - ~- . ' . .5. f
‘§_\ ‘ ‘9' I . ‘ ' ‘ ‘ r‘ . w .1 ' " V,_,. » ', » ‘ 5“." “‘35""'-<'-" ‘ ' A 8' )‘1 ‘4 l - \ﬁ “u' l' '4 ‘5 \/ '. ‘ " - 4‘ f
: 3}“ 1‘. f ' ‘- '0, ‘.' I 13:29.”. 0, ‘ zj ‘ *.§;._\4.\:-f.",j¢' 33%)} .. ‘.-'. _ 2: ‘.(,’. i:‘. —- __ _—~ ~ -
I-‘ " I x‘ . ’¢_ ," a ," x -' l .2 .’ . ' ' S" ,‘r.» XJ_‘(’$> >.\‘6 VL- V‘I. 0' .J‘:,‘V. ‘. " v‘ >\." q'-: I" ‘ ‘ * ’ > i ' .— ‘ J' - “ ‘ ‘ ’\
. ‘5. . ‘ g ” ._ -- '\- ‘s v». <ﬂi_J¢V;-1 \ V~‘C.~A‘ . . ‘1 _ -> P. .
‘—‘ 4.4.. ‘. ‘ ' x ‘» f 5 -‘ ’ ‘33 ~ - r: 1» 1~¢»q¢$<"»:1\3‘-‘1< ‘~’-§‘-i~\ :0 ." 4.53;; ' . ‘ ' ‘ -’° ‘ " '
"'3‘ "x \ ‘ a'x 'a .9! -- , ' ‘é- - » x54. m'ndx "'3' §§3$V4~ " "“"" ’Z 4““ W -. ' ' ‘M' "" V H } ‘
. _r 5 . ‘, ‘ . ‘ _ ._, - .' . 531' :15,” » ‘Y/Tf’.‘.‘».‘x~x§"'~.‘ Ps 94.5' _ V -~ ‘ ,- 4 . f,“ «
‘ ~ ' < I " / ’ .‘ ‘~ , A‘V A‘,‘1; V \..V . \ »\ . ~,» %' V/‘ 4 0 ‘v- 0! Y j“_ " 4 »— ‘ ' ' r 1* “..—' ‘
...._ '» 4 .0. - O. a ' v « S'.'\".‘.<. .Vr‘n- '. .x-nc 9.x: 4'<it' . ' ~ :.__,.~.~‘J . .-»»~ ‘
V “‘4'“ ~ ~ ‘ P " ’ 3' - é a O . = LL. «um; <3 Q‘4.'..Q',‘;.<" <.‘-.<I 0.; «3"4' "' .‘ ‘ ’ “ " i ‘
"‘_ i « “ . ' ‘ .I O ' ~ ‘J‘ 8 ‘ .‘e’i" IV. x", ‘-“."- I ('. “"P-‘V"('* th) ‘J .‘ltév’ i" ‘ I. ~ in a V 1‘
.4‘»?f-‘-‘~r‘ « t ‘3” ’u' 1".“ - . . 5r V"§"‘.~.7T»‘ V ‘.~‘ 5x12! ‘~‘-<‘-.~’ V=< 5» .’ -. ‘i-'-‘-‘:'~ 1- ., . - 5 h?
a...- -“ J -\ l ’ r.’ -. ." . ..‘ 'a . ‘ . .. r'th." V. ‘7‘ .v‘»“\;- ."‘.'.'. v. .f_ ‘..:,“v{§;“\> 4": vr‘ '1-) :4 ._~..:‘ -. g V ' f.
l’r‘ ”-— ._~‘\-‘ -\ , ’.' . \ I, I O . " 9 ,’ - " C‘ 3'5“. "~"'v"r-""V ' ~': v“,-':‘ 4" v" " --_.-~ ‘ — - . —— > i». 74
! 7 .‘* . . , . O 5’ ’ . ,- p‘. ‘l-r .-~-\ v»\ ‘. . J » .I. ‘ > ---
Y ”‘7 ' -. .0. v 9‘ ;-‘.»:»‘~ \ . " ‘ “gr " ‘ ‘4” *4 :
"”1 K ‘ ' - ‘ - ' ,4 «v.7.v‘-f~;-‘-».-‘v;-.-. 2-: r-. f». ‘ 1 ., -~. _. '. .5. j , - . i
- —-—- « r ‘- ~. ‘2 .. - ~ ' .<;ze"-‘§<-‘~:-‘:35“. -. x ’ », “ »- * »- ‘ .i i
‘ “ ' ~ .4 : t ‘- 4'. .J’, 4..."\‘"‘Ir;x.‘\u ;’\»Y V,‘ . ;. ._' I ~ ~‘ ' "A. II
.. '\ l!” ‘ ‘ _ - « W“‘\\ ._V .‘, 4\>~‘v‘«\_.. Er ,-~- ﬁ. .« » g." g .
» 'L ~I ‘ ' , “ ‘ '4" (‘75,. —'\"- - .‘v-N' ". I‘v' "' ‘ ' v ‘- 'é I ‘ l '1 . , ~‘ ‘_
-" v.2, , . ,{f’f‘fxﬁ' .(r: '_»»'..‘.:.f.\'.§j,'._'17$."y‘2‘\_ 43‘ ‘.‘-n'-‘ I ‘,ﬁ-__ ‘ ' *‘ 3‘
. ‘ ,- ~.« I V ~v . {J ' .>§-.(_‘\-'v-‘;: J. l-‘r-vx. i.. ‘V:::‘.;:: i'_-“" - - I ‘1" '. :1 ‘ - 9 I ‘ : EV
't» - ~ " 3‘: "4 " , u .- - ‘ . , g i
x ‘ .- " « z ' , I . ‘ ‘ , V ; ~ ~ , 2
A n‘ \1 I ( 4 I 'l I '1) 1' ' ‘f ‘
a V ‘_. I :l ‘ -. ‘ . I‘ ' . 1 :
rt. 1“ 7 3‘: - 4. '"TV-gu W " ‘l- . 4 ‘ ‘ ’ ' l ‘V r’“
u ' f . ﬂ .{ _- - 5‘ .m'Sﬂ‘. ‘ ‘ . - . , , . , ‘
. £21 1‘ _ , . . , -. ‘9'; ‘ , , .A . .3 j
”A «L - . :4 .. , - . . - f . .
3.“ , ‘H, ,0..." . ' I ~. ‘ \ ( " ‘
~‘ _\r . ' | ’ . I. ‘. 7 -‘ . I " i
.7 ~ ‘ “- ' ,
g. 71,-...»- ‘ - "-14 -e- 4 ‘ - , '- . 4 7 f" V . .4 ‘ . .
‘_ -;_ ‘ - l , ". ' ~ ‘I v , 7 " L y .
. _ 4; 3 , , ~- »« «.4» .» g
‘ , ﬁ, -‘.'.-. —..._l.;‘ .. ' 4 v ' . « ' " . ’. s»
.3» _ ﬂ. ‘— ’- _g~-: d ' . I; ’.
-—,-.h -1... ‘ ‘7 -‘\ _ ¢ , ‘ ‘ f - V 1-" ‘ . . ‘ '
“(.9 f ‘ __ .:, . _'_. V _ ~ ~ _ , ‘ , .‘ 7 ; .’.
L~_ -. r. ‘ .‘ . . . _ - .‘ . '* , ' .g‘. -- ." . '
, _.‘ . , 4 ‘. . ‘ . . . . 1 . ‘ . .' ' ~ ,“r' :71- - >27 _~y I.—
7 _ .(d O‘ i‘ 5 W“ \‘4' 4‘. 4 .. ' . _' V f " > . kyﬁ. “M4~—_- ' ' ' ' > ' I ' ' \' ' ‘ ‘ ' ‘ ' ‘7
~..- . . . . . ._ .»—. _-;, w---“ ‘J ‘. --‘.-‘- . ..’ . “.'-\».W‘ {$.37 -t:* - —._' ' .... . \ - ‘. ‘."- ‘. .‘. '. . . . '
‘5’.“ 1" \( '» s . v - I V x - >- ‘- - ' - V~ ' Vt‘ \‘~//-N-r ';:::~i—V:h";’:‘h . I V‘ ' ~ '- .1 \ ' ",‘ \ ‘ » x. - . . . ‘ . ' . v , ‘r “. «
a r_ a ~. ._ u '> 4‘ ,‘ ' -. ' 5 _r a - .' . 9—4}— {jfzgtjggr x. . -ﬂ » -, « ~. " ‘- ‘ ‘ \
u .41». . ‘ ‘3. . . ' ‘ - 34‘ ‘ . ’ ‘ .‘_- ‘A v‘,‘ ‘.W-_“\~:;:,\. .« v, __ _' . . ‘ ‘-_' \
Legend 14‘..;; 4 ._ ‘1 ‘. ‘1 . ;. - .. a . ;. . ‘1 .‘ ‘:‘*~‘.*‘+--_.‘;_:x _ 3;; « .
.3 sEkwaMexisting) I ' . - ._ r f 4 ~ 4 ’4 ' f ‘ ‘ ' "f;
" _HomRiverMainline " " " ' f - ‘ ," ‘ ' ‘ 4. -." .AV 9
,1 . . " "’~‘.*".' .2‘. .‘ . ‘ 5,335 4‘ Q '
‘ --- TravelRoute (Histonc) ;‘ 4 , . « - - ~ .3. 4 .4 .; " .n..."‘. g 1 1
n | "‘ ~ av“ r l‘. I ' ”- r ‘v |‘ 3
mBunal m ‘ . . -,:’ 1-“ . - ' f. 35 ‘ '3 Z
» y: _ . - ' .- _. » . 3‘s - -.- M * t J, "‘ ax
V‘ ' ' ”‘3‘" ‘ ' __ ‘~ " , «’2’. « -‘ml ‘v
- I Fishing Area (Current) -- ' " - ,- ‘ ' f: x ;, «.3 \ «« _.‘ - 3‘: I
’ a ﬂ ' . — .-,‘\. n) .4 .. ‘ 2‘ °. '3 ‘
o u 'I t ‘ :7 I
. m Medicinal Plant Gathermg Area (Current) ..‘ _ - ‘2" ,7 > / ‘~. . 3: “~ . .
7:5"... _‘ . 7 . . N _ n , L ‘ ’ '2‘ 2 . - L
. . ‘ ~\ ' o. L- ' ‘~ " - ‘ 'r’ ,1 . .» v '
- SettiementArea (Htstonc) 1. -W' ‘ ~ »‘ « - " ' "‘ I ‘74.; "g I
J? :4 u. — | 4- ‘ A \ ’. II 'I - ‘5 i'
l . . ‘ . ‘ _, : 3 ~ 1 ‘— {’1' A ‘U ,
P m Trapping Area (Current) {1-4 , .. ; ~. r" ,1} ‘ 4. , »-
n "T: r p r
. . I " ' r "l ‘ " 'l I ‘ 1 ‘-
w I Use Area (sttonc) f ; ~ .'-‘ , . . ?g- 4 y "h ' r
_ _ I ,7, ‘2. ll‘ ‘ ‘ 71., ‘ l“ ‘{' .‘
m - Wildlife Area (Beaver) r . - .I‘ .' . k»... -' -- _. g; "a c 1. 3L. . 1; g
. 1:. ." .4 . 5 “ « :1 .4 w . 1 r“ ' '
. " ‘ , ' - a’ ‘P. ' I ‘ - - ‘ 1“ t . 1 ‘ _. l ”I; I »
‘ mWﬂdiife Area (Caribou) « . * ;~.~ Jﬁ' ' '- ~— .. . 2.3%. 4‘ ' . L" ’ ’ ~ g 7‘-
v x ‘ I J, _ ‘7‘ y g. l/
’ “ rd )' f ' Q ‘ "' - " 1‘ .3... < Y L ’ I T. 7““ 1. ‘ '
- - ‘ 1. - ' m ~ -~.'- ‘ » , _ .» .-..- , - . .
WiIdIIfe Area (Porcupine) ‘3 g. ' ._ 4 . *’ 4- " r , ‘2: , 4”,?» 1:21.. ’ H 5‘ J:
m... »--‘ " r-'— ‘, 4 = -'~ g » r M. u - ' -
2?“'—‘""“o . . ‘ ‘ .. , * ‘»“--’\ .‘ " .. 'iﬁ; ;’ ‘7 ’9..- T / . ' . -'~- _.. "“’ ~. " \l v»- H ‘ .’ .- ‘
‘ «ProvmmalBoundary ,.:._" -_ 9; 3‘ J ," _,=.4- . . ,1" ‘w (‘9— - . 7‘. " jg“ 7L-iriggﬂ "53‘“12
K“ 3179*; —::-- \> 4| _ , I I - n _“> .- .af?‘ r; I.‘ -. r j {v ,‘f' . 7— _
L -'. , 4 - .74 .ﬂ . , ~ -' ,‘w - 4— _ . E .\ 1" ‘F v; _\ a '5‘ {_ _ 7 Ia -" f r‘y-‘ﬁjr‘ ’ 7-_ - '
.- - L. * kmwdxg . -_..~_; - ~’ A «.4: . _ g 5’. , 54:9. 7 , _. gﬁwﬁw, J «M; , :2..- .~LJKZ£A ‘
Map ID: 016 :
lrad't'onal U A 'd t'f' d b R b rt M t h h
in relation to the I ransCanada Horn River Mainline P'pel'ne  ‘
ALL MAPS ARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENE THA' FIRST NA'HON. ANY REPRODUCTION on msrmwnou WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED. THE INFORMATION
commso IN THIS MAP was OBTAINED FORTHE expresss PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES WITH RESPECTTO THE CABIN MAINUNE PIPEIJNEAND 15mm COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY. '
omwamou OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA‘ FIRST NATION usesmo mews m THEAREAS snovw ON mus MAP. FOR SPECIFIC use AREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. - , ’
z :

interviewee: Sylvester Seniantha

H Date: July 08, 2009

Location: Chateh Administration Office

: lnterviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beaulieu
”I pity [the younger generation] ’cause there will be nothing left. Completely nothing, nothing

: left."

5 ._ Sylvester Senior: the

' Background

. Sylvester Seniantha was born Aug 10, 1947 and has two boys and two girls and many

grandchildren Sylvester says his great—grandfather, Alexis Seniantha, was the Dene Tha’
prophet [Dene Tha’ First Nation Spiritual Leader].

' Traditional Knowledge
Sylvester says the hills near Kwokullie, and Kotcho Lakes were called "E‘t Che” [phonetically] in
Dene, meaning ”Big Hill”. He said it is an area known to Dene Tha’ for hunting and trapping
both in the past and currently.
Hunting and Tragging
ln the 1960’s Sylvester would hunt and trap around Kotcho Lake with his father and
grandfather, Jimmy and Billy Seniantha. in the winter they would trap and travel to this area
from Hay Lakes by dogsled.

. in the summer months they would hunt with pack dogs for beaver andmuskrat. It would take
about a week to travel home from Kotcho Lake to Zama Lake once they were finished. in

, addition, Sylvester would also hunt caribou around Kotcho Lake. He says the area around

' Kotcho Lake is good caribou habitat.

; After Sylvester’s father stopped trapping in British Columbia in the 1970’s he bought an Alberta

trapline {#251} and continued trapping there. His father’s nephew, Avalon Seniantha, how

. owns that trapline.

-' Trapping for Sylvester has changed over the years. He says trapping is now a ”waste of gas”,

. beca use there ”aren’t any good areas left,” and all the trees that protect the animals have been

removed. This is currently occurring on his trapline. He has also noticed that all the squirrel
dens are getting destroyed by the logging, and when the squirrels go, so do the martens.
Sylvester mentioned that not only are the animals disappearing, but the price for fur is going ‘3 ‘
down. This past spring Sylvester was only able to get $325.00 for twenty-five (25) beaver pelts.
When it comes to hunting, Sylvester stays mainly in Alberta. He travels to the area near Hines - H
Creek, Worsley and Sulphur Lakes. He says that he and other Dene Tha’ people only hunt what ”
they need to eat. ”Just enough to survive.... We don’t over kill". E ‘
Fishihg 1
When Sylvester and his father and grandfather were trapping in British Columbia, they would '
fish to supplement the diet of their dogs. When fishing for food for themselves, they would
catch jackfish and white fish in Kotcho Lake in the winter. 3
Sylvester also remembers when people would ice ﬁsh with nets in Bistcho Lake for white fish.
Currently, Sylvester mainly fishes for pickerel and jackfish at Habay. However, he also fishes at ~
Basset Lake and Rainbow Lake, which he refers to as “Long Lake”. .
Medicine and Berries . ' .
There are numerous types of berries are found on Sylvester’s trapline. He mentions specifically '
cranberries, moose berries as well as others that he doesn’t know the name of in English. i
In addition to berries he says there are medicinal plants also located on his trapline. You can '2
find rat root as well as medicines from the spruce trees such as spruce gum and the inner bark
of the tree. Sylvester says that industry keeps logging and the spruce trees are disappearing . .
and therefore the medicine they produce as well. .
He notes that you can also get rat root at Chateh, as well as a fungus that grows on willows that : ~
is good for headaches. In addition to Chateh and his trapline, Sylvester also gets medicine from .
Twin Lakes and near the town of Peace River.
Shes i“
Sylvester remembers his father building a cabin on the south-west end of Kotcho Lake. This Q? '
was used when they were trapping in that area.
Currently Sylvester has five cabins on his trapline (#251). - I

Although his father told of many ceremonial sites in British Columbia, he has trouble pointing to
their exact locations (on the map). When asked about burial sites, Sylvester responded by
saying there are too many burial sites to pinpoint, and that they are ”all over” British Columbia.
Travel Routes
“ When Sylvester, his father and grandfather would travel to Kotcho Lake for trapping they
a travelied via what he called ”Indian trails”. He explained that they would generally travel along
the high ground between the areas of muskeg. While on these travels his grandfather would
- break the trail. The trip from Hay—Zama Lake to Kotcho Lake would take about a week and they
5 would sleep on the ground on beds of Spruce boughs with duck feather biankets. “We don’t
.. leave any traces on the ground.”
Observed Changes
1 The biggest change that Sylvester has noticed involves the impact industry has on the land and
. ~ the animals that live there For example, he says on his trapline (#251) there are three to four
hundred well heads, two to three hundred pump jacks and four large industrial plants.
Sylvester goes on further to say that after industry started putting in cutlines, the caribou left
' the area.
Every December and January the caribou would migrate through his trapline, but he has not
I seen any evidence of this migration in the last few years, not even any tracks or trails. This
decline in caribou has not been restricted to just his trapline. Sylvester makes the comment
that there used to be three or four hundred caribou in the northern mountains, now there are
hardly any left.
. The changes have not only affected the caribou, he says that it has also affected the fur bearing
animals. Sylvester states that after the logging of an area the mink and the marten leave and all
' that is left is the beavers. This is evidenced by Sylvester only getting a few iynx and a few
.~ beavers last year. This decline in the for hearing animals has been incremental over time.
': Sylvester says the 19605 and 19705 were good for trapping, the 19805 were okay and since then
it has been ”real bad”. On top of the decline in the number of animals, the price of for has
; ' dropped as well. Syivester claims that nobody traps today because the price of fur is too low.
. For example, a lynx pelt used to get between $500.00 and $1,000.00, now they get between
$75.00 and $100.00. .
. . Futare Generations
; - Sylvester believes too many of the future generation do not know how to use the traditional
.- . ways. For example, he points out that most of them hunt from the road. Passing on the

traditional ways is very important to Sylvester. This is evidenced by him taking his
grandchiidren out trapping each spring. While he does not let them trap for beaver in the
winter because of safety concerns, he teaches them other techniques. He proudly claims that

his six year old grandson trapped a couple of marten this year, and his 13 year old grandson
shot a moose a couple of weeks ago
Areas to Protect
When it comes to the protection of areas from future development Sylvester feels much of
north eastern British Columbia and part of the North West Territories should be protected. This .3
includes the area from Fort Nelson east to the Alberta/British Columbia border and from the 2E
Fontas River indian Reservation north to Trout Lake. :
Concerns .
Sylvester has many concerns regarding the environment within the Dene Tha’ traditional a
territory. One of the main concerns is the dangers associated with industry. He remembers a g .
blowout about three (3) years ago when a pipeline in a creek crossing broke. While the oil
company gave him compensation and a job on the clean up, he Eater saw some beavers in the
creek, but he would not take a chance on eating them. :
Another example was in 1999, he and his son were working for a pipeline when they saw a
bunch of dead birds around the line. They left immediately and he avoided that area since that "
time as he does not want to take a chance. Sylvester goes on to say blowouts happen quite
often and this greatly concerns him. He is also uneasy when there are signs everywhere that say ' ..
”poisonous gas, keep out”.
it is not just the oil and gas industry that concerns Sylvester. He says there is way too much
logging in Alberta he feels that it isn't as bad in B.C., but has observed that it is getting worse. t'
Another of his concerns is how industry is affecting the animals in the area and how that, in i .'
turn, is affecting his way of life. Sylvester says there is ”hardly any game left, especially caribou, ; .
they are disappearing". He now has limits on how many animals he can trap. Now he can only ' *
trap 10 or 15 lynx in a year. -.
He is also very concerned at how these changes are going to affect the younger generation. He
says "I pity them ’Cause there wﬂ! be nothing left. Completely nothing, nothing left".

I i ' " V \‘V" ‘ ~~=~~~~~——+———L—"-tz
\\§ ' Area of Interest F
' M -
1 "‘«II . (I I I. .II) V . \ .- %
‘ \ \k °94P05 0941307 , , g
_ § - * e % ,;
5 ' ' * * r.
‘ h K A 11w; Ia ~ “7‘ "4‘
I “'ka _, n 0 “u c a II \ II
" , I. . , . 'II
094P04 ._-- -. .5 r ., -/' / ' ~ -:
, /. ,- ‘ ‘ ' A ‘ . ' 1 1::
‘ . . . . 7 094P02 ‘ ‘
. . ‘ I I . . ‘ . ' . , -‘ .. ‘ .h’; '(i' \\.I: I ,
w ~ ~. nt/ ‘
= " i" * A\\
* [ﬂ’ \- F W
- \. 4 ‘1
‘ ‘ " ‘ ‘\\ ' 1
‘ . a -‘ V ,3 I :
094113.» ~- . « \\ ,
w — ‘ *“ 094114 092% , I
1 . ,. I ,é‘ 094116 I
J- - 5 r
' N“. i i_ —
“m
094|12 Nyw
. 094111 094' 1 0 \_ i'
Legend I A:
, E Ekwan(existing) {I71 .I
;' — Horn River Mainline IR; '. 3:“
I --- Travel Route (Historic) I‘; :2 ‘Y'I’j
‘ C] Area for Land Use Planning I ’ 'I
, , |____I Cabin Area (Hisioric) 511‘ .I
[:1 Hunting Area (Current) is i
‘ - Trapping Area (Historic) 094107 III: III -1; III
E Trapping and Fishing Area (Historic) 094108 7‘jﬁjgé’“:
-Wildlife Area(Caribou) 75;}? '_ ,'
fa Provincial Boundary O 5‘ h‘ “i? _ Isis
_ Traditional Use Areas identiﬁed by Sylvester Seniantha
~ » in relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
‘ ALLMAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA'FIRSTNATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSlON IS STRICTLY PROHIBWED.THEINFORMATION ‘
__ , I CONTAINED IN THIS MAP WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPEUNES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAINLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOT A COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
I. DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION USES AND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOWN ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENE THA' HRST NATION DIRECTLY.

Observed Changes
Most of the changes that Stephen and his brother have noticed in the area are in regards to
industry.
Stephen says that cutlines and seismic activity is changing their trapiine. The traptine has
changed so much as a resuit of industry his father doesn’t recognize the iand anymore when he
H; visits the area.
Stephen aiso notes it is now harder to trap for furs on their trapline. He says there are fewer
animals because of ail the industry. ~
Another change was noted by Stephen’s mother, Margaret Lefou. She says the water tevei in
the Hay River has dropped about a foot.
Concerns
When asked about their concerns, Stephen and his brother are most concerned about industry
activity on their trapiine. They are especially concerned that they are not being notified of these
deveiopments ahead of time. They both mention a seismic line being put in without them
. being told. As welt, two years ago a pipeiine was put on their trapiine without them be§rtg
notified and when they came back about one hundred of their traps were missing.

Interview Summary ‘ :
interviewee: Abraham Taitey __:
Date: July 9, 2009 2
Location: Chateh Administration Office
interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beaulieu
Background .
Abraham Tailey was born in 1956, and is now 52 years old. He was raised by his grandmother
and grandfather, and has 2 daughters. Abraham was married, however, his wife passed away 2 ~:
yea rs ago from cancer. He attended residential school for 7 years, but says he did not receive a
good education. :
Hunting'and Trapging '
Abraham iearned everything he knows about hunting and trapping from his father and
grandfather on their trap tine in BC. He hunts beaver, muskrat, marten, fisher and lynx: ”I hunt '
everything”. He also traps wolverine. Abraham says that you are oniy aiiowed to catch One ~~
wotverine and one lynx because of the restrictions. He aiso hunts caribou and moose, but he 2
b'eiieves caribou are protected once they cross over the B.C. border. He used to shoot ducks,
but now he does not because he is afraid of the meat. ' 3'
Abraham says that there are bison around to hunt, but he does not hunt them. He says that you
need a ticket to hunt bison, and he does not have one. Additionatly he points out that ”It is too ~ ~
much meat!” he said ”I wouldn’t know what to do with it 011.” They wouid 3150 have to take the .,
heart and liver to test for diseases, which means the meat is not safe. The bison are mainiy j' ‘
scattered between the Chinchaga River and lame. "
Abraham said when he wouid go to go out to the trap line during the winter, he would have to .
snow shoe through the snow to make a path for the dogs to get through. This contributed to "
the sore iegs that he has today.
Sites " ~.
The buriai sites that were known to Abraham are tocated in Habay, around Zama Lake, and
three more that were outside of High Level.

Fishing
Abraham has been to Kotcho Lake in BC to catch jackfish.

Occasionally he goes to Bistcho Lake as weli to ﬁsh for jackfish. _
Mes.

A big change that Abraham has noticed the introduction of bison into the area. Bison were
-.~ brought in and put in corrals at first, but now they are free to roam everywhere.

L X Abraham said thereare approximateiy 100 welis scattered across his trapline as well as a lot of
2 pump jacks. Abraham also noted that the animals tend to iick the salt around the oii wells. One
7 of Abraham’s nephews was out hunting one day and saw a moose that had no upper teeth,
which he believes occurred from licking the wells.

f Pump jacks are also being put in the middle of Hay Lakes which is bad for the wiidiifei He
described an instance in 1982 where a pump jack leak killed all the ducks on the lake. Abraham
2 i says he would like to see the pumps that are located in the middle of lakes removed.

:; When the oil companies come and drill on his trap iine, Abraham believes that the animals
. . leave to go to quieter places. ”There is too much activity for the animals, so they all leave.”

~' 'jﬁ Abraham says that the companies are starting to do a better job of cleaning up, but there are
i. stiii problems. Before they made this effort the beavers and muskrats and “life in the lake”

.. including aii the birds, wouid often die.

If something happens with the pipeline or wells, like a break or a leak, the animals wiii be
. destroyed. Abraham would like to see companies have fewer wells on the land. Abraham says
' they also shouldn’t make the wells so deep because caribou are drowning in them as they are
' not abie to get out.

" Trails

In the winter time Abraham uses a traii from Havaama area to his trapline.

He also goes from his trapline in BC to Fort Nelson and traps and hunts along the route.

There is a trail that he used with his dog sled that goes to and from Chateh to his trapline. This
trip would take up to 4 days with his clog sied, now he can get there in a couple hours with his
truck. This is easier, but now other people go that way too.

Medicine and Berries .
Abraham and his wife would harvest birch bark that had fallen from the trees on the trail that
they would take to Fort Nelson, and bring it back home with them to dry it. This can be used to
heal sores. He also says that you can ﬁnd a lot of blueberries and chokecherries along the :
creeks. 3
Abraham is a diabetic and his legs are often very sore. His one daughter also has heart
problems and he often goes out to get rat root for her and for himself. 5 V
There is a road by a Husky plant where Abraham often goesto get different plants for his .3
diabetes, including rat root which he brings home to boil.
Areas to grotect : W
Abraham is worried about the medicinal plants that are on his land. He uses a wide variety of
them and is concerned with the effects the oil wells and pump jacks might have on those

plants. For now it is ”alright”, and he hopes it will stay this way.

I 2 -V V -7 _- ‘, -7} —-‘ “-" ”"“‘¢:"" I , . ‘. I_ . ., - .
‘ ' Ni - 1"” r ' ' 7 . J I; 2 ' I _ _ ‘ W 1 ' I I' , ’F‘l’rqw
B . . I / |’/ l ’ 2 I I A II, A 'III III) It; . I' . " .' V {F'- ' ’. _
’l , ‘ _ .. J ,4; r I ' '. -\.\ e»... .\ . x A _ I . L?) Area oflnterest
| . .13 _. 3527' 1Q?” ' . 1‘ '“- ' ' ' " " [3" ' ‘ . J 5 1’ .M
’I t A- .3 I1: . I' . KL '1 ’."' 13_I F67. 1’" ‘ . r. w} . I IK ,‘ | 1 AI]: " i
: 1 “F?.rg .’ "7‘ ' v7. f ,( '3: v25. \\ 2 =1 .2 Cs. :71 I
s * ‘ u‘f Jr; .. ' {x I t; . I . N \K W \Sﬁ" "5.3,:
. F'- ." ,. ‘5‘ I' -- ’ I ~ I ‘. ' 31! ‘7‘ \‘ "d ..‘-
" , — ‘ ‘ '* ” i - 25 -. . ‘ , , ' " 4"\ \~\Y"\ l‘.’ 1‘ % BC AB '
. . IL; ‘2. . _ j , .» ' ' , \ \ ‘ "r...
5 5“.“ l / I L r: 7!
J" Ax. , ~- _ ) 2 “ ' ‘ ~ 8 . -2313 i
: ' ~1::»e"‘~ -4 4 1 - “ . = v . s. m ¢
. ' '4. . -_ II ;. .I .' . II , I . - _ _; _.. __ l. ‘gw‘rﬁ.
i“ ' A ‘i .» [4 . .4. _ ~ ' - . - 4“: 7 . “5' " ‘ .';;»~‘»nn~
:_ _‘ . 7 ' 7.. ’v .- _ 5“
~ I i"‘$n°v «try 1/, x. F"; E“ ‘ :V‘rf ‘; ’ h'
. . \ - . - L ‘- '~ 2—. ‘ r ' ‘2 2" ‘ l — “
' . .aDr ~ 024'0. -. '5." “”1. . -.-. ~ 2 . ‘ '
. -_ 3.- . , ,- _ .- .43.. 3:: 2- : ‘ .
, . 3-. 2 - _ , I I ‘L- -l‘ 5-,, . I ‘ . ,
_ ,~ . r, \I / 09:49‘.. Egg} :g.._ , - ’
. ‘5‘3- 3 - . T . . 2 —. 2 K o." “'94" ‘3‘. 7‘ ' ' e “T?”
‘ 1L- ‘ .7- -. , , ” I .2 A I ‘ . “Fiﬁ" F--. ‘ '4 . #8:
. V5 >~ . [I y 1 ﬂ“ *7?" ’ - *
: . - * - ~ 2.» .. ._ -. v - ' “ _-~ﬁ». " »
' » - ’7‘ 2+- ' :7 "’ " -- -, ‘ 2 ~ 1“ ' ,
. ,-, -L -1; . 4 ~52" : 7' ‘ ‘ﬁ‘fﬂ' I \- iii“ ’3. . V. 0‘ 2 1 ‘ ‘ﬁ? » -t-f. 7
I '2_’.‘ \' .~‘ ' ".5. y?"""‘«‘ '\ ,(II ‘IEI’J __ﬁ- f! o 3 . , ‘»- . ' ,. {QT 5’ . .1
_ ".\;.-I.~.\I=¥.,_.I—‘Q’I‘ . ’ ' I}..J’. {K ‘ ._ 7' ' " J“ v . 2 -. ’ . ) :' ' “ - .r‘ 2 — “ "
1:33;:2»? .»_ .7 . .3, ' ’1 r '~" ‘ '
' 4x“ ‘3’ th- .35..- -";'i}:.'rr“» .~- ‘ » '3' J". v ' ‘ “ " -
I ‘__ >I " ' L . :1. 3 . rl. f’I“ ‘ ~ 7 .9, i .3. c ---.o -, 1 .‘ 3' 1*. ‘ ' . I . -
:3)“ W ‘ "1" ?ﬂafﬁ i‘ "(5 ’93.)? ‘ ~ “‘54 ‘1
f ".“34335: ‘Z’I‘gﬁriaa- 1" " J 1'; .7- i‘— ‘ . ”'1‘“ 1":{‘
.‘erIIc -k: _ ‘2 :2 .- ‘ - ’-..-- 7.; I ‘ .'?-. fan: ‘3’. .3 II. I... ' ! ,‘. ‘y.’...Il "£F\h_.1';\ II
’0‘; ’iirk‘,‘.;.; €' "2' (“ -‘.. ' L'IUI . IW' '- ‘1..€:‘JI."."~ ‘ '.. .' . A t: I‘PI ‘ﬁiiﬁ’ﬁ ‘ ‘5?“ IVI
if ‘J'jar'c’ 3‘ 3“"" I ’A' ‘7 ' h; " J ’4}. J .‘2‘4 '3: Z ‘_#-“'.~v 7 .y 9' . _I3;:r ’3‘" T l.‘ I “ .‘ 10" :3" ' ’
i . . 3‘ U 4. . , . - J - ‘ I 5 IV a O- 0 c
r 1 3 - i. "w 3’ 3' ‘t‘ 1.‘ - 1‘ ‘ i ‘4 - - " #4311 4 ‘V ‘ " 'V " ‘
. ‘pr‘w- ' :1 ?.f'v‘lkf' 1:). ’ 7” 35:54:32'3‘ . f '6'} :Jf‘ﬁ‘ ’3‘ ‘4 ' ‘ ‘ T
-. . ,_ ‘ ,_ /'. ‘ ' . 9-” :_~ 13‘.“ . .5... n - “ I... 0 ‘4'I t A. ‘ ‘
.' '- '* _“"" r» $01“ w ' ’Q‘n'.‘ ‘f ‘i' 9' ')' r'aFL-J’ ’4. 34‘” . ' ;
"l" ”'5“ ‘f- E‘~ ‘ﬂf’ ~vi'fl‘ l7 f" 5‘73 I ".r:" f}, ’ - "5“." t it" {"v ." "9 '3'- k
+‘x‘m‘5 WA. ‘1 vi? < -* -- -".".“~-‘ "‘73,:‘2'd W's." " ' *T»"'~"-‘ ‘ ,
r 4r:- 42.; 315211» 3:24;}; *W .1“ - '31": was: '
‘1 ' -~ ’. .‘f - > » w .' .. “" "“I "' ' ”‘v- v ' .' 7” ' '. ‘. ' ‘l “V " k. ' ‘ .’ " 7 1-32. - " 3“."
2 :31‘5‘2’::‘t:"::‘$;‘r‘;ﬁvl' fgng" . ,“1 II. 1:: ..| :eéz‘p11.1:ﬁstzzééilltt{:g3‘3‘,”II-‘Iv‘; ::g:-}\‘4f;ﬁ£
‘ \l*-- "‘-\ :3 -. ‘.. ". - ' ' ¢' ' ., ' . J4 ‘
-‘ [4355:5328 1‘35 '3' )L“*G&*'§“: I, ¢;>'.§_::::Ov *lf‘ 1 ‘1‘». if."3"..(‘2'3‘31‘9’4Ir',‘a'hur.7 .‘ '
"4:1" 31% 0‘5" " ’ '7'3' 3 '3 H "" ~4’%¥#€~ﬂ°457 " "3’333‘ ‘ ‘3‘ ”' '52-}
,p . a . -- . ' . - _,_ ' _ . .' V, ‘_ . n - _
1-!3‘33—9 «.3, .‘¢:?¢.§%iﬁa‘v 3.5%”;in 0’32. ac."31"‘3’3953‘ﬁﬁ"{t¢:‘~*.l;o.¥i: ._
, _ _ 2’?‘ III ,. .' _ . : 9‘19ng -“Y.","‘.. . .I I I.» ,£:P$ ’1“ ' . 1 '3" 349:3)“ hil-‘J"? :“Q‘JI'MO-‘ﬁﬁ. ;
" I “I wi*‘.‘ _ 9 "tﬁtl‘j ' . y ."’P'.". Rh ' . V?i-h $233.?
‘If. _ _. Q II .. _ . ‘ .‘. '. i It" $.92 3‘ .I ‘ q ‘ ”'Jﬁ", J i M ”a ' *0 M ‘
; «:3.» « «haw * - 2.2.x ‘3" ~ vw‘fﬁa‘o’f :w-‘ML '
, '. , '3. '_._¢.'. a, I - 2.» .2 'rgi. ‘JM""' 1 3
Q 7b; ’- , - -- CQ‘ - . -,_l,‘. ~ ‘a In a, ¢'«-.~,'-‘t',A II'.f'- "),'--:<¢"‘ .~ "i“-r’:€;‘ '. ". Gag) §I _ W .
‘ . q 'u 3. c- 43 w-r.—-—’ , - -.
I I) "‘ - ,0!" > ’6 15"., l‘e‘ 5"..." @ﬁ" . . , l7”: '
Legend '3’; . 5W ‘?‘ I . _2. .wil’alf :5 ‘3' #l a ‘ . 2- _ I
, 1‘ $173,}, ‘ ‘- " Q _ , ’61» I‘V ’ . .R . I “‘ ‘ Igﬂ
' i -———--'—_ EKWan (existing) .‘J'Z'au’ﬂ; :3 .‘iﬂ'C‘vf'kl'i‘ﬁ‘n $.59 gr: ’ l?
.V .424» .. - ‘ .-...«..~.2.e.,2w r" ' I w
-, - l=— Horn RiverMainline , £3? xﬁ‘ fﬁﬁgrxépw " ‘ ‘ t2V323f2" i
j _ . J-r’k$§1¢ -" 7% 5““ :2
.I - Travel Route(Current) 43$}. )3]; .3“? ’Jﬁ’j: ”£11“; 4‘. _ _. W. .. . 7
--- Travel Route (Historic) 1‘ -. c- ‘2" ‘a; ‘3'“ " ' . ‘rt-q'
. 3 . 9*. 41"»! V . ‘ .‘ “"4" '-
7 Fishing Area (Historic) ‘ - ' 5.! , (rs . : . ' , 2 'I f . -‘
‘ . 7‘ 3»: " ‘ . *‘A‘r: " {‘9
; F l: Hunting Area(Historic) F2," :" . 3 9 '~' ~' ”5 ~ 2; I‘
p... _ .54. I - f3 '- . 46! .. :2
. {3352; Hunting Area (Current) ' "2-1.- ;s 3' 1' ,1'. ff I , , : a": . T ; ‘ f. . it:
[’""‘= .. Wt; xiii ": - ' 1; ~ 2‘" "’F’ - '
‘- ; Medlcmal Plant Gathering Area (Current) . {5 .-‘ , 2‘ J‘I " ’ _ H; .. 2; ~ % , ., '_ {I13§,3..V 4.
~ . f1. . :42!” ,ysw- L”. » :2» .~ 51.»- 3:» .- ~ * -
Trapping Area (Current) L ‘, I y». ‘- g 5". L :5" 'I ;~ 114% r. 'P‘v J, .... I :7 . '4!
. 5-: 9 ' .. I ‘ 2:: . " 'II .22" '. II ' ' .' .8 I1 .' 'Wlf‘d _. \‘n ,r’ I‘I‘ .‘
' .. Q Provmcia' Boundary Mr » “Ar" 6‘! ,é; , .1 =-' 4... i‘m’dﬁzl 11b 15
. ~z. - qui; .. ~*er ;. 2.3.4. :5 w ——__
.- "3"": L .. 32.253. «9:333 "'2 31' :’ 51-2.3. ,1 4,3,1; 3.15 3‘} 'g'i‘hgﬁ 3 cm 7' ‘. "\
-. MaplD:018
Traditional Use Areas Identified by Abraham Talley
I In relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pipeline
' ALL MAPS ARE THE sxcwswe PROPERTY or DENE THA' FIRST NATION ANY REPRODUCTION
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP ms OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF consummau vd'n-l TRANSCANADA PngNggTvglmw WITHOUT WRHTEN PERM'SSDN ls SWOT” PROH'B'TED‘ THE 'NFORMAT'oN
, . TH RESPECT TO me
I osuuemou on SUMMARY or DENE THA FIRST NATION uses AND meaesrs IN THE AREAS snow on: mus MAP. FOR spscmc u3%‘343‘32'23ENEL2'I23‘?'§§£T”A%T'S+T4%T§sffé‘4$%3;?ﬁﬁé‘fﬁ‘égﬁﬁ INVENTORY'

Interview Summag :
Interviewee: Curtis Talley
Date: July 07, 2009
Location: Chateh Administration Office
interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beaulieu '
”Along the rivers {should be protected] ...because there’s water. Where there’s water, there’s
animals.”
- Curtis Talley
Background .
Curtis Talley, who presently works as a carpenter, was born September 24th, 1963. His parents
were both born in Zama Lake,
Hunting and Trapging '
Curtis currently uses trapline #756T001 in British Columbia. This trapline is located between E
the Alberta/British Columbia border and the Hay River. Though he no longer traps fuli time (as
. he used to), he traps for all fur bearers. This includes beaver, lynx, marten, squirrel and mink. ‘I
Curtis stopped trapping full time in about 1994 because the price of fur dropped too low. 3 ..
When he did trap full time, he would go with his brother Peter and two of his cousins.
When Curtis is trapping he sometimes goes five to ten kiiometers outside of the trapline to
hunt moose. . .
Curtis also hunts for moose along the Hay River west of Zama Lake, an area around the town of : 5“
Rainbow Lake and another area just over the British Columbia/Alberta border and south of Hay
River. As well as moose, Curtis also hunts ducks in the Habay area. '
Curtis expiains that he eats mostly wild meat. .
in the past, Curtis’ father, Jean Baptiste Talley, would make about three trips to the trapline ..
(#7S6T001} each winter and he would stay for about a month each trip. These trips would ta ke §_- .
seven days to go from Habay to the trapline with his dog team.
When asked if his father also hunted in British Coiumbia, Curtis said he hunted ”oil over”. 5
Besides his trapline, his father also used to trap in an area north west of Bistcho Lake (Alberta). 7 -

Fishing

Curtis ﬁshes for jackfish in Habay as well as occasionally in Rainbow Lake. He was also told of a
i; , good area for jackfish in a creek near the confluence of the Shekilie and Hay Rivers in British
Columbia, though he never fished there.

3'. f Medicine and Berries

Both Curtis and his mother pick saskatoon berries and chokecherries along the creek in Chateh.
He says they are good there. His mother also picks rat root around Chateh and Habay. In
E addition to rat root, she also picks wild mint in sloughs wherever she can find it. .
~ Sites

Curtis knows of two cabins on his trapline, One is located near the north end, the other in the
~ northwest area of his trapline. There was a third cabin at the south end of his trapline, but it
~ .. burned down in a forest fire in the early eighties.

In addition to the cabins on his trapline, he has seen other cabins while traveling along the Hay
:2 ..-.; River.

Also while traveling the Hay River with other trappers or hunters; they would point out burial
~ sites to him. When asked about spiritual or sacred sites Curtis says he has been told of the
. locations of these sites, but did not want to share that information.

i . Travel Routes
,3 ,. The main travel routes that Curtis would use would be to access his trapline. Before there were

" any access roads Curtis would travel by snow machine in the winter and motorboat in the
g--' spring from Habay. When traveling by snow machine Curtis would take a shortcut along the
f t.“_’ 281;}! baseline. When traveling by motorboat he would travel up the Hay River. This trip would

take four to five days one way.
Observed Changes
i". Of the changes that Curtis has seen, Curtis says there are too many new cut lines on his
trapline. He believes this is not good for the animals.

Another change he has noticed is the new access roads. For example, he can now drive to his ;
trapline on these access roads. " i

One other thing Curtis has noticed is the water. He says that the water is still good in the higher
regions in British Columbia, but that you can’t drink the water in Alberta. H
Areas to Pretect
Cu rtis feeis it is important to protect the area along the rivers. He says "'Along the rivers [should
be protected} ...because there’s water. Where there iswater, there are animals.”

i ‘- L 7 I {’2’} , [—'I.1v/ V 7' j. , ‘ I.' 7 I 7‘1 J ‘ ‘ II. .’ t 1' "‘1 ~I II; :' ' I ’ H . F" -7 " ’ "" 7" ‘ ' 5?: ' = 7 ‘
l \N-‘f $3 7 f ”(5‘5" 1/ I ,' 4;! H,."*x\\ \ 3 ." "ﬂy,“ 9114." 12161. 3 '| i: ‘1 ‘1, ﬂ
* a , x, I .1" x I 34/1}: \\ c," "-9: , L 2' ‘3‘ ‘ n. 2‘) , J M 2 - 2 1 . . Area oflnterest
ﬂ . .- 1- .J I e. ~ ,4, .. -' , a m \ w»: L. m :. ~..
~ " '1" - «CV YK'C‘V/V ‘ -' I ‘1 “(*4 ‘ i‘ 'x i x i ' £3 '9 : 4’ Jr ‘ .-
‘ ' , —' ic. g , \ ‘ 1‘ ~ - -4 -. , ' ~ ,. . -,
, 4H. '4‘ '0 {P. , ).L--\ §£w If} i ‘ _IH/ . 1' (IKICKI L. | / \ I} FAL,‘ §i:[:;s\I ( ‘ .- _ I
~ ' e» . ' max» - . . J. m '1 ,. - h c ‘ ,-
\I [{1} . ' - .1 I ~ I». I, I; I,‘ J (L I , . ( jw\\‘\;.lﬁ QQ4P07\ ' -\\\\' g ‘1. . r
, .‘V' I h “ 1‘ N f I I r, I'{ \s D’K \‘ \~~' “ L. ' . ‘ D
J' ‘ m'ﬂr , x m 1 J; I; 1-5 ’ ‘ ' -- A I». X \‘QF—x f1 “-
’ '1' ‘ \i r")! "l «J 2 4’ - / ‘h‘ 9 \ , m “x ' “ ‘ ”"51! "
, ', \ ('{H‘~ ' /' z 2"“ 971‘9/ \f' A x x‘ m4: I
. \'\ ‘ 5 \ H 5‘ ’ I} r l ‘ I K»- \‘I I' _ I ;
, I v 1 3 ‘1 ‘ P ,r r' \ II] |\ R 1/ ,f.;:\"1/ \ \I\'I\’-\ I» -.I..',_ ‘2- d “f I
, 7 9‘ = \, ' - . , . _ , -~ .» ..
.r‘ , \‘. ;_.- , . 1‘. ,’\,\\5 [g a J l , Va?” . “4: i
~“ ' M 1' “:3 \“V - & A ”"r . " ~Wr'P-‘7' ‘j—"M
I , _ . \4 ﬂ 5 ' ' 741 gm; I 0’$° fﬁ/A\\ '4 I ' _I "$5.77,; ._‘ N‘2: II-I I»; IWFQ'"
4C? Km . 3" 7.: L,“ O. f a \f‘irﬁx I .41 r325?) § ., :{Q‘V :35 7/. _— , i '
- 'r‘ ,A - . L, w , A A ‘ . .ww .~ - a ,9
1 .‘%f F ’ \ :3) / W o ‘ ‘E‘V‘IWWP‘ “1'?" 1 ’ ‘-
- ‘ \FI J . I, y 1;“ 1,“: Pg . . WV / ‘,\ g . 3%ﬁIIvM; Kw: 4.“ I,I.: I.‘,.‘ v, f :_-"
K x , 5, Ir a M . . J. \. , _ W! ‘ 3* .. , ,
\I‘\ <3” k " ~"’ ”’1'; f ‘5' 094P0'2 \ x? I. h ' “NJ, ~ ' '75- , . f;
x,” . r M Kacso ~ « w xx. ,, ,- .u,, “,5? - 1‘ . ”
‘7» A \'- 7: ’ \\ "r” 19 ' ' 4 3'1?" sit" '
’ﬁwJ—‘IJIO / _ \M I g 1 (l ’4’ I I} - 1.‘ . 3‘
4,»,— 3 j ! ° ?N 1/ °‘" 'f.‘ ‘ : ' 2.; - - - ,' ~ ,_ .-, F. -' .
r F \7- HH / ' ‘   ‘ ' I d ‘1' “ p D o ' - ‘ — .- “¥V “ '_ ' ‘ j}; .J _" J_- - ‘«'_ - *2 . .' :2:
1L ﬂ ‘- .-'_' _ ff? -r' '5’: 93“? C v" " /" a I I :9” 33.3% " 4 , _ " .4. i
1-,“ L/‘M {1 ﬂ‘ 7??“ lip ”\‘hﬂ‘i ) ”‘1 €- II/ { 7’ I, :15- . ‘ ’7" i: A , I' .} 213. .1“
I 2 I f . ..' .'_ . .‘ "P, ‘- . V I ’ ,_ :._ ;”;z—‘ I :1
- \ k. a w‘. 4‘10" ° °._ ?: \I' ”{1- :‘ '4 ”I 1. )5 - A '- 7? - , 3-57?-
\‘\. 1. f“ 'n ,4. Ekiyj‘a / ,- z . {é ' = a" +’» r > ; t " .-; - r
7§3 . "= ' ? '1‘: i I ( ’1' 1’3 I A Y? ', f' . ‘5 ‘4. 1 - ‘ ‘ ‘ ,:
”-4; k. 0'7 ‘- ". )r—rd" . 5° K k . . ' . "‘1' 2"';- ' t' ‘ 7 * 7. -“
- \ \‘a(‘ .;~“"III I . . c . . .3 o ,1, , 5, V _‘._ y , . I-L ‘ II ‘ z'. I. . . 7 ‘_ , I . I.
~ ' 1“ . _ ‘ ,. ' ‘ _g . . * .,. ,_ «J» «.v‘ ,., _-" ‘. - ‘3;
1 9N L ~ "~ "- ‘ -' r - 1/ ' D " ‘..4zi+;es:~§"=>ésf ‘ - . ‘ - 3
‘ . . l ‘, ‘ I III . I . I» .- . {1; -:'>U.— A: 9;, :_' 1 ,. I I I I I _, I
. Q L 5‘ 3‘ v : ‘ . , H ' .. “1- ﬁtfxfr‘ 3'" O . ‘_ ,\ _- C. ‘
, "'5 , - ' x . _ .' . " v I 1' 9’ ‘ 1 - ‘ L ‘ “ ‘
V . -- ‘ .hv' o v ‘1’! J 0. 7“" I "aka ti’i ' ‘ ’0‘ if“ -" > , ' ‘ . ’ i; .. . I ‘
a '4. ,7 -‘ .v w ‘ 'c -- 3-K ' '- , -‘
“K... , —- -- 33.57? 2;" _ _;_ 1L." _ . ti 5 I ' I a ' I I - - ‘ ' " L; ‘.
‘ -/"" ﬁJ§§i§W§ ‘- ' ~; 0 3” L: -' , ?
‘ ro— !' -_ -~' - r ,- ‘ I « - ~ ' . , -. ‘ ‘
' H , . l, M . .I' .- . , ,
i ~,.j,'~ ~31 ; ‘2' ; ‘Jr C. r: Clw-sfﬁ‘lﬁ‘» 'a‘ﬂ‘x'ﬁ’ I ‘ , / 3 -. _
“ ' ‘ ,2 $51,} ‘-' ,J 3;} If .I’ -." ’1' 1h , “-55 . E v -I ~ , I _ / ﬂ . J .
_7-::,:f;>§1‘-‘1"»<rf‘ ..-“:;"' " ."' . 7 =1“? ’ / ' ‘ 4-?
5' ?‘mlgr-gﬁj‘w I" .. . 3,". ' 'I, TI I W7ég_:;t / 7 { ‘ //////9// . .
. ' 5:" :_; :x ‘ " V ‘z-g“ 1 . -~.‘ .,".' J' ' ' u' 7' 1:75}, ‘m"5 . - - .I ,-
'éx"¥;‘ : ‘ “J" ‘ 7: _"hr ' I I '- 1 . »- I-I . _ _Il- ." I I . I . 1,4“: p d-‘ “2/ 4-: 5 3' a ‘Ir‘LII , _. _-: // / 7 / (1!. . L .
LE 2.7 t ) wt; , ' 7 ' . ’c il' - I ' b Z'L'I-q-(j ff 1’ / 'l “/1”. // / / Mm""‘-‘7 H
I-‘ " u‘. r,_' ' _ I —.. . ,i II‘- '--‘, ‘ II-I L. I‘ . r“ .'.'-l ' . .‘ ‘ _ . '- F.?.?‘n'r‘ ’
’I t. 55%;, ‘ , f " -."I' I. IICT'IJII 1I .‘ I' if. ‘_ ' - “if: I I _, (3“ I ,5; 1/, / I At ' ,. “I
'- gj z“ 2‘ “-_‘ F) A - -_' - : ' v‘l~r 2' - 24;; '1’"): 2‘ :— L. / / ‘3‘;
. I Legend 1 3,13 ?.‘Lé: 2 12).";in ‘W, 2:333:53‘3‘7' j: / ///: af- 7
. . _‘ 1,” r ‘ I*-_:, .'-'—', ‘ L! ‘I.’,,.; II LI .v’: : I, I I _ ‘
E Ekwan (exnstmg) {u 5%,. , “ﬁﬁ! _ ,1] //// 3 II
_; — Horn River Mainline o ?:?fftrzzﬁ}; r‘ 554;?ﬁﬁéi- f ////// J I
~ ..‘ "u ;’- <,. ' '. "‘4 gzxi';--‘I_ -‘ -- / / 1 '
~-=- Travel Route (Current) p». “L: 'ﬁﬁil'?4:‘3“” , _ - i .I / M
-. --- WaterTravel Route WW” ‘ ‘. {.31}, :4, I" __ ‘ - . -.'
‘. “?‘fr‘é‘i . . . ._ . i ‘ $i' “-th I, g ; .Ii / .
‘. Cabin Area (HlStOl’lC) .. ‘- II .o' ‘ L.- g. . /A_
. -. . J“ T I ‘ " . . Q " f ”4.3" I
1 Cabin Area Current 0941% I -' ' I : ' :2 L : / ‘ .-"
E ( ) . .g' . i; 4' ’. ‘I kg IJ .‘ ,I A? i. ';I°'ﬂ I ' .’ r c :ﬂ'g‘rﬂa
~ - Hunting Area(Historic) ' i. “* {25:5 “‘4 - j-r‘v, :_.;. ' l/L “p ‘
. ' V ”3'. , \.I , llr'vra ‘-I I, L, 5“ ‘. {I
. Trapping Area (Current) [I '- , I _- _r - Mk - ( I l 5' ‘
; Igﬂfﬁ, '4 , , I . ». a u ‘ . ,- - ‘ , ‘ ;-_ . _ ,-
‘ v .@ ProvincialBoundary rpf‘ ,3”; J . \R. J. .. , \ {'10 15
..mmaz_ymznvm WM - _ r 7 - ‘ ‘I \
' Map ID: 019
Traditional Use Areas Identified by Curtis Talley
3} In relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mamlme Pipeline
ALL MAPS ARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DB‘JE THA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION 0R DISTRIBUTION \MTHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED. THE INFORMATION
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP MS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA FlPELINES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MNNLINE PIPEIJNEAND IS NOT A COMPREHENSIVE 0R COMPLETE INVENTORY.
. ' DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA‘ FIRST NATION USESAND INTEREST S IN THEAREAS SHOVWONTHIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACTTHE DENETHA'FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.

Interview Summam
interviewee: Jean Baptiste Taiiey
Date: May 27, 2009 i "
Location: Chateh Administration Office ‘

‘ interviewers: Cathy Baidin, Adena {Jinn
Transiator: Colin Talley
Hunting and Tragging
Jean Baptiste expiains that he used to go out to his trapiine # 756T001 (BC) with horse or dog ,
teams. it would take about 6 days to get there and he would trap along the way. On his
trapline, he hunts rabbits and grouse. He doesn’t hunt for peits anymore because the money
you get from them is not worth going out. ~~
He explains that people hunt between Rainbow Lake and Fort Nelson for moose. He aiso noted N:
that peopie mm: at Kotcho Lake as weii. . .
Fishing ,.
Jean Baptiste would fish in the Beaver River (Shekilie River). i
There is a fork where the Shekiiie and Hay River come together where he has caught trout, ..
jackfish, sucker and a type of cat fish that looks like an eel.
The best time to go fishing is in October when the ice isn’t too thick. in the past, October was . ,
known as ”Fishing Month’i -
Medicine and Berries .
Jean Baptiste picks saskatoon berries, rose hips, chokecherries, cranberries and huckieberries
on his trapiine. ' .
He aiso coliects medicinal piants such as rat root on his trapiine.
$35;
Jean Baptiste reports that there are burials aii aiong the Shekiiie River. 1

Travel Routes

Jean Baptiste used to go from Rainbow Lake over the hiiis and aiong the Shekiiie (Beaver) River
to the area around the Kahntah reserve in BC.

fl; ‘A in the 1950’s and 1960’s it was very common for peopie to use the waterways inciuding the
Peace River to go up to the Yukon and the North West Territories.

~~ Observed Changes

in the past when Jean Baptiste went hunting, he couid drink water from the land. For exampie,
; ~ ~ a few years ago, he went out and oniy drank water from meited snow. There are now pipeiines
running through the muskegs on his trapiine, and the water is no longer safe to drink because
of these disturbances.

Jean Baptiste thinks the water in the Hay River should be alright to drink.

j He says that he has noticed a lot of oii activity on his trapline in recent years.

Jean Baptiste stiil goes out to his trapiine and 14 peopie have licenses to trap on his iine but he
'g only sees a few.

h: He used to see 30-40 caribou tracks when he went out hunting and trapping in the past, and
g ' there used to be a lot of fishers, now he says they only see a COUpie tracks and maybe a few
moose. '

h. . Future Generations

i Jean Baptiste wouid like to take his grandchildren out but they cannot use a gun without a
i permit. He is concerned because he does not know how they will learn how to hunt.

.. i Concerns

' Jean Baptiste is concerned about pipelines busting and poisoning the takes as well as the
i 7- damage that wiii be done to the iahd if this happens.

‘ ' -' ﬁ' 5 : * w ' ' " 1" . : '- * ‘ 5 5‘ " . .5 . - — :- ' ' ~' '7 '1' " < , 5 - " " '.‘ ‘- 11; :- .ZIU.’ 1295'?“ -f‘ L"; .:.‘i“‘; '5- -. » V-
s, i 54' . “f, ’ r ‘7 E‘/- 3ﬂkﬁ§l _ QI‘h .il i :2“ _ ?’R ' l _ ?‘FLR ”’5‘ ﬂ, 4 9 'f .’ { vb": :. &}‘f~ ‘- N V X (‘12? .17! I ,
‘»»' ’*v v; M.~~Ir s'I.¢w;xiwIé/ In;
P‘ I4 " {é c. v :2": 5'1") 2"‘.S.1,..J '- ' J 1 . 5‘? W M39 e’I "‘1!" .w I” 4' " 592'" Area of Interest I .
.55; ~~ - - 5 2.9" -= 51%;- *‘-9' _. 1 1|" "w". I“ ,5.-1t..¢2..{ I A u' *- .
a ‘ﬁ 7. , I ' V -‘*' s" 4 \ "?‘-—.-5 'LA ‘ ' \‘ . I 1 1;. ' . g 4,3. . 9 -1},an {NJ ‘ '
I u ‘ "Ti' ' I §w” — ‘- “:‘:‘ "7". l , | I “ .tﬂ,‘ " ' i r I} ' ‘o
, , - 3;. ._ “5M.-- : ,_ "‘ -- \2. I .‘ ‘é' (’5 :IL; w 1933 j .I,‘# I l ‘.

, ‘ :5 5:3,“ ._ ‘ 1; ~5 _ I -— 55: .. . - .1" , . 5 . ..;--;+§ i i ,
' I ml. . I QT" “' " 5'§.3‘-"19;ﬁa __ f ("w " ?a- , 1:", I ' ‘I
I,‘ r?" . , , _ .0. {I i-I‘ i ‘ :7 fv‘ ksfa‘m 3v . . .‘I. .

if ‘1 ~ . _' 5"] . CF.- I o _ ' ~ gs. - , t‘, . . 53$: ‘ .-' z
0‘ , 1’, C 4" 5. I . . _‘ m I I . é" -.' 2’ —-d _ I _’ 1 ‘ ‘
_ )2 3'4“ ‘ :' d :2 ‘ II I '. _ . 1. e ,1, 3%- ‘ I ”farm @911“ 9c: 4:? ' g ‘7.» l _-’
‘f 5:3,» ’ . {N ' k). . 5.5T?) 5.1; E?) i ‘ ' ' \ if.“ .‘.,I' A ‘ 5 i ‘
:I’Ir'I'S-Tr'ux‘l "‘ ~——-____ M54 ?.f‘ J 5 ‘ U; ’éﬂr I 1" ‘6 g "r I. L ' 5 I
.,- 5 I “mc—ﬁmr“ . 7}" I 1 _ \ ’ .5. ' ‘ I . _. '- ‘ . .. RL_ ‘
5'4:- r . 54‘ «545:5'15 n. J.) .: . .Ig- . I ma 41"?4 ' : ... ' x I '
@9555” *5\‘*>‘5s5 ‘ ’77-.“ -- , 5.55 L: 5 “ - l, ,2- x‘ .
55 ,5 ,, r=--\ "' 725-55 55 _ ‘ 1519515; - .- I - -‘
5. ‘ => '5 " .55 2:52 135' 5 .5 ~.~ . 5 5 . s i
‘ ' < .2"; 5:... ' " . .. " ~ 4 , .' ‘ . ~ "‘ .. '-."‘.<" " .5" TV Y 1"?
l M .25 ‘ .7 2”? J ~57...— ”.1752- »- “i ﬁ‘i’m ’ " ' ‘h: 7357 - ‘~ ”10-2,: 7.3.‘k‘_r:<.j$;;;;;’g£-§ 5 ,3. 31;” I
»«"‘:.5’.5~5’-§"‘f5:5 " 1:34 “5’52"“ '5, - ‘ ‘15; I . 5??? , ' ; .‘ r" N i." .‘ 7"“, Kiefdﬁ’k
" 1" .5 u‘—.: «r ‘ ‘x‘=---‘t ‘,. 1 ‘ - ~ . ~ -5 2H 4,. .- .. -. ..,.-,;:-;;“2!'-
-‘ 7L “ :«m‘s: g . ‘2 “~ ~ L.’ ' (a “1 ._~'= . , _ "‘--5‘"“_" . , : Y I '71 , (r: 1.1; - VI
" . ‘ ‘L‘q‘f ‘ ‘nt‘ ‘g‘ft‘rh , fag— "Tr-tﬂ n ‘1‘ ‘ K ' ’ 5 - . 4; x 1" 4' I n g . . ‘~ - I }( ‘<>l ,'. r
5 :5" p: :5 ’32». ~ .1... 5» $3.: - . 5 ~52; ' ‘ ‘ -‘~'~ -- ' I :. W = ,.
n - 7:, JOJ‘»_-" ‘--.. “ K ¥ ' .- _ > ‘ . _ ‘ I? I , , ‘. l - ~ (’1 T _’_ ‘- . .n \ . .‘ ," . . > ‘ ‘ ‘ . ‘;I.‘,. ‘W 4: ‘
-- memory”. -‘~-* :9 -- 5- - a 315,555- .:.. 5. - . --.I-‘ .‘s _ . I I
i' .15. _ """"»""‘r\_‘5‘_“ _ ‘ mu. 1‘. ‘5- 33-55.“. CW," 5 ' .' . '. ‘ '- . _-.‘ ‘. ‘. . g: .- ' . _ :0 5‘ I" '5' I
5». "* -- ' '\ 1 rm :3 ‘1» . . - . . " v » .4 ' V . ' »' I .
‘\‘~ ‘T‘ ?\L- . “K . ‘ -, «2"? '., *7 . ‘1 .. . 5‘ ’. . .~ k. 3" ‘5”: _?Q ~I . 1 1’ ’ 'L ‘A ‘ t 5. D ‘
‘ 1x7~1 .» -1 'M’j—‘V ‘ v_, . : ‘ ; b l | 7 ' ‘-_ . 5U, '5 . ‘ S 3‘ ~ '- V. b. .“‘ .
I 3‘."‘k ‘f - ‘. ‘ ‘q—‘A5‘, ._"§‘~LJ;"V r2". I .‘ ' ‘ 1“ ‘~ ‘ ‘" ">r§ ‘ - ~ 3 . V . V A V" ' ‘ Zr~y '. 5 '1‘
1‘ ﬁi'V‘E’ﬁ 3545 b: '1 ' ._- ' I ’ ‘ .. - ' - 1' ‘ "..'; k.’ ‘Qr ;
555;” ' -"- :5; V“! F :5; I 5 , -‘ 7 , ', " '. ‘5 ‘j? if. ‘ ‘ ‘ 5‘ L; f
9 *552 I ' ,- 5155—55555": - f .‘ ~ ; ~,:- ; .5 ‘ 7%?»7553.’ ~
“‘7:— F -- 5 .7" If ‘ ‘ . - _ . - -‘ '« \““"“ ‘ ‘ .. -45.?5-1 I .
'I 5‘ - ‘.:"-':‘ S’L “ ‘ 4p . ~ 0 .1}. (“3“ _ ‘ ,. I . -. '. I.‘_; ‘1: n .,‘(“v‘ ,
r ‘15‘?’~1':_ 5-9.; 1;" ‘ I I I 5 I t ‘I\ ‘ ‘- . I. 1- ' " ‘ >' '1 ‘1 ' J ' ' -' ¢ ' I . JI’SS - ‘I —-‘
y I rtn‘t»: r5." _' 12" -.~ V \‘ .r . ‘1“ 5.;." I':V .1 . I - . “ I ' Jib - § V - .‘ -' ‘- ‘~ ‘ : 5'.' V - - - ‘ ‘7. V ";;",' “I. . l I . i i ‘ .v I
t“). “‘T‘ _-_~," 1" _ .I (7’. . ‘tw _ 1;: £1: ‘177_a_§:.3: _ .... _ _ ‘7‘") .':;';'¢_'.- ‘3 t: ljr-’ ' ‘4' " ‘ _ " . 1’; '. . '5 _V ’.::A . , ’5‘ "‘ji 5‘» —, I .
. _-.~-=-5 ; . )2 . 'z 5-. d » .1» ' ‘m ' - ~L 7‘ “9* .. a . . a . . ’v ' ' V 4‘9 ‘ I
*‘ 4 5 5,5 ,1 . I .W u. .5, 3‘. 'ﬁ - 5 .\?,-\ xxx," 5- ' ' ‘ 5 ‘ a . -- . ‘ ~ 5 ~ ‘ 5' ~ < 5 «
r- I‘ \{p/r. . Jr” ‘4 1 5 I 5 k _ \ [I , .I K‘ v. “ '1 t '. ‘ ~. V . ' . v. . K ‘. ‘ . .“k‘ n. .-
ﬂ . ~ 4 -‘|‘;5t >3 1 7 2f 0’ : LI .I‘ -‘ ’— IX! 'L‘2‘1‘? 2‘ '~I€-:q 3‘” .‘ ;-'I\ :l '. '.. X , v» > .2 . . ' J ‘ 1:;‘1 " . ‘.
1 l" P_ .- 'vr‘xTv-A‘ r‘ ‘ "ﬁf’ y‘- ‘r'. Qr;";’ ' ['3' i". ,“\‘. ‘as‘.3“\-"‘ 7‘ w! -"'\4",‘-".\{ _‘ ‘ J. " ' ' 77 . u, ' - -.:‘5' ’ _ - ‘ ‘5 A' ~ ,-' L; ' -‘
~ " "I' .uI’ .\ 1 ,- ‘ ,. 3 l) i" " 1f ) y 'A 0) . , ‘ l...) 5‘\) \_l- .' :1»! ‘x' 5 ' _ F . , -_ . ‘ . ‘5 I. \ . ‘-
‘ ‘ (- 7 I I ,. 1 ." ".:\\'( v. .".‘:.~’$ ' ‘v " I ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘- ‘ I ‘v . o 9
5. ‘._. . _ _ ‘ ‘H z,» 'I Vﬁ ‘1 - . 1' , I)!" L‘ _ 1“ ‘.. , ;- “V . “_ Y 1, ' _. . . . . ..5 ,~ I . .
«:5 5“. 5—54“ r ’I‘ a ' II . rm?" “a . -. ~x ' . "5)!“ - :
ﬂ " z-.. “I V). '5" k" ,9 .53“: J '5 1 I. I ' " I ". ‘ H ” ' \ i " “ - 5 '5 " .' ‘5 'I. '.'"." ‘t
L _lv .- ' "A u _':.h-‘ "‘9‘”. [-ﬁ’ 5 l1. ‘0“ ID - I _l) I . I .‘ ~L ‘ “ 2' ' _ ‘ I I ' 5 , _ ’ “- n I
"PJ‘- “ 1 f. r’ - J’IY-‘pl 7:3}: " Q . “p '1/ ~ 5". ‘.' I > ~ . 1' 9.. “g I ..‘ N. (-1 '. ({‘_ J
".- " . :A_.“ I“! I |- ,5: (3&53‘ 2‘ I I I" 3 ‘ ' 1'. _ _‘ .a 7“ ' W -. .., " ‘1‘ ‘
"‘ I I ‘ . -"‘ ':’ .5' .; *>’ VA... ‘ ' c“: " ' V" ‘ < ‘
‘_ | I A A_K I. {,‘.v{ Q s: ‘ . ‘ . A‘\‘L ‘. . -‘ x ‘ _ _ _ _ '-'. . “'4 1 . .v. ‘ . "
t .. ‘7- ~ '75 -JM _-,j . U" VIU‘ ' I I1 I‘. “ . 3‘ .. -.‘. ' " . .' A - 5 _' . A ' - ~ . _/. . . . .7 :(I
‘ ‘:. 4 ‘- ‘ “ .— ' xv "‘ _. . ‘-_-. 5- . , '.' ‘ ‘ ‘ .‘ - - - ~ - . ' 2 I . ' J . r—
1. P ~ L1 \. t “4: “ . , .- 5‘ -"_. ("?x— v» ' tr '5' II I: “\‘5—5‘xl" - l. ‘ 2. '.‘ .‘ . ; ' \ h‘ 54‘ ‘ ’ > I ' “I 3 ‘ ‘ ' ‘1: i l
v. - "‘ '._ -t‘:\ wr .‘H 1,: 1'27?“ f; M ‘ ~ .. > ’24 ‘3‘“ » 2 ‘5._: .. — _ - ‘ _ . . ,.v . . .' . (H -. ~~ ‘ A' ;‘0 I
'5 " Q_ V .' ‘ . l‘ ' _q t . '. “ ‘ ' ‘ ‘ 4 ' I ‘ t ‘ I a V . I
5.. :5 -5 7 .54 'r l 5k, ‘ " "' ‘ “ ‘ . - -. f - ‘~ ‘ ~ ' - i.
3“ ‘ 7 ‘ I —- u “r, ‘g—‘Wl ' ' h I .1 .. ’ ' ' h ' “ ' ‘ L‘ ‘- ‘ ~‘f'¢
‘ T '25 ' - 4 ‘l A I k . ' I . ‘ . I'. L ' 5"'~‘ "‘ 4.5".- l'.~.|" ' . . .1!
- ‘_ ._5 ,4 _ n) M": II 'A :5. '1’; . “~ I "_ f‘ o‘. ‘ ‘ VA 5|, 5 “_‘ I _‘ “ _ A ' II}
_r"‘. v- ‘ . l. ‘ -..5J ‘_' .‘ . ‘ - ‘ .‘ ~I l’. . ' ~ 7:1 ", _v ' I: I .5
< ‘_ .4. - _ ‘ s _a ‘ ' . ‘ . V. Ks -
, , w. ..,. ,. g . I
,_:.'A‘= '..-:'_ ‘ "_—- L _ ~ 1 . 1 ,. - ‘. . '~ _ - -‘ . . _~; ’
"‘33. :3»: v-‘ " . __ - _‘ . . _ " ‘ * ‘ ‘ .. __ ,4. " ‘ “ . ‘ .-‘ l';
":- - 1‘ : "I h I - .5 J - - 5'" 1! IE)"
. , 1‘ ' 2’ fr _ ﬂ. ‘1“? I
_ ' . ‘ -5\5_-:7"‘-‘?-‘:;::15 . ‘ .. . ~ ' 5 V., -_ l
‘ _ .. «3555‘ . - - 5 -. -w — v” 2" ~-
3', ‘ .jrg-V‘: .. .. __ *_' . : 3:
. ‘ 5’. - ,5 4 1‘ . .___ .,. 5. ,__‘ _5 -"’:_ _- T." ' "-:‘::;:_-5::53-:- . 55 " J- p . 3. 11'. .
3" a ‘ '~ “; - ‘I 7:. 3;“ ‘5 .5 -7 l W " —.' 1 ‘ V“ ‘\\"’5/"1‘17:5;:::—5 .5 ' ' _. 2:25? - u --
s‘ 0.7 ' ‘1 ' "I“ *I v I , 5- “ r H. 5 “'—‘ L ' 5 ’ 5-‘ :‘ 4t:::j:.:‘\‘-5:{‘x ' 5
l' ‘ «Q ‘ - 8'. ' . 7‘ ‘7‘ - ’ ' ' u n. it? i‘{;;"f‘-wﬁ .
_ . _ .55... \ 1 _ V ‘ ' -5_ “x I
1: T‘f’ ~” ’. I 1’ ' l .l "x 5- 1* '75:. : —" x. ‘
5 _ .." '_ 1-— v ‘1 . t ‘- ‘—# ~.\—__- '\5../—-
. _; 5 ‘.” _ _ ,- ‘. _ j ‘3’“ x . r—-—‘
Legend , " t ' I {’57
, E Ekwan (eXIstIng) - . 5‘ I
L“ ' - - '7 ' ~. ;- ' 5 ‘ 5 , 4% a
. — Horn Rwer Mamhne 3*- ’* 5 ._ .5 7]-. . ’4. -.
.1- ' " 5‘ ’- ‘ ' 'L '
- u: ‘ f 5_ - " . A- .V ‘_ '-
5‘ --- Travel Route (Current) 5:» 5 5-5 - - __ _. . f .r.‘ 3y ,.
4 :1 Cabin Area (Current) - . ‘ V " _- :5"; )9 .5, I I
, ‘,~.. . ~ ' - [A h 3“ I
- . ~ . v. ‘ ‘v, _ .A n . -
I Pushing Area (HISIOI'IC) 5 $555 ‘1; 5 ‘— 2 “I ~ f
b 5-: "‘ - 5 ,I - v.
. . "I‘ 5 5... ..— .55 ' ‘ -
,5- - Hunting & Fishing Area (Current) 72st .1 ,n 5. ; ‘ _ "3 "' r5
1‘1 . ‘ C ‘.'
.2 " .‘ ‘ v‘- . . ’ .
5 .520; Use Area ; ' j . . a ‘2 ‘ :5 I,
.5: L_— x... ) f ' ," M(I_ II 1‘ “ ”f q I
g . _ ‘v .. r\ I, .
5, - Sacred Site & Fishing Area (Current) 4" W5 _ ' '2' ,5 ‘. ' 5} 5 5,, S J,
. . . ’- ‘ _- I' '9'. _ ,5? . .‘ I 5‘ A -. .kn _ 3‘
Trapping Area (HlSi'Ol’lc) " . ' ’7. J) " ' .— T” a 3: .-
‘ ‘.‘ 1 . 1'9. 2. 5 A 1A . ._ -‘ ‘t‘ ~).\."_:V - ‘ . .
l . r -. : .,- ‘ d. .g I; ~ 33% '5' ' 4’ .- . .- . .t -‘
. m Trapping Area (Current) ,- 5 J.Vf , .5. .. ‘13., 3 '- _ ,_ . ,5 . 1'45“; ‘51? ' M “\_. . 4 ;
. . 1-} I - ;._I J.“ J . "V; 'I ‘5’ ..—-“‘ ' 7 ' - - :.'.*"~'~'-' ‘ » +1 i 'b‘ “ < ’ > ‘
I . . ,_ u .‘ ‘ f‘ ’ M‘ '3 . 5‘ ‘ S <? J". . I 7‘? ' 5 1‘3: 5‘ _'. 11"} ' ' .
- Provmcual Boundary 1.4;; ' , 3:5 ' ,3 a $7» »- x p 5" 3 ’1 ‘ . 1 7wﬁ~-I[‘_;~—7£5I I >13“
‘5‘ .. *‘ . -' ’F‘ '. ”M; .9. ‘ ‘9' ’34 . g I L —
N . - ~‘:~ ", 3 75" g 'a $5 '3‘ 5,; J} ,‘,,§ 5!? H —
n- H 1 5.1L-.. "5..’_,“!:: L;— 7 —-VL 2-) F. ' l- 5 .5, b ’2‘. . ._ -. .5“). A. -5 . 5 55:" f — 5 _ 5 _‘ ‘ 2‘2‘.‘— gw_QJL g‘d tL—.-_.__L-m 1. . ‘
MaplD:o11 I ‘
Trad 't'onal Use Areas 'dentified by Stephen Lefou ‘
' I t' t th T C d H R' M ' l' P' l' I?"
In re a non 0 e rans ana a 0m Iver am me me me f
._.
ALLMAPS ARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENE THA‘ FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBU'I'ION WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED. THE INFORMATION I
CONTAINED IN THIS MAP MS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PIPEUNES WITH RESPECT TO 1118 CABIN MAINLINE PIPELINE AND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION USESAND NTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOW ON WIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACTTHE DENETHA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. I_
r. ‘5
If
I-

v . 1" ~._ ‘ -v , V I . A ‘ Efir. ‘ 7 - , , ,_ ; '~ - :‘.77 ‘I . 5‘ T‘VV-‘: .7 I 7 't‘ 7’ I; "7 Eu iL—;.'in:: 7:53 ' “mi: 3‘9: Ii
V7”; ‘ ' ' ‘ " ' ’ ‘ ‘ .' ' ‘: . , '7 f, . _ _ _ ’ ' '9 -- . Area of Interest .
- j - : , .' _ ' ‘ n
1 ﬂ _ . : . i} H
7 . ﬂ i . . '\ ﬂ 1 ' ‘
- ..-: ‘ ., _4_ .‘..~...- , ' ' \l [I
‘ > V V r 7 , , 7 .- :4 . ,; , r V ‘ .1 ‘
x . V ‘ ‘ '7 77 7 if A. 7 i ‘7 47': V V 7 "3-)” ,~ -: mm! W
' ' ' r” p33“ r337 |
‘ ‘ ‘ "*3 - w’:"'1‘-;‘ . .
‘4 J Arr?
w w ~ ' ‘ If
‘ , 3
l X‘gf ' -
“'4:— V"—‘ - i‘?’
4“ ’3‘.» - - V
.."'J,_" tfrfxl ’ L i
3.93., '3’:
(3.21:. :- ' ._’,._,_:‘ r- -
“:’ ,J. ' .‘ ;.-V‘ I
.,\\\:’,:.‘;‘:‘\\ - ‘93:: .1 "ta,“ .9.
\-?::\\\\:H$<\\‘:~ ~' “.?5' “ .
R“%. 'f
‘ _ N‘EPM?M\ \ '-l V
Legend - W
i=7
E Ekwan (existing) ,- ! {
— Horn River Mainline . ‘ i ‘J _ ‘
--- Travel RouteO-llstoric) " ﬁg { .

. 7 .1 ' , .i
Mm ' ~ ’ “E3 U
Ceremonial Site j; i _
[:I Fishing Area (Current) 7' a
- Hunting Area (Current) ‘ 3; 7— E

' ' ‘2‘.
Plant Gathering Area (Current) . ' ' r w . -. .

' - Trapping Area (Historic) ‘ V - ~ -‘ ' _'

m Trapping Area (Current) ‘ ' , ' H
-Prcwincial Boundary I T ‘ 7 . ‘ 7 3' h "“1 v

, ’ ‘_ ‘ _

Traditional Use Areas Identiﬁed by Jean Baptiste Talley

u 7 n 7 ' ' ' ' I :3"

In relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mamlme Pipeline g;-
ALLMAPSARETHEECCLUSNE PROPERTY OF DB‘IETHA'FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIDJTION WWFWRHTE‘I PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHBITED. THE'NFORMATIW A 1#

CONTANED IN THIS MAP MS OBTAINED ER THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTKHON WITH TRANSCANADA PIPELINES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABN MNNUNE PIPEUNEAND IS NOT A COMPREHENSIVE OR‘COMPLEFE 'NVMRY.

DELNEATION OR’SUWARY OF DENETHA' FIRST WW USESAND NTERESTSWTHEAREASSHMONTHISMAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CMUTHE DENETHA’ FIRST MW DIRECTLY. 57}:

I317}

H

' interview Summary

interviewee: Robert Tsonchoke

E ‘ Date: May 14, 2009

Location: Chateh Administration Office

Interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Kathrin Janssen

”Too man y clear cuts are making the animal habitat disappear. 1f the habitat disappears, so will

.. the animals.”

2' — Robert Tsonchoke

Background

' Robert was taught how to hunt, trap and fish by his grandfather and uncle. Robert has six

.. children, aged 18, 16, 8, 7, 5 and 3.

~ . Hunting and Trapging

. _. Robert uses his uncle’s trapline in BC # 756K114.

' Robert has been hunting for 30 years, since age 10.

Robert hunts all fur bearing animals. Robert hunts moose, beaver, lynx and bear but feels
moose is the most important animal.
._ Robert hunts for furs, and eats the meat from theanimals that he kills. '

. Fishing
Robert likes to fish on the Hay River, Shekilie River and Kotcho Lake.

~ Robert does a lot of fishing on many different lakes and creeks.

' Robert catches mainlyjackﬁsh and Whiteﬁsh. '

' ' ' Sites

There used to be two cabins on the trapline, but one has burned clown. Robert would like to

, fl build a new cabin to replace the burned down one.

There are many old cabins around; they are all over the place.

There is a tea dance area around Zama Lake.

Berries and Medicines :
Robert harvests mostly saskatoons, wild berries, raspberries, and cranberries. 3
Robert harvests rat root and mint. Rat root grows best near lakes and in swampy areas.
Knowledge about gathering medicines is passed down from family member to family member.
Robert knows that his grandparents picked many medicines for the family.
Trails ;
Robert mainiy uses winter access roads to get to his trap line. He starts from Rainbow Lake to 5 ' '
the BC border, then he travels north along the border. Robert also uses the Sierra high grade
road from Fort Nelson to get to his trapline.
Robert has gone from Chateh to Fort St. John in the winter to get to his trapline. From Fort St.
John he has driven to Fort Nelson then on to the trapline, but that takes 15 hours and is not the
best way to go.

Robert used to work doing siashing jobs all over NE BC for oil companies. He travelied to Fort ..
Nelson then up the Alaskan highway. i ..
Reciaimed Sites 3
Robert thinks that sites shouid be reclaimed properly. in some areas close to wells there are ;.
dead trees; the trees have not been cut, they are just dead: ”this isn’t right.”
Protected Areas 3'
Robert would like the area around the Shekilie River to be protected. '
The area around Zama Lake should be protected as well.
There is still good hunting west of Fort Nelson; so that area shouid be protected. 3? '
The whole area between Fort Nelson and Rainbow Lake, the high ground, still has good hunting , g
and shouid be protected. '
Changes ééw
Robert says that the clear cut areas drive the moose away. There is a lot of clear cutting on his
trapline as we“ as driliing that is too close to creeks. Robert feels that this is affecting the
vegetation as well as the habitat of the animals. -

The deer cutting also means fewer berries.

'3': Robert reports that there is more ciear- cutting in the past 10 years. The wildiife is

disappearing. Too many ciear cuts and too many wells are making the habitat of the animals

disappear. if the habitat disappears, so wiii the animals.

Robert also says that there are a tot of changes to the land when areas grow back after being

cut down. The land never seems to go back to the way it was before being disturbed.

The reciaimed sites need to be cieaned up; he notes that there is still a lot of contamination.

3" For exampie, there is white in the ieaves and grass and nothing grows on that kind of ground.
1 The companies do not do a good job of cieaning up. A lot of moose go through the iease sites

~ . and iick the salt off the pumps. The moose also iike to iick the chemicals on the machinery.

' Robert does not trust the water from the iand to drink anymore. There is too much industry

.: and the water is not the same. To go hunting how you must take more supplies; the change is
2; notgood. .

3. Future Generations .
T: Robert would like to teach his children to iive off the land. It is important for him to give that

.~ knowledge to them. Robert’s children are ail busy in school and do not have the same chance

f to iearn the way Robert did. it is very important to Robert that they learn those skills.

r
a I.‘ ‘V _-’ . I .1 3 ' .‘ :I'; Im L ‘ ‘ '. : ' ("i I‘IaI.I:I, “ '3 3% 2 2\ g 2 _. - ‘¥‘ ‘2". “', :ga'na. ..’ 4434.. 13.... . .m :—
2. I3, I“ T g, .. 7'}! I -'."II “A&‘h: \, {1&ij } . *2. . 2.7 VX2423). . In} I‘M“ ('1 R N ., ffﬂffj ; '
u. ' 2- - 2 . . . ~- “321‘ «’53ka _ ’. _ ' 72'12-1-11‘" :7 'F. -. ‘2} w) 7 _._i .I; "t' ' 23;; Area oflnterest
:2 2. ‘ _- “33'- 32-3: 43.. '3 . 2 ' 1%?3.“ {A '2' +1 -: 4 ' r4, 9‘»

I 2 3-. m- 22.33-- m ., . Hum \ . - d - ~28 +29 r w ‘- .

r - .a , - , r 193/ ,.\-._—,.. .- 3‘. f. 72.1 . 1 .7 ., HM . . . ‘ r
3 h-‘;‘? ‘3’, j \ -mj-ﬁ ‘ , “.23 I ‘\'\ \"\ -' ll \{II‘ If ‘1 3.." 'c‘ ‘ I 3} ' ‘ q.

3- ..~. 1 2 -. .3327 "ﬂ ' n:- J: * 1'31". K \wm-a .22. n2.-. Ir' "‘ 5:2 2"
a ' :1: fr)“ . V ' ‘ .. " ‘ f -‘ [2 1—3...._.’ 4 »- . ""1“. r: '2 ' ’ L 112' 5 ‘ J ’4? 12"?“ ‘ 337-" ’J 2‘ I
W/ «2'21” -~ - “2:3. I ‘ ' 2 ' ’ “.555 “'5" ’ Remy. - :1 :22": - 2- 53;! In
2 "L - ,2 . V 3 ,.- g’ . . ’35“ 7’1 , .-..: ". ' .2 2 ‘ﬁ‘1\ '80::‘337 95“} ’4' ;.-. -.—: 3 i
II (i-I‘ . I’L/ . ‘ r ‘ "‘7‘. ‘ !( ./ "LL ”i‘lllg‘ ‘ 2 I 4 1k ‘3': _ -. 3‘ .‘I_\%I £5”! 3:“! _ _.«‘- r o .
r .3’u v 7‘ . II x:{. f I ‘ I III; 1‘. . \ ‘ r . - . U -§ ‘51,. ._ I ’4' I _ 7*, 4 - €27".- " 2 . ,

. £4 'u4t; -7 a .1 ﬂ ‘ ‘ Ni} '(_ N}, '2’: "l. 1 El. . ’:.-.‘n_21 n 437/4" . ' \‘kﬁm‘ij‘ﬁ n “7 I r

. -5 " '- '2‘. - “D L 2 J:. 1" 3-? ' J .5 a ‘g--— ~34: \ a Y ‘2, 2- 4‘. '2‘ .7

1, .731" 2 I {.464 II . ‘Qy‘h'j‘ 3"‘.‘ E‘.t- ,Jf' a. \_\ . Iv: .- ;..': .~ .5 III I
f 2.3% . . J . '. r“ ' 7'1‘.‘ - » -' . 2.2 lipts'ﬁ‘: \: - .— " ‘ 7" . '~‘ ' “
2r - - _ 2:: ' 2 ’4; ~- ~. . ‘ 2 2 v' . “3.3, “29-32: " " “" u i .
Ems. ’ -,- 53:43-43. 3:422:331’ 4 t ‘i' 2 2:. J: 22¢“"2'11"":“m7d‘c‘4‘ , '--' ‘. 2'. "-1- .- . E 2
—‘ «haraﬁﬁm- s 4 -- —~ am-” . I - - 4a“; 2- “"3554; . .2 .9 -....--. -. » x a
‘ ”‘4” 7x ‘ 3-“ - 3'"? u Ii" 2— ._-._. ,- J! t rawv «f 2' , 2 r 3-1. .- -
‘ - .35“ ' — ‘2’" ' 25'r 1- —- " ' W ‘--~' 9'. 3—‘“-_ r- V ?‘1 1:233":- F '
} :33??? '41) :35: I _%“f .\ I' - 1/1313 ,1' “' _ - t :2, -:,-. ,J 51.4— f‘Iu' ‘ 3-.
-_' I ‘32??? _‘ - A g- - \‘s’g ‘ .- IL - .. ':‘ 2F 3 “‘7 I -.'u .355 as” ' 3' ‘31,»; p _ _ , . , -—._;—.V- ,_ w} ] '
r ' .431134— -—.~ I = - - - -"-- * " ”:3 “Q” ' " El 4 3 " 22%? wgﬁz ‘ ” 7 1
r' .7 . . 2:. 3:: 3. , - 22:1- . ' 2 -~ - ’22 3“ 9—.
2 ‘ '. -__ w '5‘...“ ¥5<vkﬁIl W — I 'c‘ . IIII '. I_’-,’.',. " BII__I..-.— :‘fI" \ 1 gf‘f '.-' 2 3.; . - . _ . *‘ J a so It P372}. . .
-4". " ' ‘2“:2 " ‘ ‘ 2' *2 “‘42-: 3:2 ' .. ‘ IE j—ik: 4:12—13 2‘? -‘ ' ’ 3—": "5" 2‘1’ 1‘3"“? ‘
, J . <2 ‘3-‘ .2 rr- 43- ’ :4 “34-3- . 2 ‘ H: ‘2 ‘. - -- ' .
.If .5 ;n.-:$I. M h}; .‘ 3;: Wc§:‘;i}‘\§utﬁ I‘I ! ‘ 4‘ fté’t'nf-‘s - I .. 3‘19— ' ‘, 3—5” 2. £15~5s f: I .
« $942322.”- ‘3. f2 “- 2s'>:=:'23&é&2 '3 .22 . . 23 ‘ r '» . =2: 3E4 "4 *— 2 2‘2: 2
L335: ‘_ {ﬁgtpigrd‘LL - ': ' I}. {F}? ?r:§:$3‘1 . 3 96".}?! ?;;a‘,\ _ J J ‘ .% .5 a ~= 39:? :x: w: :2‘ .. I r&{% ‘2} I
'1 33- _ A..,, - .- , . -.2_ ‘02. " -‘~ ' 3c" 2‘- J .. ':-L,,~3_ 2‘ 'L ‘ 2 ““23. 4'53""- "" 7-""'$ M L"
Eve‘zﬁ'a’ 3. ' 5- V' $7.5. ' {fff‘ﬁ’ﬁﬁtﬁfé‘ . o 025 ”-3155: 1:291 12‘: <2 2.: "2: 3&3 ‘ "
\-.t_ . . ~3 ~. -- «.1 rs. . 71%.».1I, , o. W ¢ 1;‘d'¢.-.)i .- h f I :5 ", W' 7 ”w _.. _-__.-_ ﬂ . M |‘ .2.
*V%&' w "' “7 :z- — ' 2?»? 52>4t~*~-'33‘-:‘¢.i?3§§.’. 22- 3:4 .52 '- “2.3. “r a ':.;;-v~ - - - . 232-5»: .7 . . .
43:4... 5‘52 “52‘; T23 ' 3‘10 2‘ -' 9232 _" w ’ =~ -‘ .2 22;: 2: -- f :2??? ' ~ ' :7
.- ‘5»: 23,11? , n 2- 'éQ-Irc‘nft’i~";,‘.~’¥'2-',4."- 5V- .«3 '3'" : 2 :3"); 3'1. , '11- Z - §y"""’“' -. . -. I . .
. , ‘32:“: -—32 -, ‘ >427? :2 gr. .::-:'-:-:o: -' hr" ‘3' WNH-Eamﬁx- 1: ‘2: 'r ' -372" ? 7
' ”Viz"? «6" 2"” - ‘24 333932;":3") -' 2'1?) - ' '4’ J 3’ 3‘1. k" f] .?3‘ z 2
.7 .« ‘1 .2" 7-3"; “ ’3" \ .‘V‘x .2 - ’x -, *- t __ -. ' ~ 23;“ ~i. _ -. - '. "
5:29-12:3- 2; V ' -"‘I'"22=.2~:.'é$2;22..- 232.332 .2 52““ - "2' , -. 2032: -- . 5-2;)?» tr
M32? ' ' -‘ ' _ r_ ‘ " 0‘. .I. 2 3' . 4- ~- - I l '41 —— . . '.
2:- 2. . - .. .z > 2222-9236232; .‘ J .2 32.: -. :- - - 2s! -~
1"; 3?“ W55” 9‘7“? " J (J; ' 'H ‘ f ' -- 'Q-f1-am‘t“ '1‘, .‘" -. ‘ —. J” \‘P. '52 ~ ~ 05' I ‘

_ _-. ' a _ 2 ‘ '_: _ _ 5-. ._..""-‘- 2‘ h.“ . ‘ \ _:-- 2 :
‘f-ﬁ-frﬂ' ‘2 I I L'I‘ I V ’;‘\ H 7 3.: Ir 4 . [A 43. B): . V lrﬂﬁgg‘uu-_—L~f ‘KI ;‘ g r‘ 1
nu ‘f‘ -“\L"#“ ‘1'. fat "if (f; ‘- . l y ‘— 1‘ ‘. K ’ '2‘? 2 4" . I. LII ‘. 1-:‘0. ;: L_..

V ' '. ‘TI‘V “ V‘ 0' U 1‘ 2‘ I" (It "I ‘ ‘ h ‘5 , o u {‘1
5 .4 1.3.5:. {'2- 2 2 .12: r 222 2 :32 , - 1 ' M43323”
‘ ‘ v \ I In - _ I r , ’ - . .I I . ..
1W: , , r-" .-’ ,7“ ~ ”.24 5 ug- - 4 .2 2" . " ,t .124: 1719“} 1. 3": I-' g
‘f . " 2. v' 2 --2 'V» A ?‘1‘ JA '” ‘1 . '2? 5 / ‘ ' - 'x*{...fw2.pu‘ur ‘ 3 ‘
>3 sgI . 2.2 .‘ “:5: . . I GJJJC}: ‘ , 4 . I r 1 .- 'ﬂ .5 “I 1.31 £2.31. I_ g .
.I:.__Ir I {- :I ,w: a; .Ujr ~ ~,~J?‘I ,. Bu a h x ‘7 ' ‘1 p ,c ‘1’ ,4
- ~ ‘3‘ ‘3‘ "1' ‘ " ¥b~ ‘ ’5’???“ - A ll ' I‘ I -‘ A " .f':'# ;‘
II .. .K‘.’>‘I \ ._ 4 {,3 1"; ’3. I. ~ ‘LXDC-l 1: L1}, 17 . I ‘ . I.’ ?'I; 2.3
l.‘ P . - IQ. . M '4. . V“ k. ‘5 ’II,- 3". , . 'I . 2 2' 'péfh. 2 I A .3. ‘ _Il . . .‘C ,2: ..
, '. L1 _ B 1le . ‘ _ 3:41-42 '\.'::5‘ :zh :J—I/‘T .2 L If [V ahn‘ﬂﬁt "15“ \I ct$?.¢ tI ;
:1) 4. :1 “I.; ".‘:_"-\‘ ‘ ". LF b. I I ~ IF: F; 3I I ""4“; ?> 0 }
:— - ‘ “v‘ - ~‘ — ‘ “If 2‘ ‘I y ) ‘5 ‘r. - IT‘ If I 'j‘ 2 ‘I . ‘.‘ ﬂ, 3'
’ . 3: "<_.;I;' _r “I /--<,- - t 1' ‘
$44.73 2.," 7- 2 3:3" 3.) " i‘. K' ' . 3‘ r a ”7.5.5.?! ’y' ‘ --‘ I ’3.”.' 1 I .
‘4'; : . - 22' ‘ ,2; ' . f 9. " ”3‘2“ 4’2" .' -
‘ ' f": .5 ‘ . -1 2 t , ' - .2?‘ :i F? 2*“ i
*2- - 2-22.- 2. :— . - 2 2 2 3} J ' 2 - , 2" ? -— = 1
‘2. .‘~-— ‘ .. - . -' :‘ - 2- 2 - 2 2 _. .- 4 ‘—~"‘”- ’ 22 " , -
5‘7 —' . , .- ‘ -: . r 2 "’ ’ 2,‘ ‘T'ﬁgﬁ’g- ‘
HI. :3 'r. «4 .' ,2 _ _ _,' ,‘ «=7; 1"? 4 2—:— ._‘ A --._ __ rd
.. 2 I I ‘ ‘ i 5 - . 3 .934, “$L42.:‘:;;;!;n.\+ﬁw'qr .3 "$.11; II '
I "0 '3 , " x ‘ \\-:.‘.IC:ZZ,\‘ ' . . ‘ ‘ I . r -- :‘ “J V‘ - §:-‘r W$ 1"ﬁggﬁ‘: r“; szg‘ﬁ 3
II ,... 2 . . “. 34:1;RLIIL ( .- . 3.4". - , I:R-I'Igrh ;§,*E;$;§W,}J% 24.1. II '2.ng3.‘ f .
‘J‘ . ' \‘3- 3 3- . - -‘ c‘ . - ’ r
' -. 1 ‘..‘.. H ' 3.."‘f5-3 ’1} ' liffj'fckw‘cii‘2 :' ‘ J 4_-..’,.-_r‘7" . 2 "r \If‘": I if ..'
ﬁex“- ‘_ , I ..IM.I .2 ' .‘A‘I','v .AEKT‘. D:_:.% 'f :l‘.’ — --":'_:— ‘3—Q:;I f‘I/”-—:~ITZ‘:-_,_L‘L /__ _ — U - ' ‘ I" I, . .-
I... -. 2- - . - .- -,~.~1 3:7: V I .- 22-4 _ L_L - , -. 4;:tgg4gzgﬁgiﬁg _ ,7 -- . I
- 2 . ~. g: ,. .4 - .- -. ' \\ _ _ . c _. s
: ‘ V y ' 7 , ’54:, I,,’ 1 __ ' 7‘ IV “—‘t _ ,_,.\__7 i ’
- . w -- ,. - . - . 3%. Km. 4—32.44: , -
2 - .. ‘ - - - ! 2 - . 2 . . 2 . - yn- -3, -
. F, 1.:3-43' ,‘- g :1 A .‘n‘t 1 J, ' ,."4 - v ’ v I 'u . _ 5#'\4“ %;l(\’ _.I A . . x _I' .Lél" r,
‘I, -. ,I-I.4‘ 4 '4-. . :5 “-3—...” If? J4" :‘ IH f," I I *9"? ‘T ‘I . .L' II; .1
'1 7 z; - '2: 2 i «"39 '7’ 7 ' -. a "d‘ 1 I 2 9'2 ”2
h'. .' ’35; / 'S‘va‘vs 15 1 r- ' ‘I )\ ‘ I 2 ‘ ,' ' I ‘v-&‘ 'I“ I: II ‘ ‘1‘; ﬂt‘gr"
'21. ,3 ~. ‘ 23?“: .: :2' 1 '2 -'. ‘4 ‘2 ’ 1 -‘ ‘2 2:2 .e-w - ‘~
“ . ‘4- ‘ " -- 12“ '7“ ’1 — “4- 7."! f a‘il' C " 1‘ :J‘ I' \ J -‘
i J q -3 ‘L‘ s) :‘1 “a . "-rt’—_—.‘ " f": a q I k I 1‘ -! ‘ " " L‘
. :2 -Ftkfx- J.” .- q. if" .-.—) g. '9 ‘6) 3 6‘;;?_¢.‘ " 4 ' A's; -"/ n“ " 1’ 'F It; -17: ‘ F I ‘4’ ‘&“ ‘ ~ I
. . v -. f I H , ' __ 4‘. g I J. I . 2 7 - 4: 7 Q ' '2'. II‘ M}. : H ‘
E‘. - 23:5? 1'4.~ ‘“ ‘L ‘ _ 34 . “i . ' 1‘ \ 'V W". "A \ 1*",
1 Legend . . 2.22.22 ‘ 1» 1-: - 7
. Inf. ‘I o :" ‘2" ‘ u " .; HI," ‘1 "’ ‘ ‘ ' 3" ‘
. . x _. 3373‘ _--‘ ' ' . .s . 9‘- -| ' '3?“ N ‘7. -—é
.‘ E Ekwan (exustlng) I :4 1:22; -: ,- . , ‘IIIJ 2;; ~. .I C I. II '. Ia $3; 9 2“ .2 I
I . o . I '9 ;_‘" J . u‘- ‘ .‘th_ I ‘A h K :t ‘ I R :R' ‘L ' ‘2‘. ‘
‘3. _ Horn River Mainline 7.37;:- I ,9 -. . I - . .. . z I II .I 1] x :7 -
1' v - 2"? =9 2 J- 2' . . V .2 _.: i.‘ .7 3: ‘
2 2'2)? Fishing Area (Current) ' h .2. . - ,. . ~. -, 2:2 x .L ~ 2' - ~ -
,9. ' a V - ‘ ’4" In' 0 4 : vI ‘- l .0 :2 ' ,2 i ‘7
. v ‘ . K ‘2: ' ' '4 ' .
L: - Huntmg Area(Current) .2 -. -, 0/ . 5'3: I.'-- :u - ‘. “Q. :- 1 -:-’ “5 -P-vm‘ -‘
‘ . ;I ’ ."' :.I- - r \ I- ‘ 3.. v‘ ‘ "n: 2752. a?! '.I I ”1-; I v‘ 3"::’I N}, a 2
v Q ' A } “f .- \ ‘1‘. 1 '2‘ ‘K .‘ :“ j.“ ‘ , r _ "' l _' . _ h‘I."L.1‘I: L2;
III - salt LlCK ‘ \ ‘5'} r"ﬁ3 Of... ‘5? .0, '4. ‘Q‘ﬁA 33‘ ’ F x . f - I anl‘a’ﬁ J'\[ L: - ~ I h .‘I 0%.:J‘f'é‘l; .
‘ ' i A c 2' v - '2 ' - - =2 2-2» '2 " 22% . .. ‘ 2 ' . «2’4: - ~3- . , JD: -2
: Trapping and Cabn rea( urrent) , r.- . 5.: '~-.»-.—. 2 g . :2 : .;}',. 3/2. 2:5; , 1 '1'
, 2- .2 , 2‘:- F -- ‘ ” ‘3 ~Z‘ 22.4... d - , “L ' 9'! ”13'. 42%.}; ' 4 5 ~‘- ‘j’k 5&1 .15 55,?
\_ I- IwProvmmal Boundary '_ ~-',"":"'::":;.. .3? '1? f3 .531 .23,” _ _ 21%: 3—" ‘3' ‘ , ,3 m 2_35— ' 2- “'7
5' " -. .m" “,‘2 - ., _ .‘3'11 2,2. , - ‘ "’ " f - ' ._._.T—_..W _ ‘
5‘ . L __ I .,.V. _ - - L'III'L— - "L” P LI) "1 i J 'Ig ‘ 31 ,JK . I, {a ”I "". - ‘_ _ 11g ($\- '—
..- “ . L;-~L-.~.~r‘:'i1= 2~--_.‘..:u»’ ' J. - .: nL _.._n 5'... .- _. 3;. . .. J&L.A£Lg_¢ Lg.“ ._ VI __ :._::
7, .
MaplDIOZ1 ;
in relation to the TransCanada Horn River Mainline Pi eline
1’: I
p
‘1
ALL MAPSARE THE EXCLUSWE PROPERTY OF DBIE THA' FIRST NATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION \MTHOUT WRITTEN! PERMISSION IS STRICTLY PROHIBFI'ED. THE INFORMATION .
CONTANED IN THIS MAP MS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WlTI-i TRANSCANADA PIPEUNES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABN MAINUNE PIPEUNEAND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE OR COMPLEI'E INVENTORY.
DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION USES AND NTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOW ON THIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USE AREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACT THE DENETHA' FIRST NATION DIRECTLY. 7'."
d‘.’:J
5.22"
7
l

Interview Summary
1" interviewee: Stephen Tsonchoke
Date: May 14, 2009
Location: Chateh Administration Building
interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Kathrin Jansseh
Background
Stephen is the son of Emil Tsonchoke and Mary Chonkeiay. Originally Stephen had 13 sibiings, but only
3 boys and 6 giris are alive now. Stephen has no chtldren but is very involved in the lives of his nieces
and nephews.
Hunting and ﬂagging
1; Stephen hunts and traps on EC trapline ii 756T014. His father, Emi! Tsonchoke, has used the trapline
 " since'1953. Stephen took over as Headman in 1972.
h, Stephen prefers eating food from the land. All of his famiiy members five off the meat from this
' trapline.
: Stephen teaches his nieces and nephews to hunt.
' Stephen has caught many moose over the years. So many that he has test count. Stephen considers
~' moose to be the most important animal.
~ Stephen hunts for moose, bear, beaver and lynx, Stephen hunts any fur bearing animals.
Sites
; ' Stephen used to have two cabins on his trapiine, but one has burned down. Stephen wouid like to
replace the burned down cabin.
f Stephen knows of gravesites at Buffalo Forks (the joining ~of Hay River and Ketcho River). Stephen knows
by sight where these graves are. Stephen is not accustomed to pointing out these sites on a map, but
when he is out on the iahd, he can see where the graves are.
There are graves along the Shekilie River. Stephen’s uncle was buried at the forks of the Shekiiie and
Hay Rivers. ..
'- Stephen knows of three salt licks that different animais use. These places are good areas for many
I I different types of animals.
_ _ Trails __
. 1n the past, Stephen has used a skidoo to travei to his traptine. The trip wouid take 7 hours. Now,
Stephen aiso uses winter access roads. Stephen travels to Rainbow Lake then west to the BC border,

then turns north using winter access roads. Stephen 3350 used the Sierra high grade road from Fort
Nehon. L4
Stephen has a sister that lives in Fort Nelson that he travels to visit.
Stephen has had many forestryjobs around Fort Nelson. ﬁ
Changes _§7;
Stephen pointed out that in the past, when you trapped you carried your own supplies but mainly you
iived off what you could harvest off the iand and the meat that you hunted. .
Stephen used to have no fears about drinking the water from the Fahd. However; how, he brings water
with him as he no longer trusts the water because of all the development that has changed the land.
Stephen does not iike all the changes to the iand within his trapline. The industry has changed the
plants and waterways that affect the habitat of the animais. Industry activity drives the animais away. .
There is 3 tot of dear cutting and that drives the meose away. Stephen feeis that there is too much clear
cutting on his trapiine.

' L . ’ ,. ' . , 2. _. I 7 . . _ . ,. I, ,~ ‘_, _ _2:- 2 ‘ . . . is: :- ‘4 , , ‘ "If! *4 ',‘ f. jgsgz—A‘A, MMI
'- ’ 2-,! ﬂ wmi‘r‘ 5 FT! ' . T1" ‘ ""6 ”Mr V ,5?“ , VI“ 13,12. l“. 33“ .- ?&iu if! :4 . "
1 '3‘ .' "1" f' ”" '93: L} 3% ' -5 H : " ‘ ' ﬁl 214%" - $121.54! . 2’7 f '2? Area of Interest :
‘ ~.« r \ I ‘ 4‘ ' . - 1’2”}??? _g}: 2.. ,1' ’ W “-43-er M” . £2, ' - 1y 2?: .
F: . ., p, . -- . , g... . - . : v ; . . 1,: ‘—
‘f t ' ‘3‘ ff ‘ ‘7' - ~» :1,th '32 -~'..r-—'T' I Q&g’é "'1' (“a 31‘ ‘1‘ ' £4 ‘ f3) ;
E ‘ ‘ .. ‘ 4 I“~-'” “r. ." W 7 f: “7 .~ IJ'N ‘5}‘2 1 (3'. ’1‘ 1' 1kg} " g '7} :53 l
‘l V, *7:ka _g .2 : - <7 “ J *..-‘.'\‘j J ' I‘ t_\ . . A " ‘(Rk- 'ﬁﬁ "Q‘ J ‘ ‘ ' [{ ﬁi . I... 7,;‘5’; l!
. 2. r fir}: . .141“ f .m ‘ .: 2-“. " < -- ‘ ,- N3” 52'}; 9n 2:”
’ 2 7/ .' ‘ F V, N‘ Ir- h" ' V a It“: 4 S 31‘ ' 1' ‘ “ ' :TTYe'ﬁ-r: g» ’ F‘Rk a’ (VI ’ 1? -’1
; v: f” ’ (.v" 2‘ ' ":22; 4 [?'ﬁ' -’ "AH . . _'.‘ ,-: “‘2 N -. ,\“.i~:5‘—- PK- ‘rt - W - " g .15 '2 '3 ‘ (
~ l; “‘5" V'” ‘ " “:V” .2; l": i ‘ 5'" V‘ f’ "1 - " E? .- .“V‘i :I’i ' Ly -. I: ‘r ‘/“V‘. “H“ ' ‘WX (”353” 5-. : "
62’3”; “ ” '”’ ' f: s. I .. "M l . 7“"? °~‘ Wu" TR: 27:“. .- 4‘92: 7 : “-‘
} Lh-K‘ ~v. 2:. ‘l ‘3 .3 J ’1 , -. I ~ ‘\ .ﬁb’. t“ -A»‘. .-A IU- . '1‘ . Ia —' 2'"
yw"(f‘l' ”qr “.- 4 ‘ 3‘ g __y ‘ . l . "1:, . lvﬂ‘ i v 1; I . ' ﬁ- kt T, '31 . ‘ :3 . 2 .
‘ ,-‘. .:-*~ 7. ‘ — . n I ‘ . g. - fr .' ‘ . ' ' , cl“; ’5. _x' . I. . '21:, ‘ 3" ‘ E
2 ’2? 5”?” 92%.; ‘- M1 ‘6’; ' ‘ Wife: ' :4,” I g I “UNA“ “—5” "Y” J?- R E
: x H. . J. l- ‘. "r . _ - . .‘ . _ . . .‘ a} ‘ . ,‘ 'v .‘ .‘l . 4%.. - .._ [I ‘. x ,s.
. :3 7‘ ”71.7‘ 'k - w-‘ .— ”. "I .9» V i -' 7 -V “I .‘..".‘-‘ ’Oﬁ‘ut M . g. ;' ‘ I
t b 7 "- (B'ﬁarf'ﬁ . 3 " N": ' W" $117? "‘ " ’ ;”..'~ "- ‘ - (A‘Jrz‘ / I ’i’.‘ ,1" ‘2. ,5 I 5"" ' éh‘n- ~- . —:
‘ f ,.—_. 7", ﬁxl, "‘ - - ’7‘." {(13:23} 7 V, 1i”! ”' g :‘1 Hub.” "——-. :2’: I L. 2!? ,- ‘ 3’} f.-‘
’ﬂz‘d'd'ﬁx 2 k—xﬁ. ‘I, \‘s u U 1- ‘ . ‘5...» 4 . fry .13. £42.46! ‘
‘ L3 ”n 57:32 : "4 “ “$34 - cw . :1; 7- v- ‘ “1-121": if "x‘ i 3573?. __ II . ‘Jr W ”51:." ?”‘r1
. fur" 7423.323! 322'- " " 2:; ‘- . 1?. . M" ” :2? ti ‘ “'22.: - J,_ ” ‘- ‘ 1" 2-1-23?" 4 El-
- ’21:? 2:?” ?- 2,; .- ‘2‘”?3 . “ '2." - _._ ‘59:: -2. . ﬂ" L;—"“*
. ’ ﬁ-é : 2 k? E ' v:- 33" - H g i‘ ' ‘ ‘ - N J. ‘ ' ‘ O" ‘ '-‘.” :53
1:. I(- ‘- W212; " . ' ‘ 15’ v ’33—. . - ”‘9 - g 'l a I .3_“I "_=j:_,~::\‘ A ‘L‘ 'V ~ - ‘.,-- ﬂ 1 r..-” "
i "' 3 . f . I‘ ‘ ‘ v, _ ' . L; H - — ' q 2"“ i‘- . '_ . . . ' ‘ -~c— . ‘
1 L? 3,. - 3*.‘2'0 - ’ h}??? . a" ‘ - 2-:: $1] {‘4’ ' ' J'. - "k N" 'Y 5‘ "I " - 7‘5 *r ‘
‘ _ 1'4- : - - N ‘. N:“ ’ ,1 ,4 133% (.I ”S v-‘v—u _______‘ . ’ . 3 ?.C . '3‘ _ _ '
: angﬁu W2. :2 - .-_ 2. - A . . 5...: . .9. r“ r s: -s. — » ,
a .. V ‘ ..‘ . V“ 1. ' . -".-_ - 7" ':. ‘ .‘ ' 1 "r 3‘ .9 ,x.‘ - 2" _ "
222:“v’g‘5rﬂ'a . " 9;. ‘T 2' 52:23: 2:; r: “'2’ F fl 9%: a , -. .- —~ * . ._ . _ «_ -.
' I {u q‘ $1“ ‘ V i ‘1‘ ‘ ‘ ""‘.I”'{‘“JOL!L:?J| . ,j 2 ‘ r9: 3 . :1 'pi r 7-: ' ,1“ f‘ ‘k I ‘ ‘5 _ ‘g _ ;:’ ’3‘ , —: o". :
1%~ym;. F l " ' ”5‘ 'ﬁfw \ " (4 '1 ‘I (:Wﬁ?!3:,r *1.an ! h; 2.-..” - .-
, I . ' ”—55? - - ' ' ' ' . , . ' ' I ‘r' ' h' ‘ “‘— ‘ -‘—.
. A _ .’\ r. v 7". —— Br . , . :‘j ”-—J¥\ .. ’k - 7 v .3 ‘53,? ‘> .\ f 3‘). ’ . *_ j . -‘ ‘ ‘1
‘ F2: -.‘ -R Fa... _ - ‘3‘)» “g . \—~ ’I » & ‘Rﬁtﬁg U 1,338: ”.f- ...' _ I“ 3? ‘
; ‘ %;=H_:H'." : 2" I I .31” :1an .Lw’gt/J“ r27 . , {3N .' - 4i. '2 gfﬂ"? J :14} — . ,. i, .,~.,_
L "“ " h 2???? “4 ’11 -‘f?7"5 ‘$ 4 D L: '1' ' ‘ 7 Jr ?gilgifr ' _ .’ -- .
2 53¢. , _ r4 3,: I , a J; I. ' -" ' ’5‘ . -I ~' =3 -
h f vI‘Mﬂ ‘ (‘f "sf < t» v' F, ”‘1 ~ '17 K 'K‘ w a I "r ‘ . ~N v
. :W‘a’ﬁ; ‘. T“ I’ W 5’ ‘ f" -1: ,-’ 7 r ’4’ -- r-r‘ ’:“‘ .Ii; ’ - I] L. ' <' ‘g‘I ‘-:ja::7-:' " W , s— _.
‘ ' ?”?‘m‘2-rfﬁ—22?) - - a . .2 ("K x? 3 4% " - "S; - " ' ‘L 2.; 221': r
V 3%”?ﬁv JW,-' .4, *' -:‘ L. '2 ?2.“ . .222- _ ‘ . 1;... ‘ :
W .1221 - 5 ‘ 4‘ ??"2’ f ”i. i“ .3255? ‘ :’ yr??? “#3:”‘ ’ “ “
._ _ Ta *3 L_ Jaﬁﬁlg Fab (g? ' . “q." 7' In LEV ‘ .- f‘g-II\ A) .2 V L‘ I _’
1 1‘3 ' I ‘I”:‘3.';rfd”jh ‘ {:ﬁ; 1/ .‘J; .g’zﬁ "5 ' I - - l- . ‘
2. ““l rt": I :1. ‘ A .3“ 3 N E 1. ‘I t“ ’1' '. j ' f
\i. - i. '. . ~ .-~«. ' 1 ' ' 3. " ' ‘ -
‘2 “~. M .§, 2, . 22>. £2) , .22 I; 3 , .. .1 I ; _
f r Q‘s“ ‘5‘“; t. ’ ‘1’ ’61; 'TdJJh "‘ Ft’ 1:11 :8. r. , [t I ' \ fl 1'? 2! 2 M I ‘ ’ :
N- Q-‘ . _ ‘5 I: .- . f' 9:. .I ' ,. .
‘4 Y}?! 3'12 .. ,-.RL£L~J'\‘J ‘ 3 £413; ﬁnk,“ 1 III g l, g . : '
{.333 5 ' ’ .' g " 'P "E: 5 53"?) E‘- k 1 l I J
«2.» ,2 2' ~ .= '\ IL . . .2 .
. Ir; 7] a ' K" ‘ ' “D%z ‘1‘.) ‘ ‘1‘ if" :7 " .; \ﬁ 4,-'~ ‘ _ .v J : I ‘ ‘
3s ‘5 L 1‘.) 2:1“: ‘2 .1“ 42" ‘ aw)»‘ Iv: ' ,If ,1" I 'v ?:?:i‘” _ ~ / '
, '3 a. - .2 * 2- 2 22 k: .r .. ' .
g .' ”2;. ’3 “é“ ‘ A' «‘1 " ,. — " " ' :
a ' ‘ f2 ‘ Ir: -. I': y,“ {f “It _ . ‘ 2 ,
’I‘V'z-v—Jn f“ .A {V >1" ‘ u 3‘: ’-‘;"‘ u I 1 . “ ‘ ‘
25:»:- .--.«:_~ .- 2, -r ; 2’ ,2" 1 ' 27"” ’ ‘w * 2. .. ' ~
4‘4. 5.: "'1': ’—\ .__(j‘ ’ . r .-:—’ . ' ,1 ' ’ ' ’ ‘ I - f? --
A. 2 — J? —'-- ,_ 0* 3" I A n A .
rx‘: - —.-\:.‘—. _' ’_—, .P“ 1-4..-v 1.; ‘_ .-' f: ' q /( ‘1 ”I ll _ . ~. I- f; . — I a
‘ ”1”“ ‘2‘ ' " '. . - . “ ,’ " a _‘ ‘ 4‘ “ r -. '5 - 2
- - - q' I .5- ’ “ ‘ I —~— —_ - I
..‘- ,-—'-”’/ ' w' ; ,' T ' . . ‘ V ‘— ,4 ‘ 2 2 ’
. _ ‘3 - ‘ ‘ _ - : g " 1" 2‘ ‘ I 1—)(- I 'Y’ ' ‘ -[4 I .‘t . '
T . P, 4 :2 n : !'. f . _ ‘ . n‘ _ _ ‘ -. .II - - 7:}. _ .. ...' }” .9 ‘<_ .13.
' I .‘ ‘5‘ L \ L ‘Tgf..‘_:‘.;”_~:““ - _ ‘- ' ~ -: ...: -‘ - ﬂ? , - -. , f K _. - . . . ¢‘
, 1' . “XL . _ \»--.:I::;I;t_?x . - .t 2-. a I" ., ._, -r" _-. , w "1- a
- ‘- 91,. ; .2 I . 2‘13. ,..~: ~'-‘ : - ” .- .- -‘ ~ 2 .. _v'x'gJ ~ r
'v "x ‘t v. . a ,- I britt ' 5.2"? i‘.;--;”t'z~t\‘°\f‘_‘%’—HL‘I ”32:7/ H. ’ 7’ '-" ' ."'"‘ f. ‘ '2' 2' ‘ .I (_V" ‘ 'y
-. N i . , V 'U - a .rj-:‘ - “»‘-‘:~:<—‘2I;,..:_‘5~___Ir‘ - .'4;—:‘ 7 “??‘m; \"l' “MN I' r ’ _ri‘? ‘ . J _ _
‘ - ' “L. L 11‘? i: . ‘ f” '1‘ [€51 v - 1:;—PI‘::‘ - —. ‘. \;r,/\"\ R-dﬁékv/érfj} 7‘ ‘ f}! V ‘ ,.
_ 2 s w. .9 I ,- —.-«- - .2 2712222.: » , A; 2
; ‘ ‘1? . 5‘ j ' .. ”,4 “I'D? ’ ft)- —' 'E A V ". . 1'- 3‘ _ r \>__'n—‘ _f .- H’hghﬁgig r—-___
' ‘ A ' ‘J . ' p , ' l .' ~55 ‘ ' 4 _ "v .-';"/’:—‘
:‘vxmv - v” ~. . ' : ‘5‘ > u ' .
Lr- _, :33, .. '5" Q r» ‘ f, 3" I ‘l ‘ 1 f' . - - .5. - ' - ‘_.
‘ ii F‘ 5-": 4’ I. L, ‘ P749; 4:1,} ' ,‘ ) J _‘ ‘ I 35"". ' f ‘4 _ ' “2 r‘)‘ I
" " < -.’-‘ E. i" 3 ’a " ff.“ " ' j 7 . . " —:>-‘ ‘ " . 7-3?
_ ‘. , 1'7 ‘ ‘ _‘,:Ir .' "#53; vi L‘ '7“ '3‘ 2 . _ _ __- - , ‘” 7" ‘ ‘ .1- _'-. ,.u ' “:4” ‘2
i eya-‘fdﬂv:;rf t r ' rt], I: I .h “ ‘.U M -“ ' 1- ' _‘ >\>— ‘ —‘ ’2 'l‘ 1 1 ‘ i g. Jr'k“ .1 t
. E . .- ﬂ 4" : 7’ __A ~ ‘ ‘ , q . . '2 ' .
a . . .. _ 2 72-2 21:: . _II. «.7— ' ‘ ~ , 3,: .. - : - -. 1\ . -
V 1‘ I E‘VWvEE?®-“ “"1: 3‘ 1-171. 'l'f‘ E 3 3' 1.3:. a.“ > — ‘ ,r —‘ x ‘3'), ' b.” 4" 111 1‘ r - 1; 1‘4: “1‘ - ‘ - k:‘§»
‘ "I _ ' _‘J ‘3. f .. &’_14 {a J’ryﬁ“- 74;”. -g-.-_ 3;. 7.1-. . w: _, - . /,I:'I _. t 4g" - ‘ 4 x: . g 31" v "7".
2 ??‘?a 7—. .- I I a -19: ‘2‘ “:4. ‘ , 1'9”; -" » *‘ 1“ ‘. A. - . J. I": ‘I ’14. )1 i ,j Y ‘3}:
n b. _ . . ' / - N l
b ‘ :9 I Cm" ' Rf ‘. ' k ’ t 1--.. _ 4 “.J
- L" Legend f'f‘:“~ ,I-g —’- - V ,»-,' - ‘ci: . . ‘. " :2‘ 31 0‘1‘- - Et‘ H _l - ‘
‘y . I k, 2. ' . o ‘ I .1 | -
' . 3 .3" -, ~ 2 . 22‘ 1 1 L” '3' l] ' 3:“ ‘1. 1 1
- L} E Ekwan (existing) 2:25;; 25‘ ,““" ' .2 f ‘ I 3'3 3" ‘ :1 ﬂ 5‘ '
. . ‘ 5“» '7'... ‘ - {1. I ”‘4‘ .11 L '4: 5
w 2 — Horn River Mainline '/ . - .9 ,1 .- u ,9 , g,
. 32 .I ‘ . 9' 1'7 . E; J i] w '5 I: ‘ «11‘ f. ,,'
F" - Hunting Area (Current) f. "‘2 j .231." -: 9.. 9, . ‘. 3‘ ‘ ; . H $2., 2
- . .-. , 2 “-"r’ 7 \. u ‘LV ‘: "W‘i ‘9; ~,»”' #1”
Salt Lick ' J 5 , .12"! ” ‘ \_ ‘ ‘ . . i ,w: t
.2 V - 1‘ 9" ’9. v‘T'T k {1‘ “:“T ' Pg ;? IQK¥:*%II r ‘ * T’ P’f:~;(::: ' ’l I.—
. o ‘ 2, , » ‘ ~\ _- ' ~ '4 .4”7 . ._ x A _
I . - Trapping and Cabin Area (Current) 1 ﬂ " / r: .;._. ll "53 ‘.' ~ - ‘ > :' 2;? ,2. 1 4&45‘2? 2‘:- i. 13“.): ‘
: 5 . . x ‘1 - -' f”: 2.2.. ,u .. -. v ‘2 *2; " -. _ 22:11 :1:- ...
. v w ‘Provmcnal Boundary '. ”2.71:1 3} .4 ,\ f, #3. 5??" '2. '9 {1: fit . ?- I_—E_
,. 5.22.»... ' . 1| ” . ‘ ‘ ""“z‘w ‘v.’ i ., ” 3. --?~" 2 — "W"
‘3..— .rr ’9. ' 2 '2 ‘ w: . _ r 2:. «:1: ' .
" ._"' -”- ’71—: L". Smwmg ‘2' L‘-':..-..Lz*2'rr L" _J. , 23.9.; :9 -_ . -_ -23... .4... {L}. -L" L..___. * ‘ -_.
2 ,_ MaplD: 022
A I I . I I
Traditional Use Areas Identified by Stephen Tsonchoke
r .;. . . n u I I I
‘ :2 In relation to the TransCanada Horn River Malnlme Pipeline
‘ ALLMAPS ARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA'FIRSTNATION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION WITHOUT WRUTB‘J PERMISSION ISSTRICTLY PROHIBI'I'EDJHEINFORMATION ‘
. - _ CONTAINED IN THIS MAP MS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSUKJ'ATION WITH TRANSCANADA FIPEUNES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABIN MAlNLlNE PIPEUNEAND IS NOT A COMPREH‘SWE OR COMPLETE INVENTORY.
:31“ DELINEATION OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION USESAND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOWN ONTHIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE COWGT THE DENETHA FIRST NN’ION DIRECTLY.

Interview Summary
Interviewee: William Yatchotay E;
Date: June 4, 2009
Location: Sulphur Lake Camp
interviewers: Kathrin .fanssen : ‘
Backgrouad 0-
Wiliiam is 74 years old. He was raised in the area of indian Cabins (Alberta). He has 5 daughters, 3 ’ ﬂ
3 sons and 6 grandchildren. After doing forestry work for 26 years William retired in 2000.
Hunting and Tragging
Wiliiam is stiil an active trapper. He goes trapping with Gabriet Didzena aiong the 30-32nd :
baseline on A§berta trapline # 99. j
In the 1970’s William mainly trapped beaver, muskrats, lynx, marten, wolverine, waif, fisher;
weasel and squirrei, among others. '
tn the past, Wiliiam used to go trapping to trapline #510 in the NWT by dog team. ;: ~.
William hunts for moose and caribou around Rat Lake (Alberta), Swan Lake (NWT) and Rainbow
Lake (Aiberta). ; .
His brother Maurice aiso hunts in BC in the area covering traphnes 7551015, 756T015, 756T016,
7561017 and 7561014. f
However, most of the hunting they do is around Suiphur Lake in Alberta now. '
Medicine and Berries '
Wiiiiam explains that there are stiii medicine people today. '0
A few areas where William knows to find medicines inciude south of Zama Lake (any medicine) - ,
and around Habay (rat root), Rat root is dried, powdered and then drunk as a tea to fight coids. ' f

William explains that different medicines grow in different types of environment. Some
medicines grow on high ground, some grow in the muskeg.
William identified the area round indian Cabins as a good berry picking area. _
2;“ Blueberries can be found in the muskeg anywhere.
1 Sites
' William identified 3 burials around Bistcho Lake that he said are difficuit to find as they are ail
4% over grown. One grave is right by a cabin site.
3 Wihiam indicated that there are many burials along Hay River.
'35 Travel Routes
Wiliiam has identified a number of wagon traits between High Levei and Meander River,
between Meander River and Assumption, between Assumption and High Levei and between
j " Assumption and Zama Lake Reserve. These wagon trails are not used anymore today. Now the
5. highway goes to most of these places. =
In the past in the winter time they used dog teams to get around. His family had 5 dogs. He
remembers that they went to Tathlina Lake (NWT) by dog team in the spring In the 1960’s.
. Winiam identified a dog trail going there from Indian Cabins (Alberta). .
William also uses the Upper Hay and Chinchaga Rivers (Atherta) as travel routes by canoe.
. Usually he hunts along the way.
Wiliiam mainly uses a skidoo today to get around in the bush.
Observed Changes
.5 William has seen a number of changes on his trapline. He says there are a iot 0f pipelines now
and well sites and ”more white people than fur”.

.2 interview Summam
3', '- Interviewee: Betsy Martef
Date: July 07, 2009
“3 Location: Chateh, Administration Office
Interviewers: Kathrin Janssen, Brian Beaulieu
Translator: Agnes Gallant
Background
, Betsy Martel has eight children and many grandchiidren. She was born in 1936.
: Traditional Knowledge
: Betsy remembers a tea dance taking place every year at the Zama Lake community, as well as a
tea dance ring located at Bistcho Lake. Dene people wouid gather at these places with their
, reiatives from different BC communities.
Hunting and Tragging
Betsy remembers hunting around Kotcho Lake for mostiy moose and rabbits‘ She would
prepare for winter by going to northeastern B.C. to hunt moose. She wouid make dry meat and
_ store it for the winter and also help prepare moose hides. This was done in an area ranging
~ g from Kotcho Lake, north to Estsine Lake and east to Kwokuilie Lake, an area of approximately
' 50 km. Betsy still knows of three (3) people that stiH use this area for winter hunting in her
.. family.
Her brother stiil hunts in the winter with a snow machine [skidoo] about 30 km west of Zama
I Lake towards the BC border. Betsy still uses trap line #86, she started trapping in the 1970's and
trapped 10 lynx this past winter.
Fishhng
. E Betsy used to fish while at Kotcho Lake. '
Medicine and Berries
Betsy feels that medicines have not changed and they are still good for use. Currently she
_;:___.._; coiiects mint and rat root in Habay and she coHects common juniper in Zama.

Wiiliam and other trappers and hunters are afraid for their safety as they fear something could
happen with the pipeline while they are in the bush, where they do not have a phone or a quick _ §
way out.
Another reason why William does not like the pipeline is becasue trapping has been poor since
pipelines have been built. He says there is not much left for trapping. M
William suggested that industry should have higher fences put around well sites as the moose ..
and caribou now get in easily and lick the salt, which he does not think is good for the animals. -;
Wiiiiam is concerned about the destruction of trapiines and trails by oil and gas companies.
Future Generations
William’s wife still makes moccasins. ..
Wiiliam says that the Dene Tha’ are slowly loosing the ”indian ways of the post”. Now they are
living the white man’s way.
Wiiliam thinks it is important to teach the children the old traditional ways. That is the reason
why the Dene Tha’ are holding a camp in Sulphur Lake each year to teach the younger .
generation the traditional way of hunting and meat/hide preparation.

Wiiiiam taught his children, including the girls, bush skills.
His family eats more wild food than store bought food.
Areas to Protect
William and his brother Maurice agreed that they would like the area around Sulphur Lake
protected.

- 2.2., -- --" ,, 2, — »- — 42—: "‘ﬁl
v - \"' “ 7H?A;r—‘_l—‘ME
_ 'r W 7 w -' 7 Y 17‘ )‘ '97, 1" #
_ 2 _ . _ - r V gar ‘, p pzyr’f 2, . u
2 2.. ”‘2 - ~12 " - .l 1 '3‘ '5' . - ' 1- ‘~ - ' 7
k 1 ,2 2-2, ,, ,2 .~-—- 1, 1: I 'I’ J ‘ * ff 4* ‘ 2}”3!‘ 4 .II, ﬁﬁ Ir” r Area of Interest U
* N112 ' 9' 2 2:12 ~ 1' 1 ' ' 1’36)“ 311"" W» 11-1 n
} C} ‘3' 1-. If I ' "gr?" ﬁ’i/a'm‘ 7 K 2’? ,- ' J7 ’2? 6.351; 1 4 1 :7 5 W72" I “
x I 1 ._, . t . ._ 2 42 1 _ . - . 1 ‘. x ,.
1 " I1 ‘ . -* 2 ‘22- I 2 — - ‘22:" 1' 349%? I20“ ‘ f, :22: I
I s: ‘ »..'—":.‘« "‘-J' ' .7 « " '» 2:29 I.
I W ' f . .4 2:123: I ‘ ﬂ ’ 3"» \ ' {7}» 12,- q
.- ?‘ -\-» 2 " ‘ ‘ ‘-’ 4 ‘ I , .2 Cry, .2 ' '7 7:-» "f
' 45?? 2‘44] ,- ~ )1? 1 '? ‘ m1 4 12‘ $21’37mw-I {‘73 1 E3
'1 . .1 '1 ' ~ .» 2: .- ' '- 111 ~ 1: g _ 1‘1. 1.112.222.2113 2 §\ 22.22. - ~ '
i I ‘3 ",. I , ,3 '. _ 421:2] ‘ I . I ’- ‘ '3‘ j {fl ,3 12' i”, ,7 ‘ 1'. 1’ I ‘f..»: H
I . '.' . I '1'." / x "‘71" 33(1- 1 - '0 _ ' 1..‘ 61‘: ﬁrm "1“?" 2 '2" A 11’; » 1‘ .
. I1 a. .r; If I / _'I-~.c"‘\" ( . . ' . . ﬂf', 'r‘ ‘ I- f 77‘ a ('7, ' l3 . ‘-- 13:77 ‘7 9'7 1!- » j 7]
I 11’ II - - I i I % Iv _ J” 1. ‘ '1 . 3‘ 2". . 7.527- .', I , I I 7.- (I . ,3». U‘
i (37“ -7 x ' " 7b - I t v’ 2 t ' I 7“; ’I '7 '9 ? " I 77 ‘- 77,,“ J 7 1:77, ‘ 7' 7‘ 77— ‘ ~ '7
I 7 ‘ r" 7 7 7' ‘ “ 27’ ~12; 71/ "3 -' ' 33.x ‘ \‘5 ('4: “‘ 5‘
, : C“2 II ‘ 7 . ‘4. I 7 yr 0 7 :1 I f 4' . W ’ , >I$ ‘ - F 7 2, .. . . '7
I 2 If. - 1 I121 - 2 . 2-2-- m 1*. .. , g: .1, , I 1.222,. - 1 I
I - a f“ .1! _.-—y—-—,_ ,:-—~..- - I I v f ‘I ("A _'- 39‘, ALA 3..., 12>”, .I - 4 3“" 5|
I - 7_f&'- ’ u -2 f :L‘ .% ~?7“:‘7‘.‘='."‘f.7\-L I; \2 I ’3 j .0 I r _‘ I - I" 1‘ 5 v Yr f; {a r ‘VI ”/7 -,. ‘y :r' L:
?'fwf‘ MWK 7717727 ’ (7&777‘7‘7 77 7 77 7777.73?" "'U..’IM?:7I gftﬁ‘ ~71 £3 7! " ;_ ":‘lr‘*‘ _ :{75271 - v» . ,— 2 2 2 \ H‘L‘k
. 1 ' ‘2‘..- 2". ~ 22:31-2- ~ 22'“ 2? ',=1;.:f-~—x2_2x~ 1- -' :1; '- :‘.22"Vg1}<22 1: "-1: {9" ‘_ 2 r" , — 2' 7"‘4; “
i "; 2’3’73321" J‘Z’ﬁ 2'2‘9-«2 ' 7 i. ' “15¢? rfkgf 2- ‘3. I _» , ' 1 - "= 1. "’;21‘-..__\-'
; I1-';"»" ,: g... __2 .- 1' ' 1222.1 .- 1~".‘ ,1 > f. 41““:
I :‘2 2‘ 77/:237‘11“: 1- I1 Kr: IJJI I I 1%? ' 1 {gig}, I' ?II‘B [ I II: I I. r . 7 . 1 I‘ ‘2, .. I
. 14‘ 1112:?"- ‘37‘54‘72'2 5:21-32:4wa “-2. 2 1» h: '.—-' -— 3' .. 1'4; ‘. .1,- - 2.32-21 . x I + ‘ ‘
' .373?” u: 11;, ar- ‘ , 1’51 ,Wh-ér-ja- , —_r , VI 1J1:--£1’“;}$'é:€",‘ =52; . - g 21 , ~. , f ,1 ‘ ‘2
. . IV ”/77 . \ \4—4 . __ ,‘ IV 2 »_ . I —_—".='{‘ I 7" I_" ‘I ‘ ’ . ~24 77:“ 4- 7 ‘ﬂ _ I 4 '7 7 . . 7 7
';.~.'“ ’0” ( E~§'b7 . a: ﬁg: ; 0' r \ .Iﬁ I1}. ﬂ‘ I. i¢7$ih .9 n‘F’ p -- --1..v _‘ ."7 _—, _‘ ,I' _ _
a 1’ ' ~43 2 -— 2'2 1'- , ‘ .- , . r "-“» '~'. ,' :1. 2'1 ‘ 1 ’“ " ’- F 7' . 2- - ' ‘ ‘ 1
I 3‘ £;%;#;I . 7 .‘x‘rt‘ l? 1‘."’x1‘.‘_rj_: ‘2 2 "3 \ I 10 {§va ":5 : -:)-. I155 .531 3 I I _ If I._. A I '. . I .
1 I L 10‘. 7,. :ﬁgfﬁgﬂkt \II 3.211;] ??I- 77:?ﬁ‘?:§;0€5 I ,5 F. _I: IIII _i7~r_7 2,3321: ’14:?) . ,-~ -3 d G'I ._.‘:77 3., ' I I
r 1 r1n~=§ ¥ 'i ‘32-“;‘1r )2 .v I 1 . -. . .0- ”.bl 1-, - 2.» W 11 ‘ ; - 2 , . «.1
. ‘Q I ‘ﬁqvﬂ ‘ ‘1 ~ “A , -' D n, 4 .L "I ,‘L J ‘4' l v . ’ *‘ - ' 'I - 2 -.
‘ ‘ 3 ~" " 2'" 2" ~ ' - {-1- a1— ~ 2-x 1.1 - ~~_. , . -
d . ‘A77 ‘22" 1."‘.’1 i$¥ 1:“ Atat. “K.“ h‘ '7' 2% 7 "7 4‘ ‘43:... . bl“ J": 7i . " — q '» ' ' ‘7 '\ 7
I - 1‘35 1-2:“; 2 pg ;.-* ﬁx .1 . - M22112. .- f :24, .1 a 2- 2 2 '- ~ 1
‘ ax. — L M. 22 » .2 1- .1 .1”, 12.111212 -.-.2-=_~~2:/ » 2, 12 -- 2 . - -,1 ' .2. .. -~ 2- 1
. ;‘\¥;7-¢&w 7% 7 I '1? 3" LIX.IJL.-. ..sI-~ ‘Ii .II __.I I..oﬁ I R, I- _ "p",l- #J y I' ‘,»II_ F. \I 2 I I , I
2.22.22, - .~ I x «1‘23” . ,1 <15: .‘_ ~ 1 ~, 1; e: 41.‘ 2’ 1 2; ~ 1- ‘ *
1 _ _, _; {5; ~_ 4 . I 4. r 1‘ .\.- . g /q’§" . 2 . \ ‘2 - 2 I
1- . 22,126 2 2;: .1. ~~-. ~. ~ .» ‘— : 1 I -,
_ " 4 .1 ‘ j. "b | \ A- ,n. '
. -228» 9: 2....1245222241 _, - .32 l’ I ?x- - - ': . ,1 . ' , ,1»?
; rfrg..,,~»,2~2_.2mwr' -- - 2:22 »~* 231 » 2: 14:1». 2!. .. . 1 , - , .~ 2
. .2 -22:- 51 1 , 2—. a ..- 1 [- 2.: 1- 1
. 1+ w- ~21“ W'— .12 -~:1r-2~21~ IL 4, = “1 U ,- ~ 1:
1 s 22:12:; 2- 1 .1- F f‘ '1‘ 1" a :' . :I . I. ' 1 1 ' ' 2 v 1
2% f
' b3 77"» 71" "2M “2 5!, ‘I( ‘31?" ,2’ '21.)! 93,252.? I ‘- , I R .3 1 x 1’ ~ . I
r 7' 2 I 27w 7' 17‘4- A 7 719'- 77 ' 7' I 7| 'y} I‘ . '. .3 I
I5? 32695me ,~_1 2,777,737 JﬁIIgII $1“; . - '2’ RI . ’ / . . . .
.k 12, 'Y‘rr'.’ ‘ "":\'7- 77:777.?ij ‘3 Ia 1) .‘ , _\ i7 I. I ‘II‘ ,— 1 I . . I .3 .
7 7‘$ I 7‘1“. {dig ‘3); f Q‘g' ‘Kfi-{K‘IZi ‘v' 7’ f'. 7 { h 17/ f] 24 .4' 7 ‘ 7 4 . ‘ . .
, . I L . u 4.2 '.,‘ ‘- ‘1‘?" 2 I"".’) f L g ‘9 I ‘ ‘ 7
I .- I R \x‘ ,- I I745“ - \ I f yfyg‘ 'I . {A 1 I l '
-' t2. I _ 1.213212% 2191? ’kab 9 '\I '2 I 1 ' 4.! ‘ I 1 '
tuf‘ .- 123“ ‘ ‘7 '1 ff'm Ieryetﬁ‘b‘ ‘ ' ,‘7 ‘ 7 .\ '1 I ‘ I I I. . . - ‘ I - I 2. ‘
2’ ~' '1‘ 7 " ~ ‘ , f" ,4‘ . I j,;.J”’ 3-4 ,I 1—:5’41‘ -'I .12: I ‘.1' - 1 , t 2
1.73 ?I ‘r 7 7"-y" «<7 7.:7 x2 7 07 '. 7 1 .‘77 2/ 77‘3”. :3“ 1-2—5 Z~ - I . w
. Wu 1'} 11—'a~.2~f”~15 “'21; 27.- 1 . 2 " ‘ 1' I ' . I 1-, :
. '4 y . I ~ 6ft; ‘ ‘ - V 'l 5 II II .4 r" ‘. x ‘k . - I
=1; 1 IL 2‘ >23 _ I 22 -. I, i ‘ -1 ,
1 -¥.,-x~;;“-==~ a 21-2.: 1 2 r‘ ‘ t ' ' " 1
I . 2 - F - -2 - . - - ¢ . ,. 4 "'- 2
7-. - W 7" 7" 7 7732,77"- .7 ’17 7’7. ‘ . 772777.?‘1"; 7 'I-I. I I I , ‘u" I j? d
7T ‘1"‘"“-‘f—"r¢4'7 77 ‘ " 7) f7 1' ... ' ' _ .
L 7 .. :‘J-r: 77" _ , r x \ -2- 7’7 I " I1 , v -\ - ' 777* 7 7 7 ‘1
5 _~ -7:--—'~‘7\"\ij”:37‘7_"7’777 {*5 r w , 7 , . 7 ‘ 7 7 ’ j- ,‘ ,7: 1' ‘ .
.- » t :32 III.” .‘—"‘ : I.. 2 I I ~ I, ' ,..-- ‘73-, T’r“ ‘; ' 222- 77- 7‘" i ..
} ‘v’7'77: 7 lw' - 717" 1 '7 27. :7 7» 7 ‘7" +21.» 77 ~1' ’ 3‘77 7 7‘ 77
7 ”2.2-." :1 , ' , I A - -2-.— -1 2 .1‘ ‘ - :.--~ "“ {-1
1 I I 7 :1 I I, 31 7 7 . , 7 . _II» "- 7‘ 7 #7 ~a 0‘ I 5"- 1‘1 171
‘ ,Q‘T.;;;;_II_ 2 ' _ ' ' 2. "7 ~1- ‘ .- 3 I I 7775. I . ‘
, . P2.) .1 _‘ 7% II. ‘ «L_L" 77‘77:§C:‘\\:_\I; -‘, v—:-‘ 1 _ I ‘ F‘K“; 31‘ 1'3 p — “’7‘?" ! {I
‘ ' ‘7‘ I '27" 777$:TT;:-x ...." —J__ITY - .- I".4- ." 7, ‘98 I —, _ ,Ja E} 7‘ ’ 7 7
u I ‘,.7:' 1 ‘ - _- - ' /;'»..~’- ”7’2r'51-jg‘3— 2 4 -L; 2‘ I .7 I’h‘ ‘ , I. 2 ' $ T "H I
I ‘-. .77 \7—777 “11 2,, 7 7...??? 2'77: 3 ‘ I‘f-rﬂ£#-j:‘.t...; «‘77:; ~27? 7 7 “:16“ W7 7 ‘j‘IEFW’ﬁxbiﬁfigf‘ﬁ' ' ' 7
7 1 , 1 ' . t " 7 7 ‘7‘. w , 7“ 777 . __5 . , ’ ’7 77 ‘7‘ 1»¢-7"I. 7 7777;725:222 . 2 _,.I-\_ '7
33“; I V » IL‘Ivn If; '2. ‘ 1I ’I‘I IIIII II‘ .‘7 7 (?:I‘III : VI‘ III!‘ :"I' I - \,"“—-—4I _~-—- ‘x “jg?” .1
l ' . . ._ ‘ 1. , - 117-?" -I, ' 1“ I“ .~ I . '2 '1 3» "I ‘ ‘ " _ 2; _-._ :'
1 77“; . S .5 27,7 . .1: . - I . . .1 2? I' II . , I, I _;_
77 7 7 2 a 's 77 J L777 11777, ’I . ’ »' 7 -‘ «E{“) "I 7 7‘ 7‘I ‘77.
- . ‘1'?! II ,1" 'N , II .I [.4 ‘I 7,. ‘4' _, I _ I - II II I . .2 I1
, 2". " ' _~ I g T ' 1 .- '1 A , -"’ J'C 1' ‘ ‘ 3 l 777 ‘
-1 {‘2 ‘7 :‘7‘7. 3 ‘7 717‘7 ‘ 17:; a ”W4 7.: :7 H 7 7 , - 77-“ 7 -7 h: 7 ‘7 E 7:71 } .ILI. l;¥‘ J ‘u
g 7. .0 III’Id: MI 59%: -»‘ II] “ ‘ é' -II1’ 7 I ‘I-\ . I :i‘ Iv I I 1- ”I'Ii‘\ X y
’- lIﬁaLrI -I I')’;""' ‘ .' . .P 5 --' :. " ‘5': I‘ a. Ju‘ ? ._ j; II-I I 5‘ ‘1‘; I 1‘" I " -‘_\ 2" "I ‘ ,Iy:‘
»: 4 1,. ‘ a s- 2 a 2:5, ,. — -~ ,_v;«../ - 22/. ,23 " 1- J :1- “12a; ' *2
» r: 7 AIR 7%” 1d7i‘ﬁ. i ’7‘ 7 38‘ A23! 11‘“? ."-";‘- -1 777 .""l f 7 77 777 » ‘1’ J ’J’LN / I; ‘1) 7 ‘
»‘v_ - -3 'Ir. -2 ‘. I 431‘} 2.( x-.f‘7"‘“”“\ "21-27 _2- I ‘ 2 , 2 » r , I
2 1’ -7- .211»; w, 221-1 » ~ » - 2- 4.22.- -"L , ./ , i»-
E "=~=——~—~, -r-Lxr 2.... 1 “ 22— 1i: 1:24- . 1 1; 22—2 * 1*
I I :2": 2- ‘2’ 2"» ' .17, ‘17. ' '3 1 . , . . "'1“ :— ‘ ' ' ‘ '7 7 7‘7". '
I f.. - ‘I—‘T-I _II'_::JI, II’ ?’?“I‘élﬂ :‘II—‘r' 7 hﬁ'h, I»") 2 .— 7“ fig Y » ‘I ){7 f I} $25 \I E
A777 _- 7 7- 7 - 77‘77‘ 7 7"—.1 “-—-— ,r,‘ 7 . 2 ”v ‘ . 7 ._ "7 ‘
Legend r” ”11:1‘L12nx“ '” 12"" ” 1 1' } ' ‘1 ’1 L 1
2 ‘f - ,4" v:' , , 1. 1f L, ‘- ‘ >~’-. '
”A"- I f ‘1? ‘7‘; 7737—. ’2'" ,I "I I6- j? :1 “I {I 17 . ‘
,7: . l 7 - I 7 § 7 '7 I 7 - 7 '7’." 7 ' 7 77 "
- ; Ekwan (EXIStan) I .2“, J ’1.' i153 37L -. “ I 7.3' , I ‘; :IIT; L rs 1:51: ”5-71" If
‘ '~ -- 1 . .u; ~]., ~II '. I 7|. . 2"“ ‘ . v .4 I 1‘:
. 5‘ - ' x. 7‘7: I 7 77 "7 27 7' ' ‘71 j 7 :‘f" 7 7 ' I77 7’7... 7 L f I 7 7 ’7 ,.1‘I° ‘
E7: — Hom River Mainline 7.327" ‘ 27 )7: ‘7 j‘ “9/ rw"-’77': :7 1'73‘ 77,731» 77777“: ,. . ’ ’7 ‘ » 2‘42217777’ I
- . 2' "~' , 1. " ‘ :22'”2 " “7‘“ .2 -11 “' , I #37314: 1‘1 2 V _ -
. f m Huntlng Area 9 73"; a I \R - 2‘77 2 ' 7.2 17" 7 7 7 7‘7; ﬂit}; ’f’h.‘ ‘ ‘ d i“ 3'; 2'" " :V’W‘» Efwjx 131.767! ’1‘,
7 2 ‘ ‘ -'_~'-ﬁ7 ' 7 . 1 .- ‘ I v . ‘9‘ 7‘ . 77- 7‘ 7 7 7 L_;7
._— . 1 l - ., ‘ — ' 2 L r n ‘- ' .‘-¥ & <51?
3 V ' ent) I II - ) ‘8‘? 1I ~ _ u 3 L‘ x‘ \ 2‘ _
» - a In Area (Curr I _ .0 _, - 2 -_ 2 1; , .2» ~ . 1. . —
2‘; p 2‘ Tr PP 9 r } I I. 227-1 I‘I‘rx r; ‘\ i” J ,I 12’2" 3:» J . IT 2.1; gm .I
i 7 [1.77773] P'W‘m‘a' B°undary I ‘2 _.- ., . ,2' 2F"; ’ ““3 3 \I '.._ 2;- 1 :51 -1123? 4222—11“ ' — 2
I 1:: :27 1‘“ L"? a.,-;W...u:.¢'., 1 ~ :...-..211
- ' ' W'Iliam Yatchotay
' ' Areas Identiﬁed by l ,
I TradItIonal Use . , I' P' l
' I t’ n to the TransCanada Horn River Mam Ine Ipe Ine
‘ In re a lo mm WRITTEN PERMISSIONISSTRICTLY PROHIBI'I'ED.THEINZﬁIIEMgglggMPLErEINVBIITORYI
-7 . ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIEJTION OUT CABIN MNNLINE PIPEUNE AND IS NOTA COMPRIEHEN TION DIRECTLY.
OF DENETHA FIRSTNATION. 53W RESPECTTO THE , NTACTTHE DENETHA FIRST NA
ALL MAPS ARETHE sxcwsgggaosgssagzamss OF CONSULTATION WITH mmmgmeoﬁﬂmls MAP FOR SPECIFIC use AREA MAPS PLEASE 00
MAP M5 OBTAINED FOR TH . AND MERESTS IN THE AR .
.. -. CWNNED $$$$me on SUMMARY or DBIETHA FIRST NATION USES
- 1
£7:

Betsy identified tree buriais at the conﬂuence of the Shekiﬁe River and Hay Riven She also i:
remembers Germaine Pastion’s cabin located at the north end of the eastern-most bend of Hay
River, about 25 km west of the AIberta/British Columbia border.
Betsy also recalls another cabin about 9 km up a tributary of the Mega River which has its *
conﬂuence at the north end of the Zama Lake Indian Reserve. t
Travel Routes . f
Betsy remembers traveiling by horse team to Fort Liard a long time ago as well as travelﬁng to 2 "
Kotcho Lake to camp, hunt and fish. She also remembers traveiiing for six days by wagon trail
from Zama Lake to Fort Nelson; this trip had a lot of hiiis. j
Observed Changes .~
Betsy noted a significant decline in the number of animals found on her trapline. She beiieves '
the increase of industry in this area is the cause of this. ..
Future Generations ~'
AH of Betsy’s children hunt and trap and she stresses that it is very important for the current

and future generations to continue these activities. ‘

’ -- - r' '«10‘ 55-7 v7 ' r ,1 on- «v r. *5» .v '5 j ‘1: ~: .u r? 7,7 r 7 - 'rum r ‘7 w " . "-."‘ ’5“ HQ?" ‘ ” 7 ' :5 5'. _‘h~—.A—-—_-———~—‘ ' 7 ' ' ” ' " ”'“l'l'w-r’?‘
.5 7. .5 5 5” f ' v“ kwié‘f/J /:2:5. L: ’ . 45“ ' ~ A‘ H ‘ ' 5‘ 55’ ' W ' 5 V 1‘ «5 '1
~15 5i- ' L, ' :r- f» .:~ J7; ,y-‘mtg- 5 ’55-; (ﬂ / A - $5“) '5' ‘5 «g :5 , 5 _ ' 9.1.33 J2: Area of Interest 5
5 "v. 5_ ‘ . .- 57,755 :-5.,;7.. - ‘14 ' ~5 .{5 5 5 , .5 . 5 5
‘ ﬂ ' V .7! 5 - ‘~ ‘- flﬁuﬁ 'F:““""¢:’;; " .2 5—— .’ - i ' L’ k \5 I a ‘5 f 1' ﬁ .5 " ' 7" ‘
5 9 ‘, - 2:5, \"r «3 cf ““5 ‘rl ‘ 1’ 1 |O‘.‘ *5 1 ﬂ 5 i L l} ’1 h I “'- l
‘ 5 — ~ .1‘ ‘ ‘ 7' 1qu ﬂ "W S" i' 45%“3‘ 1:5 x “ " " 5' / ﬁe!
‘ f - 3? f: fa?" ‘ ‘ ' f; w 5'ﬂ5,1ﬁfq¢£1?=* 3.. 1d: #36, ' - -' " :‘5. ’ ' .413”; i}
1-5 \‘ﬁ . 1f r . ‘ ' ‘ I f ‘ ’ i/"'c’"r ( ’5) Lr'v‘dgr‘zayrﬁ .: J . w", L?“ J“ ' 3‘" 1:5 '1’ I ‘1 ‘ ﬂ! 4;” ‘ l" L
5n ' ‘ ’1 ' _. ‘5 _':.; . 1.“. '5 5‘55 4135' .ﬂ .va ﬂ“, 3 -- 5 ‘5“ ‘2 .. '_ "a 1435314 g 5‘ k ‘ , . 5 ,. z ’ ,
H 6 " 4 -' '47 t’ 5_ " ~-lr . I.’ "’HV 1 )5 ‘i‘ 8 " n *1; M' 1‘6 ' d f "' '13 . V l
V _{ '0 y - t, yn‘! ’ . 1;, " > ‘5‘ 7- ?.JI' 4.‘ ' ‘ tn ‘\ ﬂ 04-9. :‘ J '
‘ _._/ J A . .c 5-}.1': .- t "7‘ I 5 I 'I .l’. . ‘... .35, ﬂ - : 5. \ ; 5"._.f 5 1‘
- x #33::17 r 1”.) ." ﬂ" "5 A? 1, 5 ' 9.» .J ', {"1 .r’ 'P V. 2-; '2‘ ’1 a ' _ I. “g“? - \~ - ~ "(- "l._\ H
‘ 5-" x5. ~~ "f' ' " :2‘?‘:1"~»rs§i 9‘ Jﬁ’f :51 .. 5/" IF 2., ' ' 4 _‘ -,. -- ' . -' x: w * .1: H
. ,i' x "g k : 5_' 5 i..a‘5‘-_ 7' :5 {3;1' ' ‘roll’ 4 ; f '3‘ 5 (iv: fﬁaﬁ 4, 5 t, ‘5‘ § -,~ 1.3- ' ‘ "
‘ :J*':J ‘ 2“ ‘LR 1' V 1,; - I? 0"”.‘4" y" 13'? — (J, f A . 1. P "“IJ" -7 ‘3' - .- -~ R .7:
‘ ‘ ‘. ‘5 > :2! 31:." , '-5 x > ' .- .I ‘ 6v" ; ‘ " t J, 5 Vt?“ :j-r-r»- .5 ‘ ‘ w.‘ x L
.1, S“. ,55‘ kVSL‘A-iﬁtlﬁ‘} .‘_ 7 u 7 Is 34‘ ‘53:;- \ $4; ”grad?" ' Km .‘ . “’W ‘ ‘ " ; J
5 [ﬁxﬁ—w—("t‘ E r?‘¢¢' V '5 '7'. 7. 3 7.44;: 1‘” 5 ' B ‘ J2. 1:1‘ ' h " ' 2‘3;— 7 " '7‘ 3' ’ a ‘a ,‘5
. 5 - ~ 7* ‘ 5 - «v.5 “ 7;.- w-g—J x, r- ” flit“ rrwzu .031: ~ ‘ r 5 - 5 - f
‘ :" , 151* , “ :3 ' ,1. ﬁ '5'- " "- ' " “. ;-‘ ' 51";5‘. f 7 V 5-745" " 4
5 E . ”7:75;: 7:4 - . g. 7, . . 5.33,, “5.4% ‘ a ‘ m: M, ___ , .55 _. f 5
F“: 1. '57 —I:,/M- I '— c ’ﬁﬂ ~-‘-'-;I:?.L ’;—‘ é - _ - __,’—J';V';. '1 :1 ; y;:“£i ,. _ 'A'. -->". ‘—‘T‘: - 1 T L:
' i f '4 u 13%: .' * ' ~‘Y ' - -- ‘ 'f ' i ' W 1'31! w ‘1 “— - '— - '5’, 7—: ~.: ’ 1‘
P ”‘5‘ " _’ ”9"; '4' '3'? 1. - V :;’*‘ . i: 3"!" . l ’2 . 'xﬁ~ ”'1— “ . ~ - ‘ l‘ ' . ‘ v4,"-‘
‘ 55'3" '~ 7 . y 5 9" “ ' 7! ' -: - 51., .1 Q «3 Wk I ‘5 ' _ ’ ‘ . ‘3 -——5’ gr:-
i J. \ ‘1'. -| V * _ V ‘_ 1; 1*— . ;‘ A K» H- a." =5 ' "- ‘ ,_\ ‘ i‘ v s‘ 5- .J
> - ._ - ,-, .. 5 - .. - , 7 .45 5 _. :41“; -¢5mq5“ _. ~ -
: " “5;: ‘5 « W "-591 . a5” , —='-~ ~ ' .«. - '19:? ' ‘ ~ ~‘ 5-~~. ‘ ‘ 517-», 1
'E f 3.7- 5:3“; Fiﬁ“ 4 7. f, .' 93“.; 4" 5 ' ' " 1 H F“, ‘7 ; _ — r '41:" _. l
5 ' " “55”)“; 5 " 5-? , -57 x "7 ' "3V 5 ' 7- 1
! IK-‘q: qf-‘jfht:fi?‘ . . ‘ I: ___ a? l‘ 5 fﬁéwf?hyé ‘.~ "v.3 x“ ' ' A I? _—. *1" i 5
5 ‘ 1 gm? ' 'g‘é‘ﬁ .' ‘3‘u—f‘g ?%P? 1‘ r, .' ,—.. 7"- 1. j ,- 2‘“ - ' 7A - .
J“; 335 "c.gV Vii! P . 42‘ g 57"...n-,\ ‘5, “~.» '- ' 5 — ,5
‘ ‘ " ‘15.;9 . X - ‘ ‘ '7‘- .‘ 5 ' “AC “iwvauﬂﬁ 5, 1 5. : 'v
5 "‘45. ‘5“; 5%} Iiwmm 5‘qu”: >7 7:52- 75$ .’5 ’. 5 ‘; - 5' " ' r91 ,
" ““1 P .45“ 21‘. ‘ d .‘K‘ -r f V‘ -~- ??;2: ‘ ‘ * ’ - f;
“w 54")": - 5 t ‘7 g .. ‘3 iv. 1;: " " “‘ - '
,r - ‘uqv’ 7' ,— r w ' q.‘ ' g , >_. .— ... . , 3. 5' , ‘ ~ - . V- 7 ' _
:3?th(‘3‘25’33 ' _'r F" T‘ -‘ ;.. - . '_":‘}‘ ff“) f9 [4; -_ U " ~ ' - ‘3‘}: ’ - _ . .
—, 1 ~17? 7’! - — 7;. 25);, A1g—7“ . 5 ' ‘. ‘ “ ',_ ' .
5 'miaargxi f ,3: ~ Q25! q .5 ‘. ~.. 7. \-~-—~ :‘
‘ ~' at.» ”"55 7‘} f b 3 ' ‘. V-.,J - iii? , > a a 7: ";,_,r— 7 5
. ‘ J L— ‘5?“ ﬂ, " ‘ 4 ﬂ :-‘§ ’ "’ Q‘ r‘ I\’ A, , ﬁg” 7 t— ’ ' J A 13‘ ~ ' k
“5*. “57"”‘37. ,1 ! :5 «XL: 5 ' 5- 55 " “.5151? 1" ﬂ ‘4’ 1 ' ‘ 5 5 ' . 5 r5
4 755, 5 ,_ __ 7-7:" ‘ z» I :5 74* ,5 5:55," aﬁ' \ 5 '5 ' ‘ ‘-
_ 5 ‘s-r‘vjl5531 J “:5? 5? ’4' :3; - ‘L‘ ’1' I ”5‘ : I 71,. - .4
5 .re ' 5 5 . 5 ,r 5 _ : ’ 5 , 5 ’ '
15'. ‘. i~= ”7-" ‘ 7’ 4 a - 5 5" "~ ~ 2 5 1 5: ,« 5 ' 55
3 I. 1 h C'A) ha 9 ’V. ‘ rlls‘I i} ,-na;-} r‘ 9’0 r: 1‘ . 5' ‘i . ' . ,
‘5 1‘ ‘ x '5 _'5 1"“ ["32 1-! 1‘} r 1’ ’ : . ’5 ‘5 , I . ‘ ‘
‘ W M ' l" '2 . 'f‘y“ '1' f l ‘ / I" H 5 1 ‘ ‘ ' ‘
, 5-L“‘ \\ _ ‘ILV“"‘ ‘r‘ﬁ ‘ (J -_,“$r'VJ;. : 5‘ t '. a ‘ - ' I ‘ ° ‘
:5‘1'5 K) [«I > ' 4' ' ‘V" - . 3,432., , tr:.1‘ I 9‘ .1 ~ I ' ‘ I I ~ A
- L ,-5 ‘vi. ‘ 5 _ 7' , _ f :F 1;." T , ’T-”""'..A:; ‘ _ V- " L .- l ‘f ‘
' 3.: | 5' "s 'v -*-. 1 ﬂ . ' " r". ' xi" ‘ "Ty: 5 3 ' ' - — " ' 5
' ‘ ‘ ‘ V 2." r\\ ‘ 4". "‘ '1 r,“ .V'I’b Q 1' "’F ‘ ‘ . I >
- - “5 :5 L ‘ “5 "5 ' 5V 5 .4 ,t 5 .3 ‘ - - 5 5 , 5
3‘ -—« —.'x '—‘* 5 ' \ 5's I 7 .‘t 5 7 .. , 5 ' i
%‘ ‘ : ‘1 _ ‘ ‘ ’. ‘¥ A ,l_ l; '21” '. " ‘ ‘ ‘
h. ‘1 ‘ﬂ ‘i‘ ~ ‘57 .‘.-r 5‘ ﬂ ‘ ‘ ‘ > - -‘ ‘
, "7‘ ‘ 1 .-1r‘.., ' ¢ 1 r". A.:‘ I V ‘ ‘ . ‘5 _ - ‘
-.*- 2"” * - 5“ M. ' .5 5‘ ‘ ‘ W17; _ 7
7 Lti 7; '5 i - -7 '5 .‘".7» J ‘7‘ I”! " i t ' ~ . ‘ -".
. ‘ ' —_,.._~'" , ’_.‘ ‘ ' 5-;1- : . ,' ‘ :‘ 7‘ . |._ ‘ .‘ V. . , ‘7? _’ x
‘ 5 ﬁx _ "7—: 1,.- _ .' J 1' l o ’ ~ ' ‘ '7 ‘ “
—-. ‘ ‘.— '15 ' d4 ‘ i‘u 1‘ ‘- c ’ :3 ‘ . -r I .4 I
> 5 ’3: J" \_ * A h 5 7 ‘ ’ 7 2 ' _. ' 5
- l‘i‘:“ " ‘ l -h 1‘..\" ' —-13‘ 2' ~ ,I
L 5» 5 7} I ‘ . 1 ‘ ', . I ‘ ‘A c.~ > ' a 7 ‘~:__‘ , _ ,
- “4— "- 1 ‘. I. a 'pi:::;7~7‘ - .5 7 7 ' ~ -. I '- ~ ’ 7. -'-'~ A .7; § . "'
. 5 5- - ‘ I ‘”5 ""~*::7‘7 . ,_ - ; 1 2 r' .A ‘
5| .ér'f . _ ~~‘Tf'v-"5EDR _-.' . ‘ __ ’ - ‘ ' 2‘ ; — .~ ' 7-“ F f -.
, -. .75- . 5 7-. : - 7..” -..- 5-. 2- - =5 4‘ ‘
' ~ - ..1~- .7 7-..~.-.7.- n. :7”) ,2; :‘Tkgf-rr-1T—77 .7 , 5 - ’. 5 2
‘1‘“ ‘-" :-l ' 2: 1 ; t... 91‘, -V —T- ’ _ _ - _ " "0““ ‘4‘: '1}::\f::ﬁi":.‘..kgk Q3“ 1 -
. .45! ‘2 ' " ‘ ' ' ' 55’." 0 5r 5 , _ -' ’ ‘ “‘ 'R“ " «‘33::7223: ""5 '
- ~ ' - ‘5 ' 5 ~ - ~ ‘ 4 1- "2-5:.
‘n ‘I . ‘ 5 .-‘-'-.‘~ ‘ ,' f ‘ " ' - I 5: ‘f 7—; 577—5 '57‘ I
75 "x ‘ _ ‘ " 5‘ 5' ' ‘ *ﬁ' " I ' b :7; - 7' a 2:“--‘42/ 3 "-'
R I, >‘ :;‘ VAT“ t a ‘1 5 " f'l '1“ 1" > ‘ . 5 2-" )5' ~ ‘ I 1 I, 7‘7
5 r ‘: - Y‘ . 0.‘ .' 5" 7": H -.-_ ‘ ‘t-‘l 5 ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘1, .‘
'5 1; '5 ”'3 -.e {3 .‘ :1 V; ‘ 2.1 1. >(- .5 k ,, _ .- , {,7 | 5 - 1 Jr .
5 ' ﬂ ’ 0’5 D ~‘.| M,‘ V ‘ ‘ ? ' l ‘ ,* ' - , ' -""‘>‘
- z“ I. w“‘~n"” .' - - . 4 -'V 2&1? ﬂ 1'. I “w... J, ,. A i ‘ I ‘ ' ‘ A > V, ‘t .L 7- ‘I V' 1"“ 7» ‘
‘ a ‘ \ x‘ y 7 7 ‘- T 7"- '— .95 .5155. 54:31. '1 ‘ _, /’f’- ,- ’ . " )3; ‘ ‘ I r f- 5‘) ‘1 ‘5. 1‘
.—-- 5‘ . .v _ 1- ' , :1 _d'." '— 4' 3;:- , ‘ ' -,u"d *‘. 5')‘ " 5,:
75 n. ‘nrxn \_ . - __ , " {4’ 1 y" i y ‘
. 5 Legend , - - , . 5,5 -4: ‘ / ; ' , - 5 ‘
. ' / t h f
V :f' I ‘ v; ‘ .. ' ' lv
. o ‘ _ ‘ - , n . ‘ -\ 5 '
‘ 3-: Ekwan (exnstlng) ;' 5'2; :- - - ., «'2‘ , v 1,; 5 v. ;
A — *--—- ' I I ' ’7 ’
5 $11 : f 5 ' ‘ 5 ’ ‘ ‘5
. . . . ‘ _ - . 5 . P -‘
,_ — Horn River Mainline -5 K - . ‘33 s!“ t 5 ,1 ‘5 ‘
4‘ 5" ‘ “ ‘ ‘V
- - . ' - I . 5 .Y .
. r v v , ~ 4 . 5 ,5
‘ ‘2 9309.? Burial “‘ ’ . - ‘ ‘ ‘ I ‘5 E" ‘ 5'5 ' l
5 5 “ 1L v w ' " 5 ‘ ' " 1‘
1 $7 1:] Cabin Area(Current) 5. ['5’ 55 5 1; 5 575‘ W % 5
‘5 ‘ _ " ’ "I “‘1 "'5 l ‘ ' ‘ :5 Q ; 5 (,2; " -."
5.7. f a a . o n '3'. {‘1' K 1- ‘ ‘- ;., A 15-7. ~1 ' '-
1 ' Camping. Hunting & Fushlng Area (Historic) . 51- : 5 (g. 3.55 ~35 :5: ‘ x4“ ‘5‘ -. :1? 1,51,; 5" 5
. 7 V ' . ‘ ' 9 . ,g‘ﬁl, ,- 3}: _ 9’4 J; ‘,' Hi _.__ II'“ 755’ 3. 5
‘ 9" Hunting Area(Hlstonc) ‘ " 1 #- -- ” . g 1735;; j J {a g 7,5 --"'..5:?_';,‘7 :34" f} h
5 ‘ 7 7 5 5 _ _, ‘ .‘IT . ~33. O?! I, 172‘ _‘r‘ -‘ 5f; " 4‘ _ 5 7 ﬂ" 4", ”i; 1‘5; 55 "3.57;." n: ?‘1
i L. a PTOVinmaI Boundary 57 , 53.3 v.) 7-1 58‘ ,1 " 5 ‘7 jf‘ “.55 231—1 i__'~"~—~ 1451- ”1
‘ ' a W ‘ ‘g -" 'fw'ﬁ T‘J 'L- D _._ 3 1;, j ‘ — —
5 2 ' ,5 5 ' . 5 1‘ r . _» ' .5 i“-"“*‘ " $-
‘ 3;; .3" '; ' - LZT‘. mﬁ’gtL5 4:22;: " gr: , 4 .- r; -, , :7, 5: 291.5: 5. ﬂ. 5. -. 4L __ LU. : 53:: 2‘
_= MaplD: 012
‘* Tradit'onal Use Areas identified by Betsy Martel
7 in relation to the TransCanada Horn R'ver Mainl'ne P'pel'ne
)5 ALL MAPSARETHE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF DENETHA'FIRST NKI'ION. ANY REPRODUCTION OR DISTRIBUTION WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION l5 STRICTLY PROHIBWED.THEINFORMATION
‘ ; , ; CONTANED IN THIS MAP 'WAS OBTAINED FOR THE EXPRESS PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION WITH TRANSCANADA PlPEUNES WITH RESPECT TO THE CABN MAINLINE PIPELINEAND IS NOTA COMPREHENSIVE 0R COMPLETE INVENTORY.
'5 ‘25.; DELINEATlON OR SUMMARY OF DENETHA' FIRST NATION USESAND INTERESTS IN THEAREAS SHOW ONTHIS MAP. FOR SPECIFIC USEAREA MAPS PLEASE CONTACTTHE DENETHA’ FIRST NATION DIRECTLY.
5‘ 't-

Interview Summary i'
interviewee: David Martel
Date: May 13, 2009
Location: Meander River Administration Office ” ‘
interviewers: Cathy Baldin, Kathrin Janssen
”Today, everything is at your fingertips. You can buy anything you want, but, ffyou don’t have 5
money, it’s not at your fingertips. So, in order to get it, you have to work. But work is hot on the ..
land. That is the sad part”

-Davfd Martel '
Background 5
David Martel is married and has children. His children are all grown now and work full time, but 5
they used to go out on the land with him when they were younger. David still harvests food ' ..
from the land. .
Hunting and Tragging ~.
David’s grandmother used to tell him stories of the old days, when people would travel along
the Hay River and north to Kotcho Lake. People moved around a lot in the past.
His grandmother wouid tell him that people hunted while they were traveling. For example, if '
they killed a moose, they would dry the meat and clean the hide. They would use all of the
moose, making moccasins and other things besides consuming the meat.
The Dene people would also trap throughout the territory. in those days people could trap
anywhere, all over Alberta and into BC. Now they have a little trapline area that they feel they .
cannot step outside of. .. .' "
David currently traps in Alberta on trapline #1036. He says if he goes too far west he would be . I
in someone else’s trapline. David feels that the trapline is a very small area. He received his
trapline from his father who started trapping there in the 1930’s. '.
in the 1980’s David supported his family with the trap line and by trapping around Bistcho Lake. L
This is not the case anymore as the low fur price and the high gas price do not make it
worthwhile to trap. The cost of living now is so high that David would only trap for furs if that
would bring him money. The price for the different petts varies from year to year. If lynx is high 5:

one year, then that is the pelt that he traps for. if marten fur is worth more than lynx, he tries
to trap marten. Right now, the market price is so low that David even went and spoke with a
fur buyer from Grande Prairie to see if he could offer better prices. The buyer said not to
“ bother to trap for beaver pelts as it would be just a waste of time. According to David the fur
; ~ prices change from year to year, but the tendency is downward. When for prices are low it is
not worth it for David to go out trapping at all. He would spend too much money on fuel
‘ compared to what he would make.
David cannot drive to his trapline in the summer months because there is a lot of muskeg and
‘ sloughs and no access road. There is however, a pipeline on the south side of his area. David is
l ' glad they opened up a road to the pipeline and a number of wells which enable him to drive to
the trapline in the winter months.
His grandmother passed down stories of winter trapping of beaver, lynx and marten. in the
spring, they would trap beaver and muskrat. David knows that there are other stories of Elders.
For example, he has also heard that they would paddle down the river (Peace River or Hay
. River) in springtime and participate in a spring hunt for beavers. The Elders would also travel to
' Fort Liard River to hunt beaver. ‘ '
Fishing ~ .
As David grew up, he remembers they did not have a fridge or a freezer. if someone caught
fish, they would have to clean and dry it. In the summertime, they would set a net in the creek
right in Meander River Reserve. in July and August, they would also set a net on Hay River.
David says people always have nets in the rivers.
Years ago, David remembers people travelled to Bistcho Lake at Christmas using a team of
horses. They would be able to get Whitefish, jackfish and pickerei at Bistcho Lake this time of
year. They caught many fish, enough to fill the wagons. Then they would come back and share
the fish with everyone in the community which is still the practice today.
Every spring David goes to the Mackenzie River (NWT) to catch greylings which are very good.
This fish has rib bones, not like jackfish that have more bones. to Dene they say ‘Tsu-tya—yah”
{phonetically}, which means grayling.
' . David’s children would often go fishing with him when they were younger. They would travel
to Bistcho Lake and take a trail out to Jackfish Point. in winter they would ice ﬁsh at Bistcho
. Lake and drill a number of holes into the ice.

0210912010      15:SSDlFHSpectra                                                                                 P.0021002
                                 JANES FREEDMAt KYLE
                                                   i)               1]                                      h -r
                                          z n                  _i i’_t         L’ r’i- I ± L_ I’
                                                                 Sufte 4fl 1122 Ma{nlajd $tret
                                                                           —
                                                                 VncOntçBC V625L1
                                                                 Pho.io. 6G4.d7O549 Psx; 604657.2696
                                                                 w wwj &Iaw.ca
                                                                                                         U,
   February 9,2010                                               KosamtM.Kyk                   —
                                                                                                     -,
                                                                 isc;L Lino 604.687.0549, ext. 0?    rn  rfl-
                                                                 E-m.ik rky]bJ&IAw
   Delivered by Fax                                                                                   0
                                                                                               C
   National Energy Board                                         FlieNo. 1003-041                     3,
   444 Seventh Ave. SW                                                                         rn
                                                                                                      .1
   Calgary, AD T2P 0X8                                                                                cj;
   Attention:       Anne-Maxie Erickson
                    Acting Secretsry of the Board
   Dear Ms. Erickson:
   Re:     Rearing Order CH-1-2010 and LII. OF-Fac-Gas-W102-2009-04-Ot
           Westcoast Energy Inc., cartying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission (“Spectra”)                   -
           Fort Nelson North Processing Facility (“the Application” or “the Project”)
   We are writing further to our letter to the Board dated January 5,2010.
  Dene Tha’ First Nation (“DTFN’) has had ffunher discussions with Spectra and we have been instructed
  to advise that DUN’s concerns about the Project have now been resolved.
  DTFN accordingly does not intend to file an intervention or othsrwise participate in the proceeding that
  has been initiated by the Board. DTFN withdxaws its previous request for an oral heating. DTFN would
  have no objection to an immediate approval of the Specin application by the Board.
  Yours truly,
  lanes Frredpan         e Law Corporation
  Per:
  Rosantie
          /    .K
  RMXJejr
  cc:     DTFN ChiefandCouncii
          Valerie Bonnes, Manaser, DTFN Lands Department
          Tracy Campbell, CalIiôo Group
          Robert Freedman, Janes Freedman Kyle Law Corporation
          SpeGta Energy, Attn.; Peter SpickeT
          Natural Resources Canada, Atth.: Bruce Akins
 0210912010    15:S9DlffiSpectra                                                                   P0011002
                                JANES FREEDN KYLE
                                         /    -
                                                                   —              ,L.
                                                                Stkc 340—1122 Mi.nhaSucn
                                                                Va,io&iiwr, BC \‘6 SLI
                                                                Phoiie: 6046&70549 Fax: 6O467269b
                                                                wwJftIawn
       FAX TRANSMISSION COVER
       To:        Anne-Marie Erickson                     Fax;     1-877-2884803
                  National Energy Board
       From:      Rosunue M. Kyle                        Pile:     1003-041
                  rkyle(gjfldawca
      Date:        February 9, 2010                      Pages (including this covei):        2
      If you have any problems with this transmission, please contnt our office.
                                                MESSAGE
     Please see auache&
 02’lOJlO    13:26 FAX 1 250 774 6794            TOWN OF FORT NELSON/NRRD                           001
                        —                                     Northern Rockies Regional         Municipality
     I    T                                -         ..               Municipal Office 5319 - 50
                                                                                              th
                                                                                                 Averue South
                                                                    eagSerce399, FortNeLsDn, BC VOC IRO
    fl 12%                                                                Tel 250.774.2541 Fax2507746194
                                   SALLL     ic.   “    -“
                                                                                        ,wnorthenirockies.ca
                                    zaiD FEB I 0 P 2:
      Regional Munrdpa ity                               Dii
January29. 2010
                                          NEB/0t4E
Anne-Marie Erickson
Acting Secretary of the Board
National Energy Board
444 77 t9
            Avenue S.W
Cagaw,    AS    T2P OXB
Re: Hearing Order GH-1 -2010 and File OF-FacGas-W102-2009-O4 01
Dear Ms. Erickson.
 It has come to the attention of the Northern Rookies Regional Municipality Region Council, as per the
Fort Nelson News that the National Energy Board intends to hold a public hearing regarding Spectra
Energy Transmission (Westcoast) application to construct and operate the proposed Fort Nelson
North Processing Facility.
As per the notice placed in the Fort Nelson News, a location for this Public Hearing has yet to be
determined. Given the proximity to the Horn River Basin the Regional Council for the NRRM would
like to take this opportunity to urge you to hoid this Public Hearing in Fort Nelson.
The Regional Council for the NRRM has diligently worked to prepare for the Horn RNer Basin
 Development. Much thought and effort has been put in motion to ensure we are prepared to service
the gross number of companies nvolved in and around the Horn River Basin area. We feel such a
hearing should be held in Fort Nelson so as to allow for the various companies and organizations
which could be affected by the proposedFort Nelson North Processing Plant to make comment, ask
questions, andlor to be informed as to what to expect from this development.
 We look forward to your response.
 Sincerely,
                         /
 Mayor Bill Streeper,
 Northern Rockies Regional Municipality
02/19/10   13:15 FAX 1 230 774 6794              TOWN OF FORT NELSON/NRRD                                L001
          P H1I!N            --                           Northern Rockies Regional Municipality
                                                                   Mur.101p31 Office 5319 5O’ Avenue SoutI
                                                                                         -
                                                               Bag Service 399, Fort Nelson, BC VOC IRO
                                              cI\LLZ                     Te12507742541 Fax2507746794
           gønalMtsnidpality                  ‘                     I                 vw.northernrockies. Ca
                                                        q    p34
      February 19,2010
      Anne-Made Erickson,
      Acting Secretary of the Board
      National Energy Board
      444 Seventh Avenue SW.
      Calgary, Alberta T2P 0X8
      Dear Ms. Erickson,
      Re:     1-learing Order GH-1-2010 and File OF-Fac-Gas W102-2009-04 01 Westcoast [nergy
              Inc., carrying on business as Spectra Energy Transmission festcoast)
      We are writing in response to the Board’s letter dated February 11, 2010 regarding the
      suspension of Hearing Order Gh-1-2010 until the Board makes a final decision on the process
      to be used to consider Westcoasts application to construct and operate the proposed Fort
      Nelson North Processing Facility (Project).
      The Regional Council far the Northern Rockies Regional Municipality supports the Project and
      has no objection to the Board cancelling the public hearing to consider Westcoasts application.
      The Regional Council understands that time is of the essence and would encourage the Board
      to now complete its review of the application arid issue its decision in a timely manner to enable
      Westcoast to meet its construction schedule.
      Sincerely,
     A—
      Major sill Steeper,
      Northern Rockies Regional Municipality
      cc. Spectra Energy Transmission, P0 Box 11162, Suite 1100- 1055 West Georgia Seet,
      Vancouver. BC V6E 3R5      — Attn Peter Spicker
0311212010    15:26 DTFNacheZreeProject                                  A)Ø25O 381 8567          P.0021023
                                 JANES                                                    KYLE
                                                     Suite 816—1175 Douglas Street
                                                     Victoria, BC V8W 2E1
                                                     Phone: 250.405.3460 Fax: 250.3818567
                                                     www,jfklaw.ca
       March 12, 2010                                Robert C. Freedman
                                                     Direct Line: 250.818.3719
       Delivered by: fax                             E-mail: rfreedman@jfklaw.ca
      National Energy Board                          File No.      1003-046
      444 Seventh Ave. SW
      Calgary, AB T2P 0X8
      Attention: Anri•-Marle Erickson, Acting                                            ‘
      Secretary          of the Board
      Dear Ma. Erickson:
      Re:    Comment on the National Energy Board (NEB) Filing Manual (revised
             November 2009).
      On February l1 2010, you wrote to my colleague, Rosanne Kyle, legal counsel to the
      Dene Th& First Nation (LDTFN) concerning the application by Spectra Energy
      TransmissloniWestcoast nergy to construct the Fort Nelson north Processing Facility.
      In that letter, the Board commented, among other things, that while the NEB’s Filing
      Manual provides guidance to proponents as to the typical Information that the NEB
      would expected to be included in an application, the Filing Manual “is by no means the
      only information that the Board will require a proponent to file.” Later in your letter, the
      Board acknowledged that it has not received information from DTFN about the Filing
      Manual, and invited DTFN to submit comments for consideration by the Board.
MAR—12—2010    16:29                    250 381 8567                     s4                     P.002
 0311212010      15:26 D1FNApacheZnehieProject                             FA)Q25O 381 8567       P.0031023
        As noted by DTFN in varIous submissions made in respect of the Spectra application,
        DTFN is concerned about the information requirements that project proponents are
        required to file in applications to the NEB. Set out below are DTFN’S comments and
        suggestions for revisions to the Filing Manual in particular. Those comments 8hOUId
        also be considered more generally, particularly in light of the comments in your letter to
        Ms. Kyle that the Filing Manual is not the only source of guidance for proponents in
        respect of information they should file with the Board.
        It is our understanding that Apache Canada Ltd. will be applying to the NEB to construct
       the Zama Lake Pipeline Project. DTFN has already sent a letter to the Board and to the
       federal government raising some initial questions and concerns about that project,
       including in relation to filing/application requirements. DTFN would like to meet with
         eprasentatives of the NEB about that letter, as well as In respect of the
       comments set out herein. It is important that thIs meeting takes place before
       Apache flies their application, so that the Board can consider DTFN’S Input and
       communicate any changes In filIng requirement. that may arise from that
       consuitation to Apache In a timely manner.
       Should Apache decide not to file lt application at this time, it is atili important
       that the Board meet with DTFN to discuss DTFN’S comments and concerns
       related to the Filing Manuallproponent filing requirement. In a tImely fashion, and
       before other proponents file applications for projects that may have the potential
      to adversely affect and infringe DTFN’s section 36 rIghts.
      The comments set out herein are preliminary in nature.
      We begin by noting that the NEB Filing Manual was created to provide applicants with a
      clear view of the Board’s expectations for applications, help foster consistency, reduce
      information requests and ultimately reduce timelines required for the Board to make a
      decision on proposed projects before them. it also is the primary source of information
      for proponents for consultation with First Nations, and Involvement of those Nations in
      the environmental review process.
      We further note that the Filing Guidelines and NEB application requirements may take
      on an added importance, particularly if the federal government chooses (as the recent
      Throne Speech and Budget indicate) to transfer more decision-making authority and
      responsibilities from CEEA to the NEB in respect of the conduct of Environmental
      Assessments.
      Overview and Introductory Comments
      Firstly, DTFN would like to highlight that they were not consulted in the development of
     the Filing ManuaI nor on the applicable sections of Canadian Environment
     Assessment Act [such as section 18 (1) (2)]. DTFN respectfully submits the following
      comments for consideration.
                                                       2
MAR—12—2010      16:29                       250 381 8567                 94Z                 P.003
  0311212010     15:26 DTFNxheZanebieProject                               AO25O 381 8567           P.0041023
         DTFN’s main interests in making these comments on the NEB Filing Manual is to
         ensure that the Filing Manual is updated to mandate the full assessment of the
         potential direct, indirect and cumulatIve Impacts of proposed projects on First Nation
        section 35 Aboriginal and treaty rights, More generally, DTFN has the following primary
         interests in respect of environmental assessments carried out by the NEB: (1) ensuring
        that there is a full and proper assessment of the potential direct    1 IndIrect and
        cumulative Impacts of proposed projects on First Nation sectIon 35 AborigInal
        and treaty rights; and (2) eneuring that there is a full and proper consideration of
        TUS and TEK information from DTFN in the EA.
        The comments set out herein focus, for the most part, on the contents of the Filing
        Manual and on the adequacy of the Aboriginal consultation requirements with respect
        to DTFN’s Aboriginal and treaty rights. While the NEB i8 a quasi-judicial body, case law
        directs that because the NEB is the decision making body for certain applications they
        must ensure that the Crown has fulfilled its duty to consult with and, if applicable,
        accommodate Aboriginal peoples. Moreover, to the extent that certain aspects of
        consultation are delegated to industry proponents, the NEB must also ensure that the
        proponent properly carries out any delegated consultation responsibilities.
       Two decisions recently released by the British Columbia Court of Appeal speak directly
       to this issue. Both of these cases confirm that project approvals aró at risk if regulatory
       tribunals fail to take into account, and make decisions about, whether the Crowns duty
       to consult and accommodate Aboriginal interests has been adequate. While DTFN
        recognizes that there are recent Federal Court decisions that may treat the issue of
       Crown consultation differently, it is DTFN’s position that tribunals are required to “act
       constitutionally” In making their decisions. Therefore, full consideration within regulatory
       proceedings of whether the Crown’s duty arid that of proponents have been met should
       be required by the NEB and First Nations should be consulted with respect to the
       criteria by which such consultation should be measured, as well as in respect of the
       criteria to measure the adequacy of proponent consultation. To be clear, the suggestion
       that the NEB must consider the adequacy of Crown consultation does not presume or
       direct any particular result. The NEB is free, provided that a First Nation has the
       opportunity to present full evidence on the issue, to decide that there was no duty to
       consult, or that the duty was properly discharged.
       In Canler Sekanl. TrIbeJ Council v. British Columbia (Utilities Commission) (Carrier
       Sekani DecisIon), 2009 BCCA 67, the Court found that the British Columbia Utilities
       Commission (Commission) has both the jurisdiction and the obligation to decide the
       constitutional question of whether the Crown’s duty to consult (and, if necessary,
       accommodate) exists and, if so, whether that duty has been discharged.
       In the second companion decision, Kwlkwetiem First Nation, •t al v. British
       Columbia (Utilities Commission) (Kwikwetlem First Nation Decision), 2009 BCCA 68,
      the Court relied on the Canler Sekani decision to rule that the adequacy of consultation
       must be assessed at the initial stage of Crown decision making (i.e., when an
       application for a certificate of Public Convenience arid Necessity for an electricity
                                                     3
tIAR—12—2010     16:2                      260 381 8567                   94                    P.004
 0311212010       15:26 DWN4acheZeieProject                                           A)O25O 381 8567    P.0051023
        transmission project has been made), even though a subsequent decision-making
         process (the environmental assessment) made specific provision for the consideration
        of Aboriginal consultation and accommodation.
        While the NEB filing Manual is quite detailed with respect to guidance and
        requirements for most environmental and socio-econoFimic elements required for the
        conduct of an environmental assessment, DTFN notes a marked absence of guidance
        for defining and assessing potential impacts to Aboriginal and treaty rights. Assessing
        the size, scope and extent of potential impacts to Aboriginal and treaty rights is
        essential in the determination of both accommodation measures that may ultimately be
        required, and in the some cases, whether the project should proceed and be approved
        at all by the NEB, Moreover, as per Sparrow and Van der Peet these potential
        impacts must be considered from an Aboriginal perspective.
        For instance, an ESA filed in accordance with the NEB Filing Manual requirements
        may indicate potential changes to plants or animals, and the proponent will set out
        corresponding mitigation measures. However, consideration also needs to be given to
       what the change means to a resource user (the cultural and social impact to their
        livelihood, the potential impacts on their right to priority use of the resource for food,
       social and ceremonial purposes, their ability to teach the next generation how to
       exercise the right, and the abHlty to have places to exercise the right that are not heavily
       impacted by development). Without consideration of.these issues, the true ability of
       DTFN harvesters to exercise their rights is not assessed.
       Further, an activity such as hunting or gathering points to what DTFN do on the land,
       where they do it (i.e. the Traditional Land Use), and their ability to access those areas.
       The NEB Filing Manual does not require or even address this kind of information, since
      this kind of information has not been linked to the very things the ESA is supposed to
       assess, such as water quality, air emissions, increase in noise impacts on plants and
       animals, and how all of this is holistically connected. These omissions are particularly
      troublesome because, among other things, the courts have held that: (a) the Treaty
      and Aboriginal rights of First Nations are constitutionally protected; and (b) First Nations
      have priority use of certain resources, such as for food, social and ceremonial purposes.
       It is. significant, then, that there are no references to Aboriginal and treaty rights in the
      entire Filing Manual. Instead the Manual only addresses First Nation interests in
      relation to “traditional land and resource use”.’ Traditional Land and resource use is not
      a defined term within the Manual, In addition, Treaty and Aboriginal rights are also not
      defined or included in the glossary of terms.
      To the extent that First Nation uses are referred to in the Canadian Environmental
      Assessment Act (‘CEEA”), they are dealt with in relation to current use of lands for
      traditional purposes. The absence of mention of section 35rights in the Filing Manual
      ‘This directed focus is present specifically throughout Chapters 1, 3 and Guide A
                                                            4
MAR—12—2010       16:29                        250 381 8567                          94              P.005
                                                                           ipVi,U i                 r.vvoiuo
       and the way they are dealt with in CEEA are problematic. First, failing to require any
       analysis of constitutionally-protected rights is, itself, hard to reconcile with the law.
      What is protected by section 35 are DTFN’s sectIon 35 rights and not merely their
      current use of lands for traditional purposes. Moreover, there is no legal requirement
      that First Nations confine their use of lands to traditional purposes. The case law
      makes it clear that the practice of rights can evolve over time, although there must be
      some connection to traditional activities, although they can be carried ut in a modem
      form. The focus on “current use” also ignores an Important reality: as more of the lands
      of a First Nation are taken up, other areas within their Traditional Territory become more
      important as locations where rights can still be practiced. There is, therefore, a need to
      focus, as well, on Intended future use to account for the taking up and industrialization
      of lands. A current use test essentially tells First Nations that they must “use it or lose
      it,” irrespective of conditions on the ground.
      Without additional guidance, proponents develop their own ad hoc approach to either
      identifying Aboriginal and Treaty rights, or instead take the position that “traditional land
      and resources use” does not include or is somehow less than section 35 rights. The
      Filing Manual does not reflect current understanding of these concepts or direction
      provided by the courts.
      In 8ectlon 3,3.2, Design of the Consultation Program, the NEB provides specific fIlIng
      requirements for the conduct of a project public consultation process. Again, this section
     makes no specific reference to specific Aboriginal consultation requirements, Aboriginal
     and Treaty rights or environmental/soclo-economic effects to those rights. The courts
     have identified that a public consultation process may not be adequate or sufficient to
     address Aboriginal consultation requirements. Without additional guidance, proponents
     develop their own ad-hoc approach to Aboriginal consultation, or simply include
     Aboriginal communities within their public consultation approach, as though First
     Nations were stakeholders with no more rights or interests than any other stakeholder.
     This section does provide some guidance on how proponents can identify “Aboriginal
     Groups” (which are defined to “[includes] Indian, Inuit and Métis peoples of Canada”):
                      Aboriginal Groups potentially affected by the Project can be
                      identified by considering the location of Indian Reserve lends,
                      Métis or other Aboriginal populations; and the traditional
                      feriitory that may be claimed by one or more Aboriginal
                      Groups; contacting regional Aboriginal organizations or
                      government agencies familiar with Aboriginal Groups; and
                      taking into consideration past experience working in the area.
     Rather than leaving this task up to the discretion of individual proponents, the Board
     should instead identify the Aboriginal Groups that are potentially affected by the
     proposed project and provide this information to the proponents.              Case law also
     requIres that First Nations must be consulted on consultation processes. This would
    also flow from the Mikisew decision of the Supreme Court of Canada, where the Court
     held that both the procedural and substantive concerns of First Nations must be
                                                     5
MAR—12—2010     16:30                     250 381 8567                                          P.006
  0311212010     1 5:26 D1FNAacIeZnfteeieProject                            FA)Q25O 381 8567        P.0071023
        addressed. For these reasons, DTFN recommends that First Nations should be
        consulted in respect of any proponent and Crown consultation program or approach for
        applications, and that a consultation program (with First Nations input) should be a
        requirement placed on a project proponent.
        The Manuel does specify that prpponents should uconsider aumentina the aIication
        with local and traditional knowledge and intearatinQ the information and knowledQe,
        where appropriate. intoihe design of the project. Where local and tradftional knowledQe
        is obtained. Drovide an opportunity for the individual who provided the infozrntion to
        confirm the interpretation of the information and how it was used in the prolect design”.
        DTFN agrees that collecting traditional knowledge and use information and integrating
       that information into the design of the project is an important aspect of consultation;
        however, without an examination of project effects on Aboriginal and Treaty rights, it is
       more likely than not that this exercise will be superficial only. DTFN therefore
       recommends that incorporation of traditional knowledge and land use Information
       should be mandatory and so, too, should incorporation of that information, through
       consultation with the affected First Nation, into project application materials. Otherwise,
       it is difficult to see how the Board could “act constitutionally” in assessing potential
       project impacts against the section 35 rIghts of First Nations.
       Because the Board does not requIre them to do so, proponents generally do not collect
       information on potential effects to Aboriginal and treaty rights and this failure translates
       into deficient assessments. Without this information, it is impossible to do any further
                                         .
       analysis on how such potential effects might be addressed. It cannot be assumed
      that collection of basic environmental Impact data or Information translates into
      effective Information to assess impacts on section 35 rights. While there Will
      certainly be overlap, there may be unique species or VEC. that would give better
      Information on sectIon 35 Impacts. Also as noted earlier       1 there Is a need to
      require information and analysis to understand the social  1 cultural, environmental
      and economic impacts on the rights.
      Some of the considerations that the NEB Filing Manual should address in relation to
      the assessment of impacts to section 35 Aboriginal and treaty rights include the
      following:
           •  Fragmentation: The fragmentation of the landscape, as it affects section 35
              rights, must be considered. It is not only the clearing of areas that can affect
              these rights.
           • Disturbances by all industrial activities: Most small project, includIng exploration,
              camps, roads and even pilot projects, do not require any environmental or
          • cumulative effects assessments. These projects are also not generally shown on
              disturbance maps. As a re8uIt, the predicted cumulative effects on section 35
              rights are underestimated.
           • Mitigation: Mitigation measures are often formulated with a project-specific focus.
              There tends to be an assumption that First Nations are able to go “elsewhere to
              access the lands and resources necessary to exercise their section 35 rights.
                                                        6
MAR—12—2010     16:30                         250 381 8567                                     P.007
  VOl I lU U       1 I UItMXnaemeFrOjeCt                                      A)()25O 381 8567        P.0081023
                  The difficulty, of course, is that there are rarely “elsewhere’s” to which affected
                  First Nations oan go. There is therefore a need to foäus on mitigation both in a
                  larger area than the project footprint and to ensure that accommodation
                 measures are addressed as well, particularly for impacts that cannot be
                 mitigated.
              • Access concerns: Consideration needs to be given to the need for First Nations
                 to be able to travel to and access other parts of their Traditional Territories in
                 order to exercise section 35 rights. Disruption to this ability to travel to and
                 access other parts of a Traditional Territory is an impact that is often overlooked
                 when the potential impacts of proposed projects are assessed.
          In order to meaningfully assess potential impacts to section 35 Aboriginal and Treaty
         rights, it will also be necessary for proper baseline studies to be carried out to assess
                                                                                            —
         how rights were exercised in the past, how they are currently able to be practiced, and
         how the proposed project may interfere with their practice. Performing a baseline study
         would help all parties to understand how much of a First NatiOn’s ability to exercise its
         section 35 Aboriginal and treaty rights is already affected, and therefore better
         understand what the potential impact of further development on these rights would be,
         This also relates to the “future use
                                           TM issue discussed earlier.
         The NEB Filing Manual should address this issue by requiring that baseline studies are
         mandatory. Moreover, in order to fully understand the potential impacts of a project on
         section 35 rights, it is necessary to incorporate something other than a “current
         baseline” approach.. A current baseilne approach, particularly when combined with the
         absence of any requirement to assess impacts on section 35 rights, ignores or
        downplays the impacts of past industrial activity on First Nations’ section 35 rights. It
        essentially accepts, without any analysis, the past impacts of all existing activities.. Set
        out as Appendix “A” to these submissions is a letter that DTFN sent to the NEB in
        respect of the SpectraiWestcoast Fort Nelson North Processing Facility Application
        together with a list of questions that DTFN would like to discuss with the NEB. The
        issues and questions set out some of DTFN’S general concerns about proponent
        applications together with an approach to properly assessing the potential impacts of
        past, current and future activity on DTFN’s ability to exercise their rights. DTFN is of the
        view that those issues questions should be incorporated into future EAs required by the
        NEB. DTFN Is happy to engage in consultation on these issues with the NEB.
        It Is also important to note that the NEB Filing Manual, once amended to address
        potential impacts on First Nation s. 35 Aboriginal and treaty rights, will also need to
        incorporate thresholds, criteria or guidance to assess these impacts.                 Vague,
        unstructured direction, unaccompanied by proper thresholds/methodology, will not be
        usefulfor eIther proponents or affected First Nations.
        For DTFN’s involvement in environmental and socio-economic assessment process to
        be meaningful, the NEB Filing Manual must require that First Nations potentially
        affected by proposed projects are given the opportunity to participate in the following
                                                        7
MAR—12—2010       16:30                     250 381 8567                                         P.008
           iv      i .L! uIrnLI*diWS1er1OJeCE                                           ØAX)250 381 8567      P.0091023
        key ways, such as through being consulted by the proponent and the Crown in relation
        to the following::
             1. Development of any terms of reference, application requirements for project;
            2. Scoping of a project for assessment purposes, including input on the projects to
                 be assessed for any cumulative effects or impacts assessment;
            3. Identification of species, habitats for inclusion in biophysical studies (including
                 Cultural Keystone Species and Habitats);
            4. Identification of spatial and temporal parameters for biophysical studies
                 (reflecting Aboriginal Knowledge of seasonal rounds of selected species and
                 habitats);
            5. Completion of a Project-Specific Traditional Land Use Study with a focus on
                areas potentially affected by anticipated project effects;
            6. Participation in field study components of all applicable studies, including
                heritage, archaeological, biophysical, Traditional Land Use, noise, aesthetics, air,
                aquatic resources, etc;
           7. Development of project-specific mitigation and accommodat         2                 ion measures
                (including avoidance, environmental, and financial); and
           8. Sufficient capacity for involvement and participation of the above.
      Specific Commenis on NEB Filing Manual
      I         NEB FilIng Manual: Chapter 1        — Introduction
     This section of the Filing Manual contains a background and introduction to the Guide
      and provides specific information on what the Manual was designed to do.
     Under section 1.1, Background, the Filing Manual indicates that “applicants must
     submit applications or information filings (collectively referred to as filings) to the Board
     that are complete and that enable the Board to: evaluate the overall public good that the
        A particular concern of DTFN is that “mltlgatIon is often used In a very narrow sense In project
     application and review processes. It Is often assumed that Impacts can be mitigated by replacement
     planting or by fencing a site. That approach faHs to consider that a proponent or the Crown may have to
     accommodate First Nations concerns, particularly where impacts cannot be ‘mitigated”. As well, the
     Filing Manuel needs to make it clear that impacts to be mitigated or accommodated are not only site-
     specific impacts. A site-specific impact approach ignores cumulative impacts and injurious affection on
     section 35 rights caused by one or more projects within the vicinity of the applied-for project.
                                                         8
MAR—12—2010      16:30                      250 381 8667                              94                  P.009
  ui, i u i u     152/ UThNpacflenflerePToject                                  FAQ25U 381 8567     P.0101023
          request can create as well as its potential negative aspects: weiaht the various impacts:
         and make an informed decision that balances, among other things. the economic,
         environmental and social interest at that point in time.” (emphasis added) DTFN notes
         that this description does not specifically outline a consideration or evaluation by the
         Board of Aboriginal and Treaty rights. As the NEB is responsible for ensuring that the
         Crown has fulfilled its duty to consult, as well as the obgations of the proponent where
         consultation is delegated, information on potential impacts to Aboriginal and treaty rights
         as is required and needs to be evaluated. Moreover, absent an express requirement by
         the Board to consider issues such as the adequacy of consultation and the potential
         impacts of ,a project on section 35 rights, it is difficuft to understand how the Board can
         meet its obligation to “act constitutionally as well as its obligation to comply with the
         Public Interest test. To be clear, it is DTFN’s view that the Public Interest must include
         constitutional considerations of the sort set out in these submissions.
         2      NEB Filing Manual Chapter 3— Common Information RequIrements
         This section of the Filing Manual contains common information requirements for
         applications and provides project proponents with guidance on how to approach these
        elements.
        In the introductory portion of this section, the Filing Manual indicates that the Board
        expects to see “details rearding consultation activities and outcomes.” (emphasis
        added) DTFN notes that this does not provide proponents with clear direction regarding
        consultation as Public and Aboriginal consultation are not distinguished. Again    1 DTFN
        recommends that proponents be required to set out a consultation program in
        consultation with First Nations. This is the practice carried out, for example, by the B.C.
        Environmental Assessment Office,
        Under section 3.3.1, Principles and Goals of the Consultation Program, the NEB guides
        proponents to specific goals and principles to employ within their consultation program.
        However, no guidance or principles were specified in relation to Aboriginal and Treaty
        rights. DTFN requires consideration to be given to Aboriginal and Treaty rights,
       potential impacts to these rights and mitigation/accommodation for any identified effects
       to be a key portion of any consultation program.
        Under section 3.3.2, Design of the Consultation Program, the NEB directs the
       proponent to consider a number of factors in the consultation program and design. It
       specifies that “the potential environmental and soclo-economic effects of the oroject’
       should be considered. DTFN requires the consideration of the potential environmental
       and socio-economic effects of the project on Aboriginal and Treaty rights. Both in
       respect of consultation and in terms of the application requirements for assessing
       Impacts, It is also important for the NEBI in consultation with First Nations, to develop
       criteria and thresholds for assessing impacts on section 35 rights. Otherwise, there is
       no way to assess the adequacy of the information the proponent has collected.
       Under section 3.3.4, Justification for Not Undertaking a Consultation Program, the NEB
       suggests that an adequate justification for not undertaking a consultation program would
                                                      9
MAR—12—2010      16:30                      250 381 8567                      94’               P.010
                  -       .-.--.—.-—._
                   .—. -
                                      1-_•• •                                 ,     ,i ,j.,j,       r .ui I IUL
        be that “there is no Dotential for, traditLonal use activities to be affected by the project”.
        (emphasis added) This is an insufficient justification for not undertaking consultation.
         Proponents should be able to show there is no effect on traditional use activities and no
        effect on Aboriginal and Treaty right8, In addition, DTFN asserts that a proponent
        cannot make the determination that traditional use activities will not be affected without
        conducting Aboriginal consultation. To cite some examples, a proponent may take the
        position that a project is on “private lands” or that it is taking place in an area that is
        “previously disturbed.” Neither of those justifications is sufficient for a lack of
        consultation.
       The case law is not clear on whether aboriginal rights can be practiced on “private
        lands.” Moreover, such a consideration and the relevant legal tests may differ
       depending on whether it Is Treaty or Aboriginal rights at stake. Similarly, to simply
       assum. that rights cannot be carried out on “previously disturbed” lands is problematic,
       as it is necessary to assess the facts on the ground in consultation with First Nations. A
       “previously disturbed approach” incorrectly presumes that once an activity has occurred,
       no matter how long ago or in what form, those lands are not available for First Nations
       for exercise of their rights. It allows the proponent, who has a vested interest in having
      the project approved, to dispense with a key means of interacting with First Nations.
      Table 3-1, Other Potential Federal Contacts, does not provide Aboriginal and Treaty
       rights or traditional use activities as a project consideration, or provide a federal contact
      should these be potentially affected by the project.
      3        NEB Filing Manual: Guid. A           — FacilitIes Applications (NEB Act s 52 and a.
      50)
      This section of the Filing Manual contains information required for proposed projects
      that involve constructing or modifying facilities and which require a Certificate pursuant
      to section 52 of the NEB Act, or an order pursuant to section 58 of the NEB Act.
     Within the introduction to Guide A, the Filing Manual specifies that [wJhen assessing
     apolicationspursuant to these sections, the Board must satisfy itself that the facilities
     area and will be required for the public convenience and necessity. In makinq this
     determination, the Board may consider information relating to: engineering: environment
     end socio-economics economics and financial matters: lands:- an&any public interest
     that may be affected by the grantTh or refusina of the aølications”. (emphasis added)
     The Filing Manual once again fails to require any consideration of Aboriginal and
     Treaty rights in relation to the question of w1ether the proposed facilities are required
     and are in the public convenience and necessity. This is also highlighted when the
     Manual refers to Section 58 Applications where it specifies “Iwihile alications made
     under section 58 do not automatically trigger a public hearing, the Board_will still assess
     the application with respect to: public consultation: engineerini: environmental and
     socip-eenmjcs: economics; and lands.” (emphasis added) This section not only
     excludes consideration of Aboriginal and Treaty rights with respect to sec. 58
     applications, but also excludes traditional land and resource use as a distinct
     consideration for the NB.
                                                        10
MR—t2—2010      16:33                         2,3 381 8567                   34Z                 P.011
 IJ..J I .ILV   iv   i     u                                                   QAX)250 8l 8567        P.0121023
             In 8ection A.2.1, Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Introduction, the
                                                                                    —
            Manual specifies that for any size of project the applicant will ‘eneralIy provide a
            description of: the environmental and soclo-economic baseline setting; the effects the
            øroosed project will have on the human and physical environment: the rationale used
            to identify environmental and socio-economic issues: an explanation of the analysis; the
            proposed mitigation measures; and an evaluation of residual effects”. (emphasis
            added) This listing once again omits Aboriginal and Treaty rights and possible
            accommodation measures and does not specifically guide proponents to discuss the
            effects the proposed project will have on those rights. This omission provides
            proponents with the opportunity to not fully evaluate their projects’ effects on Aboriginal
            and Treaty rights. Again, it also allows proponents to move forward by either ignoring
            impacts on section 35 rIghts or without establishing any criteria and thresholds for
            assessing those impacts.
            With respect to Section A.22, En vironmental and Soda-Economic Assessment— NEB’s
            Environmental and Socio-Economic Responsibilities, DTFN also notes the omission of
           Aboriginal and Treaty rights not only in the Manual, but within CEEA, under which the
            NEB may be a responsible authority. As a responsible authority, the NEB must
           ‘determine, together with the other responsible authorities, the scope of the ESA:
           provide to the Canadian Environmental Assessment Registry: a descrløtion of the scope
           of the project; and other information required øursuant to section 51(1) of the CEA Act:
           maintain a project file: monitor public concerns and, if appropriate, provide oportunitias
           for public participation; determine whether the project is likely to cause significant
           adverse environmental effects; determine whether mitigation measures are reauired,
           and ensure, if the project is aroved, the imDlementation of these measures...”
           (emphasis added) The exclusion of Aboriginal and Treaty rights by both the NEB Filing
           Manual and CEEA provides faulty direction to proponents and minimizes the
           importance of assessing this element. Additional sections where Aboriginal and Treaty
           rights are omitted are: section A.2.3, Scope of the Environmental and Soda-Economic
          Assessment What is Scoping?; section A.2.3, Scope of the Environmental and Socio
                           —
          Economic Assessment Determining the Scope of the Assessment; Table A-2: FilterIng
                                      —
           questions for Determining Appropriate Level of Detail for an Application.
          Within section A.2.3 Scope of the Environmental and Soda-Economic Assessment, the
          NEB manual outlines subsections 16(1) and 16(2) of CEEA. These subsections of
          CEEA also contain no mention of Aboriginal and Treaty rights. DTFN also takes issue
          with the wording the Manual uses in this section: ‘Local and traditional knowledae may
          also be considered when conducting an ESA”. Without any direction to consider
          Aboriginal and Treaty rights, and with only a soft recommendation to consider local and
          traditional knowledge, the NEB Filing Manual almost inevitably leads to ESAs that are
          carried out in complete disregard of Aboriginal and treaty rights as well as the
          associated Crown duty to consult. Moreover, given that the federal government often
          states that it will rely on regulatory processes as part of fulfilling its consultation
          obligation, it is difficult to understand how such consultation can be meaningful if the
          NEB and CEEA do not expressly require examination of the Aboriginal perspective, as
          required in case law.
                                                       11
MkR—12—2010          16:31                    20 381 8567                                         P.012
 ui, iiui u     1 b/ umIxheereProject                                         A)C)25O 381 8567        P.0131023
        The “significance test” imported from CEEA is also problematic in the context of section
        35 rights. There is no requirement in the section 35 rights jurisprudence that impacts to
        section 35 rights must be significant before a proponent, or the Crown is required to
        mitigate or accommodate, In considering potential impacts to section 35 rights, the
        WEB, as well as the Crown and project proponents must adhere to the following
        principles, which should be incorporated into the NED’s approach:
        (a)     Section 35(1) of the ConstitutIon Act 1982 is to be construed in a purposive way.
               A generous, liberal interpretation is demanded given that the provision is to affirm
               aboriginal rights: R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075;
        (b)    Any limitations which restrict the rights of First Nations under a Treaty must be
               narrowly construed: R. v Badge,; [1996] 1 S.C.R. 771, at par. 41;
       (C)     When considering the direct and adverse environmental impacts of the Project
               on DTFN’s rights, the term “environment” must be construed broadly and
               includes the rnulative impacts of a project and other facilities to be developed
               in the future on those rights: Dane The’ First Nation v MOE at ci., 2006 FC
               1354, at par. 34;
       (d)     The potential negative derivative impacts of a project must also be taken into
               account: Taku River Tlingit First Nation v British Columbia (Project
               Assessment DIrector), 2004 SOC 74, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550, at par. 32; and
       (e)     The injurious affection that a project causes on the exercise of rights within the
               vicinity of that project must be taken into account: Mlklsew, supra, at par. 15,
               44, and 47.
      Concluding Comments
      Overall, the Filing Manual takes an inappropriately soft approach towards directing
      proponents to consult with Aboriginal communities on impacts to their Aboriginal and
      Treaty rights and to incorporate consideration of potential impacts of projects on Treaty
      and Aboriginal rights. The Manual focuses on traditional land and resource use rather
      than specifically referencing rights. This approach leads to a lack of focus and analysis
      on full effects to Aboriginal and Treaty rights, a failure to assess the potential impacts of
      these effects, a deficiency in appropriate mitigation/accommodation measures and an
      overall flawed approach to ESAs. DTFN requests that the NEB review these
      deficiencies and revise the Filing Manual accordingly to ensure that Aboriginal and
      Treaty rights are respected and that the honour of the Crown is upheld.
                                                      12
MPtR—12—2010    16:31                      250 381 8567                      94Z                  P.013
 u.zi i iu I U  i     uirpacrierereroJect                               QAX)250 381 8567   P.0141023
        As noted earUer, DTFN would be prepared to meet with the NEB to discuss these
        important matters.
        Yours truly,
        Janes
        RCF/mcc
        Enclosure: Append it1”   — October 28, 2009 Letter to NEB with Enclosures
        cc:   Chief and Council, DTFN
              The Honourable Jim Prentice, Q.C., Federal Minister of Environment
              Valerie Bonnes Director, DTFN Lands Department
              Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group
              Lorraine Clayton, Industry Canada
              Graham Carter, Apache Canada Ltd.
                                                  13
MAR—12—2010      16:31                  20 3e1 867                     94’              P.014
                                                                         rAA)Uid) frI          F’.UThIU
                                                 APPENDIX A
  Potential Information Requirements to assess potential Impacts of the Project on
                          DTFNS Section 35 righls
  Set out below are a number of questions which, in our view, would help guide any planning
  process related to potential impacts of the Project on DTFN’s section 35 rights. DTFN’ would
  be happy to engage in consultation on the questions and suggestions below.
 Exercise of Rights Preliminary Questions
                             -
      1. Does the Federal Crown dispute whether or not DTFN has existing, constitutionally-
           protected rights within the vicinity of the Project?
              a) What lands, if any, does the Federal Crown say have been taken up under Treaty
                  8? Within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.?
              b) For any lands taken up or occupied, Is the Federal Crown aware of any
                  consultation that was carried out by the Crown in respect of such taking up of
                  lands? Please provide details.
     2. Has the Federal Crown conducted a preliminary assessment of the strength of claim
          and assessment of impacts
       -     a) Throughout the parts of DTFN’S Traditional Territory in B.C. where the Project is
                  being proposed and where development, such as forestry and conventional and
                 unconventional oil and gs, are being contemplated/have been applied for?
             b) What information, guidelines and/or policy has the Federal Crown looked at if
                 such an assessment has been made?
    3. To what extent, If any, does the Federal Crown factor in potential impacts of the Project
         and subsequent development on DTFNs ability to meaningfully exercise its rights?
         What information and factors go Into such an assessment of impacts on section 35
         rights?
MAR—12—2010      16:31                     250 381 8667                 94                 P.015
            •      .      ...              VJi                                        I aui           r.u i
                                                                                                         2
   Impacts of IndustrIal ActMtles on DTFN’a Traditional Tenitory
       4. What steps has         the Federal Crown taken to determine the extent to which industrial
             development within DTFNs Traditional Territory in B.C., whith has already been
             authorized by the Crown, has already deprived DTFN of a meaningful opportunity to
             exercise their rights?
                 a) How. does the Federal Crown define “meaningful opportunity” in terms of the
                      exercise of DTFN’s rights?
                b) Has        the     Federal     Crown      consulted   with     DTFN      on      what
                      ecosystem/environmental/sociocultural conditions are required to sustain
                      DTFN’s ability to exercise their rights now and into the future and to provide a
                     .meanlrigful opportunity to exercise their rights?
      5. What steps has the Federal Crown taken to determine the extent to which approval of
           any oil and gas and forestry that have already been approved and/or applied for within
           DTFN’S Traditional Territory in B.C., would deprive DTFN of a meaningful opportunity to
          exercise their rights?
     6. is the Federal Crown of the view that there will be or already is Increased human and
          financial hardship and expense to DTFN members to exercise their rights as a result of
          industrial development within DTFN’S Traditional Territory in B.C.?
     7. Has the Federal Crown assessed what lands and associated resources (wildlife, fish,
         water, air quality, access) DTFN requires to carry out Its constitutionally-protected rights
         now and in the future? If so, what specific Information was assessed?
     8. Has the Federal Crown, identified any lands within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.
         that will permit DTFN to exercise their rights now and Into the future, based on the
         answers to the previous questions above?
               a) If the answer is no, why not?
               b) If the answer Is yes, what criteria did you use to make this determination and did
                    you consider what use other First Nations, Métis and other persons are making of
                    these areas and what their future needs are?
              C) Did you consider the       direct and cumulative impact of other industrial, activities
                   within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in s.C. or Alberta when making that
                   assessment?
    9. What federal permits, licenses and approvals have already been granted for oil and gas
        related development within DTFN’S Traditional Territory in B.C?
1AR—12—2010         16:31                     250 381 8567                                        P.016
 V.11 ILILVIU      I.LQUIrflIrJUJt’.L                                            U.OI OX/          Y.UI/1UL3
                                                                                                      3
        10. What federal permits, licenses and approvals have been applied for in relation to oil and
            gas that have not yet been approved within DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.?
   Regional Benchmarks I Targets
        11 .Are there any regional benchmarks or targets In place to assess the impacts of
            industrial activities on the rights of DTFN in the B.C. portion of their Traditional
            TerrItory?
                a) If so, then what are they?
                b) How are they aimed at assessing impacts on the rights of DTFN?
       12. Is the Federal Crown prepared to consult with DTFN on the following, prior to approving
           the Project;
                a) To Identify the key resources (species, numbers, uses, air quality, water quality
                    and quantity, etc.) and lands that DTFN requires to sustain the exercise of its
                    rights, such as through the development of and funding for a Traditional Use.
                    Resource Plan?
               b) The development of appropriate baseline data, benchmarks or related measures
                   for wildlife, fish, associated habitat, air, water quality and quantity and other
                   resources on which DTFN rely to carry out their rights, to ensure that potential
                   impacts on DTFN’s rights are properly and fully assessed and accommodated?
               C)  To prepare a baseline inventory of all such key resources?
               d) To establish effects modeling and proper scientific rigour that can be used to test
                   the conclusions reached In the EA for the Project?
               e) To implement regional targets/benchmarks/measures for DTFN’s key resources
                   and habitat to preserve DTFN’S ability to exercise its rights in the face of the
                   development of its Traditional Territory/to serle as an appropriate and
                  meaningful measure against which to assess potential impacts of the Project,
                  and industrial development, on those rights?
              f) To identify critical lands that should be protected from further development, to
                  ensure that DTFN retains a meaningful opportunity to exercise Its rights?
              g) To work with DTFN to Identify and assess the cumulative impacts of all existing
                  and reasonably foreseeable development on the rights of DTFN including, for
                  example:
                       i. Projects which do not themselves trigger an assessment under BCEEA or
                          GEM?
MAR—12—2010        16:31                     250 381 8567                    94Y.               P.017
  v.i ii u   u     i o u irineevraJect                                         ØAX)250 381 8567      P.0181023
                                                                                                       4’
                           ii. Projects beyond those that have been applied for or approved?
                          iii. The tenures that have already been granted, the potential development of
                               the same, and the potential impacts n DTFN’s rights?
                 h) To implement rigorous monitoring and assessment programs, on a regional
                      basis, to ensure that DTFNs key resources and lands do not fall below the levels
                      required to sustain those rights?
                I) To develop credible and detailed roclamatjon measures for land, water, air,
                      wildlife, habitat, vegetation and other important matters on a local and regional
                      basis?
               j)     To determine how the development in DTFN’S Traditional Terrftory in BC. has
                      adversely impacted or Infringed DTFNs rights and how further development can
                      be done to avoid or minimize such impacts or Infringements?
      13. To the extent that the Federal Crown is prepared to engage In consultations on all or
           any of these Items, could you please Identify:
               a) The statutory and regulatory mechanism(s) by which the contents of any such
                     consultations will be integrated into existing decision-making processes for
                     regulatory approvals?
              b) The means by which the contents of such consultations will be integrated into an
                    existing/ongoing regulatory/approval processes for existing applications under
                    review?
              c) How such consultations and any necessary folIowup will be carried out in
                    sufficient time to be taken into account In all relevant statutory decisionmaking
                    processes?
              d) The process and timalines by which consultations be carried out, including when
                    and bywhom?
     14. If the Federal Crown is not prepared to do so on any or all of these items: please explain
         why not?
tIAR—12—2010       1.6:31                      2C 3e1. 67                    34z                 P.018
 ‘.‘.JI IL.I.’.’I.    iii                                                         TM)U.CI aoI
                                                                                                        5
     Baseline Information to inform the DTFN Aboriginal Impact Assessment
     Proper baseline information needed to understand potential direct, Indirect and cumulative
     impacts on DTFN’S Treaty and Aboriginal Rights and interests has not generally been required
     in the context of regulatory applications. in our view, he following Information is required to
     properly assess impacts and to ensure that for any further approvals, there is adequate and
     meaningful information to assess Impacts. We look forward to discussing these information
     requirements, which could form part of the development of a Traditional Resource Use Plan or
    some other Plan to protect DTFN’s rights in B.C.
     15.        QuantItative Information on DTFN’s Traditional Territory in B.C.:
          (a)      Traditional Territory location and size in miles
                                                              2 and .    2s
                                                                         hecatre
          (b)       Fixed Sites of Cabins, Camps, Communities, Historical Trails, Graves, Trap Lines,
                    Spiritual sites (locations to be kept private unless authorized by the DTFN) within
                   TraditionaF Territory.
         (c)       Current and past potable water sources and infrdstructure•.
         (d)       Amount of land within Traditional Territory taken up for development (energy,
                   forestry, agriculture) and percentage of total Traditional Territory.
         (e)       Amount of land within Traditional Territory proposed to be taken up for development
                   and percentage of total Traditional Territory.
        (f)        Amount of land within Traditional Territory potentially impacted by the proposed
                   Project.
  16. QuantitatIve and qualitative information on Current and Historical Traditional Uses (hunting,
        fishing, plants and medicines, spiritual use):
        (a)        Hunting
           (1)     Main species hunted for food and domestic purposes and the uses made of those
                  species.
           (ii)   Locations and access routes currently used for hunting main species.
           (iii) Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations and access routes used and
                  costs associated with hunting main species based on such changes, both qualitative
                  and quantitative.
          (iv) Estimated amount of current consumption and percentage of total meat intake from
                  hunted animals,
          (v)     Estimate of change in amount of hunted meat as a percentage of total meat
                  consumed from 40, 20 and 10 years ago
MAR—12—2010           16:32                      250 381 9567                    94Z
  ui ‘LI LU i   u     i o u irnneiweurroJect                                  jAX)25U 1 567         P.0201023
                                                                                                      6
         (b)        Fishing.
            (I)     Main species fished for food and domestic purposes and uses made of those
                    species.
            (ii)    Locations currently used for fishing main species.
           (lii) Changes from 40, 2Ô and 10 years ago in locations used for fishing main species
                   and costs associated with such changes, both qualitative arid quantitative.
           (iv) Estimated amount of current consumption and percentage of total fish intake from
                   fishing.
           (v)     Estimate of change in amount of fish as a percentage of total fish consumed from
                   40, 20 and 10 years ago.
       (C)         Gathering Plants and Medicines
          (I)     Main species gathered and uses made thereof.
          (ii)    Locations currently used for gathering main species.
          (iii) Changes from 40, 20 and 10 years ago in locations used for gathering main
                  species and costs associated with those changes.
         (iv) Changes in frequency of gathering activities.
      (d)         Spiritual and Cultural Use
         (I)      Locations currently used for spiritual and cultural practices (locations to remain
                  undocumented unless disclosure is authorized by DTFN’).
         (ii)       Changes in location from 40. 20 and 10 years ago and costs associated with those
                    changes, both qualitative and quantitative.
     (e)         Traditional Economic Pursuits
        (I)      Animals, plants, medicines used for barter or trade.
        (ii)     Changes in bartering and trading from 40, 20 and 10 years ago and reasons for
                 change.
        (ill) Estimated cost of purchasing goods prevIous1 traded or bartered.
    (f)          Traditional Resource Pursuits
       (I)       Current forest and mineral resources gathered and used.
       (II)      Changes In forest and mineral resours gathered and used from 40, 20 and 10
                 years ago.
rIAR—12—2010           16:32                  250 381 8567                   94                 P.020
                                                                                                           7
   17.           Socio-Economic Information
         (a)         Community Demographics
             (i)     Current demographics    -  age, family units, education, sex,       private sector
                     employment, FN public sector employment, self-employment).
            (ii)    Changes in demographics from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
            (iii)   Predicted demographics in 10 years based on current trends.
       (b)          Income
           (1)      Amount and sources (trapping, wage employment, etc.) of income.
          (II)      Changes in amounts and sources of income from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
          (ill) Number and percentage of IridMduals and families rèceMrTg social assista
                                                                                              nce.
          (iv) Changes In number and percent of social assistance recipients from
                                                                                       40, 20     and
                   10 years ago.
      (C)          Expenditures
         (i)       Expenditures on food, housing, travel and recreation.
         (U)       Changes in expenditures from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
      (d)          Resource Sector Employment and Income (energy, forestry, agriculture, other)
        (I)        Current number of DTFN members employed In resource sector.
        (ii)      Changes in number of people employed in resource sector Irom 40, 20 and        10
                  years ago.
       (lii)      Number of DTFN members currently employed by industry operating wfthln DTFN
                                                                                                       ’s
                  Traditional Territory.
       (lv) Number and value of any contracts provided by indistry operating
                                                                                        within DTFN’s
                  Traditional Territory.
18.        Health Information:
     (a)          DTFN health problems (including cancer and respiratory illnesses) by age and sex.
    (b)           Changes in health problems from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
    (c)           Deaths (ages, causes).
    (d)          Changes in causes of deaths from 40, 20 and 10 years ago.
MAR—12—2010           16:32                  20 301 867                      94Z                   P.021
 0311212010        15:29 D1FHpxhe2ne&1eProject                                (AA)U 1 d/
                                                                                                        8
       (e)       Health problems arid causes of death compared to regional population.
  Cumulative Impacts
  19.        Cumulative Impacts on Dens Thas Traditional Territory and its Uses
       (a)     Amount (quantity and percentage) of potential forestry and oil and gas deposits within
               DTFNS Traditional Territory.
       (b)     Amount of land (quantity and percentage) currently leased for forestry and oil and gas
               eqloration and development within DTFNs Traditional Terntory.
       (c)     Percentage of tenures developed In DTFN’s Traditional Territory in past 10 years.
      (d)      Amount of land within DTFNS Traditional Territory taken up for other developments
               (I.e. converted from natural vegetation).
      (e)      Amount of DTFNs Traditional Territory lost to Traditional Uses because of direct and
               indirect impacts of existing, planned and reasonably foreseeable development.
  20.        Current Projects and Activities
      (a)      Fore9try
         (1)   Forest tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project.
         (ii) Size of forest tenures in the vicinity of the Project.
         (iii) Size of forest tenures In DTFN’s Traditional Territory,
         (iv) Estfrnated size of area of direct and indirect disturbance to wildlife relied upon by the
                DTFN In the vicinity of the Project and within Traditional Territory.
      (b)      Linear Corridors
         (I)    Identification of all linear corridors (pipelines, transmission lines, roads, seismic
                lines) in vicinIty of Project and Traditional Territory.
         (ii)   Estimated size of area of direct and Indirect disturbance to wildlife relied upon by the
                DTFN in vicinity of Project arid in Traditional Territory.
  MAR—12—2010        16:32                      250 381 8567                    S4                  P.022
 v.,        IU    I     U IrnhIWIerIUJeL                                       AA)U 3 I              r .U31U.)
                                                                                                        9
         (c) Other tenure holders
         (I)    Identification of all other tenure holders In the vicinity of the Project area including
               exploration leases.
        (ii)   Size of area of held by other tenure holders in the vicinity of the Project and in
               DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
 21.         Reasonably Foreseeable Future Developments
      (a)      The identification of all projects which have been applied for, or reasonably
               foreseeable, or which are likely to be induced by current and planned development,
              with DTFN’s Traditional Territory.
     (b)      The Infrastructure required to serve the future developments.
     (c)      The number of access roads, and size of accessible area, for all future
              developments, including exploration, based upon current averages.
 22.      Traditional Land Use by other First Nations in the area
     (a)      Assessment of the effects on DTFN of land use by other First Nations, Metis and
              non-aboriginal people in the vicinity of the Project.
MAR—12—2010        16:32                     250 381 8567                     34                  P.023
       —. —-          —.— —.
             —                   —.—.‘.-*-.-.
                                                                                                         %I b%A)LIU .U I UIIJI         r .VU 1UL3
                                         JANES FREEDMAN KYLE
                                                 L A \‘\i                C C) RP I               T
                                                                                                 QR    ’IOA                    N
      .   W   CORPO A I ION
                                                                            Suite 816— 1175 Douglas Street
                                                                            Victoria, fl VW 2E1
                                                                            Phone: 250.405.3460 Fex: 250.381.8567
    Date: March 12, 2010
    File No: 1003-046
                                               FAX COVER SHEET
   ATTN: Anne-Marie Erickson, Acting Secretary to the Board, NEB
   FAX No: 4ft3-292-5503
   CC:        Chief and Council, DTFN (James.Ahnassay©denetha.ca)
              The Honourable Jim Prentice, Q.C., Federal Minister of Environment (fax:                       819-933.0279; M1nIsterec.gc.ca)
              Valerie Bonnes, DTFN Lands Department (va1erie.bonncs(ldenetha.ca)
             Lorraine Clayton, MGPO (lorraine.clayton@ic.gcca)
             Graham Carter, Apache Canada Ltd. (GrahamCarter@apachecorp,com)
             Tracy Campbell, Calliou Group (Tracy.Campbell@CalliouGroup.com)
   Number of pages including this cover page
   Please see attached correspondence with enclosure: Appendix “A”
   Thank you,
   Monique Cotton (mcottonifkJaw.ca Tel: 250-405-3469)
   Legal Assistant to Robert C. Freedman
  This communication is intended only for the use by the Individual or entity to which it is addressed and may contain information that is
  privileged, confidential and protected from dlsclosurc under law. If you arc not the intended addressee, or a person authorized to deliver
  this document to the addressee, any review
                                         1 disclosure, copying or other action based on the content of this communication Is strictly
  prohibited. Ifyou receive this communication in error, please ncIfly the sender immediately by telephone or email. Thank you
MAR—12—2010         1S:2S                              20 381 8567                                      94X                        P.001
