[f 5‘ §§eewae§e ?etéeg ?fewez‘gtg :9; g
’2’?” 55$? ~ 323:: iieeae 5131:» ‘ 11. e g
W1 ’1. 155,1 3‘ Q’Si’éé’f“: E§§S“C§E”§J&
«1/ ,2 " ?eete ’ESE‘ 555%{58535 11 ._ j ..
, I £5 ﬂax {Sﬁé} Egggg «g? 1 11 :11
A r“ 30, 2007 ‘g- §§§ g ‘
p 55%;??? 1:? - a :1g 1 {3

Mr- David Young .

Acting Secretary 11
National Energy Board of Canada

444 —~ 7th Avenue SW.

Calgary, AB T2P OX8

Dear Mr. Young: _

Re: Preposed Southern Lights Pipeline, Scope 9: gnvigenmental AssesSment , .

Your file: OF»Fac-0il~E242~2007-01 01

Thank you for your correspondence of April 27, 2007.

Issue:

Section 2.2(a) “Factors to be Consider” reads:

“the environmenta! effects of the Project, including the environmental effects of malfunctions or
accidents that may occur in connection with the Project and any cumulative environmental
effects that are likely to result from the Project in combination with other projects of activities
that have been or wilt be carried out”.

Does the phrase “other projects" include all existing pipelines that have been constructed within
the right—of~way, regardless of ownership?

If the definition of “other projects” is limited to those of Enbridge Pipeline Inc. or limited in some
other way, then we recommend that the cumulative impact of all pipelines in the right-of~way be
considered when assessing risk to the environment.

Rationale:

The current scope may not capture a concern over the Iong—term safety of the proposed
pipelines (Line 13 reversal and a new 286 km light sour crude oil pipeline) that relates to the fact
that they will be constructed inthe immediate vicinity of the existing and, in some cases, aged
pipelines. There is risk in the fact that the otder lines may fail. and/or require repair work and
that those failures and/or repairs may cause additional risk for the proposed lines.

Sin»%?§ely, 5/1

-11“: :1

j, , , €113“ . 5.
Susan Lamb » . . . .
CEO
Meewasin Valley Authority

8541-32007 01:25PM FRGM—Mandall Finder 384 681 $959 T-SBZ P. 081/333 F-El?
' " 22~ 080M 3 ,V WERBCVSB 2T4
Mandel! Pmder 4 '* :ngiiiumm
Barristers & Solicitors ' " ' ""W""‘""m
DATE: May 11, 2007 CLIENT #: 330-00
T0: National Energy Beard FAX: 1~403~292~5503
Attn: David Young, Acting Secretary
Cc: Enbn'dge Pipelines Inc, FAX: 1403-2314380
Ann: Helene Long
Cc: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, FAX: 1—204-983-3629
Aim: ”Lionel Bernier
FROM: Tim Howard
RE: Enbridge Alberta Clipper Pipeline
ORIGINAL BEING SENT BY MAIL: YES: NO: X
N UMBER OF PAGES INCLUDING COVER SHEET: ‘2
MESSAGE
Please see attached letter of today’s date..
Thank you.
CONFIDENTIALITY CAUTION
This, message is intended onty for the use of the individaai or entity to which it is addressed and may contain information mat is
privileged and conﬁdential. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, or the employee or agent respcnsibte far
delivering mg message ta the intended recipient. you are hereby notified that any dissemination. distribuﬂcm at copying af this
mmmunicamn is striczuy pmhibited‘ If you have received this mmmunEcaﬁon in argon piezse notify as immediateiy by feiephime
and retum the 0:395:33! message to as at th& above address at car cost.
IF YOU DO NOT RECEIVE ALL THE. PAGES PLEASE CALL KIM AT (804)681-4146
AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
33$~5$§ﬁ38i3

US~HeZGUY 81:26PM FRGM—Mandatl Finder 864 381 0959 T~582 F.SBZ/DB3 F-EI?
’ 22— csom s .v Bcveaz'r
Mandell Pmder “ * mhiuetxtmms;
B arristers 81 SOHC I‘IOFS M. LOUISE Mew. QC.“ CLARINE Osmova'
BRENSA GAERTNER' MARY Locke MACAULAY”
TEMOTKY mWARo Rosum amass:
:3- ; ( V , Cream. SHARViT Jmm Dwvea'
,5 t t ,0 , ' \ ' V UWSM’ WAeee‘LL 8mm JACKSON
" WWW:
????‘g 3233; A ﬁt N ?xggmg’
teig E; E E ”5? 5: :53 " ’
May 11, 2007
VIA FACSIMILE: 1-403-292-5503
National Energy Board
44% Seveﬁ Avehue 3W.
Calgary, Alberta T2P OX8
Attention: David Yeung, Acting Secretary
Dear Sir:
Re: Southern Lights Pipeline Project, Hearing Order OH-3—2007
We write on behalf of the Roseau River Anishinabe First Nation (“RRAFN‘”) in response
to the NEB’s letter of April 27, 2007, seeking comments on the draft scope of the Canadian
Environmental Assessment Act (“CEAA ") environmental assessment.
The RRAFN reserves the right to pmticipate in, and provide input to, the CEAA
assessment. However, we wish to make it clear that RRAFN does not accept the broad public
consultation process conducted pursuant to C2144, as sufﬁcient to meet the Crown‘s
constitutional duties to the RRAFN. What the law requires, and the RRAFN continue to seek, is
a direct process of consultation With the Crown to address the RRAFN’S speciﬁc interests and
concerns.
We have previeusly advised the NEE that the Southern Lights Pipeline Project adversely
affects the constitutionally protected 5. 35 interests of the RRAFN, and that the RAP N expect
and require the Crown to fulﬁl its duty to engage in a meaningful process of consultation with
the RRAFN, directed towards substantially addressing the RRAFN‘S interests and concerns
regarding the pipeline. Despite the advancement of the regulatery review and approval process,
the Crown has to date failed to take any steps towards ﬁtlﬁlling its duties? The Crown has not
provided the m with infomatien to assist the RRAFN in assessing the impacts of the
project to RRAFN’S interests, 1101‘ has the Crow contacted RRAFN to discuss haw consultation
will proceed.
It appears that at the present time, neither the NEE nor the Crown is taking responsibility
for consultation with the RRAFN. We reiterate that fulﬁhnent of that duty, is a prerequisite to
33omxeem4

l . 854132007 Bl :ZBPM FROM—Mandall Finder BB4 881 0959 T~562 P.0[33/883 F-EIY
.. 2 -
the exercise of any statutory decision—making power in relation to the project, and RRAFN will
not accept a decision made in breach of the Crown’s duties-
We received with thanks the copies of the NEB’s policy regarding consultation With
aboriginal peoples, and will address the same in related correspondence in the near future.
Yours truly;
MANDELL FINDER
Tim Howard
Barrister & Solicitor
TI-I/ki
cc: Chief Terrence Nelson, RRAFN
Helene Young, Enbﬁ dge Pipelines Inc.
Lionel chier, Indian and Northern Affairs Canada
ssomxocom

JUN”25"2UU7 MON 11:48 HM Transport Canada Program FHX N0. 2049835048 . P. 02 .
‘ '*' TranSporr Transports
Canada Canada
PO Box 8550 , , ‘ N @ gOur File: 8200~07~10117
344 Edmonton Street 32? £52“; M E; ~ §§i g N? .
Winnipeg, Maniteba R3C 0P6 V M .............. Your File: OF~F ac~0il~E242-2007~01~01
June 25, 2007
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue SW
Calgary, AB
T2P 0X8,
F ax: 403~292~4800
Attention: David Young, Acting Secretary
Subicct: Enbrid ge Anglicatian- for Line 13 Transfer, Line 13 Iimversatala and Cagacim
Reglacement for the Southern Lights Project
Project Title: Southern Lights Pipeline Proiect '_
Tramport Canada (TC) Environmental Affairs -- Prairie and Northern Region has reviewed the
applifation for the .Enbridge Southern Lights Pipeline submitted to the NEB on March 9, 2007.
TC notes that the proponent indicated in the Preliminmy Information Package that water
crossings associated With the pay" 301: may require approvals under Section 5(1) of the Navigable
Waters Protection Act (N WPA). TC has a requirement t0 conduct environmental assessments of
projects for which approvals will be issued pursuant to Section 5(1) or 6(4) of the Navigable
Waters Protection Act and/or Section 108 of the National Energ) BoardAcr (NEE Act).
As per the Department’s Federal Cocrdination Reglaonse letter of November 20, 2006, TC
requires the proponent to submit applications for appmvals of water crossings to the Navigable
Watars Protection Program before it can dctennine which type of NWPA approvals will be
required for the proj eat. At the present time, the pmponent has submitted a request for
determination of navigability for watercourses cmssed by the proj eat to TC’S Navigable Waters
Protection Program. The Navigable Water Protection Program is currently reviewing this request
and Will advise the proponent Which watsrceurses are navigable. Subsequently, the pmpgmm
will be required ta submit an appiication far approval under the NWPA for watercourse crossings
that are dimmed to be navigable;
Based 01112116: infomaﬁon provided by the proponent in the Preliminary Illfomlation Package, TC
is operating under the assumption that the Depaxﬁnent will have a CEAA trigger and is
participating in the environmental precess as per the “in until out policy”. Accordingly, TC
Environmental Affairs is pleased to: comment on the application. Please note that our comments
Canada ‘

JUN~25~2007 MON 11:48 AM Transport Canada Program FAX N0. 2049835048 P. 03
are limited to the com oncnts of the ‘ - ‘ - ’
our mandate. p PTOJeCt for whxch we have a 111(er trigger and that are within
Reference: 6.2.1 1 Human Occupancy and Resource Use, p. 6-21
, , Table 5.2 p. 6-—74, 11.1 (h) ’
3:113:11??? hgs pro v’i‘ded an analysis of the effects on navigation, within the assessment of
' ' n a e 303- rampart Canada‘s position is that the effect ‘ '
. , , _ , , , - s ofa preject on mm 'at'
31:12 1:23;: RES; 110 navzgate ancli pccplc’s Safety while navigating) should nnly be consiierfc?
' assessment W161? the project causes an env' ' ~ '
. have an impact on navi g ation (indirec ‘ ' Ironmental. effect, winch zntum
- T ﬁfth“). Any Impact on navi at' I ' " ' a
result of the project should not be consi-de ' g non ha: :1: 1303 as a due“
. V . red to be an cnvzronmental efthct D’ '
Pro; eat on navigation are addressed throu- - ' ‘ xrect Impacts 0f the
gh the Navzgable Waters Prorection Ac! and as '
V v .x . , ,. .s c
Zipﬁovals and cagnot be, consrdergd to be cnwromnental effects as deﬁned by the Canadianted
i dlgzronlmenlal A..vsessmem Act. (CEAA). However, any impact on navigation that arises
n greet y, as a result of an envxrom‘nemal effect must be: considered t0 be an 6 '~ ‘ ' ‘
under C MA. nvxronmental effect
If you have any questions ' ‘
‘ _ , please contact Mar ar ‘
or V18. email at Zellism@tc.gc.ca. g at Zalhs-Sklba by telephone. at (204) 983 "1 3 92
Sincerely, ‘
Io-Anne F0?)
- Supf—Brintendent, Environmental Initiatives
En v1ronmental Affairs
Programs, Prairie and Northern Region

JUN~25~2007 HON 11:48 HM Transport Canada Program FﬁX N0. 2049835048 P: 01
'*l Transport Transports | '
Canada Canada
3'‘1 Floor ~ 344 Edmontan Street
Winnipeg. MB R3C 0P6 FACS!M!LE TRANSMITTAL FORM
BQR'DEREAU DE TRANSMISSlON POUR
TEL
W-tc'gcm ECOPIEUR
Fax to: - Téiémpier a :
Davie! Young, Acting Secretary, NEE
Fax number - Numéro de téléccpieur . I Telephone number - Numém da :étéphona
403w292-5503 403~292~4809
F , : - : '
mm De . Fax number ~ Numéro de télécopieur
Margarat Zallia~skiba 204n933—5048
Cdmments: ’ Cammentaira's': V, I J I ..
Pleaaa ﬂind attached Twang art Ca d ' - ' '
Applicatian . 13 na a a Lattar of Commant on tha Enbxzdga Southern IlughI
I i
.
Number of pages including this sheet - Nombre de pages induant celle-ci ’ Transmission date . Data :18 transmission
, 3 2 <3 0 ’7 - O 5 - 02 ‘
WM mm
For additional Information. pfsase ccmtact me at: - Pnur plus da renaeignements‘ cemposer la ;
L204~983—1392 I
WAWWWMWm—n
WWWWM
. N!
4043223 {0405-02} Elna, 3-

                                                    Letter of Comment
Date: 7/3/2007 9:01:42 AM
                                                      Proceeding Information
Project Name:     Southern Lights Project                                    Company Name:     Enbridge Southern Lights GP Inc.
Hearing Order No:     OH-3-2007                                              File Number: OF-Fac-Oil-E242-2007-01 01
                                                        Contact Information
Name: Gwen Charman                                                           Address: 402 Third Avenue South
Title: Director of Operations                                                City: Saskatoon
Organization: Meewasin Valley Authority                                      Province:   Saskatchewan
Telephone:     (306) 477-9124                                                Postal Code: S7K 3G5
Facsimile: (306) 665-6117                                                    Email: gcharman@meewasin.com
Please ensure that your letter of comment includes:
      ·   the nature of your interest in the application
      ·   comments on the application
      ·   any relevant information that will explain or support your comments
For further information, please refer to the Hearing Order on the NEB website at www.neb-one.gc.ca.
                                                                Comments
                                                        Attach additional pages if necessary.
Re: Letter of Comment
    Application for Enbridge Southern Lights Project
    Hearing Order OH-3-2007 and File OF-Fac-Oil-E242-2007-01 01
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this application. The Meewasin Valley Authority is a conservation
agency responsible for about 60 km of river valley in and around Saskatoon on the South Saskatchewan River,
pursuant to The Meewasin Valley Authority Act (SK). We also manage a stewardship organization, the Partners FOR
the Saskatchewan River Basin, which is interested in the river basin from the Rocky Mountains to Hudson Bay. As
such we are interested in any proposals that may pose risks to the quality of the water in the basin, both up and
 downstream of Saskatoon. In the particular case of the Southern Lights Project, our interest relates to the river
crossing of the South Saskatchewan River
Enbridge Pipelines Inc. has put a great deal of consideration into this application, particularly where it relates to new
construction. On the other hand, our comments are generally related to issues surrounding Line 13 reversal and the
redeployment of that line from crude oil service to diluent service. We understand that this pipeline had been
approved previously several years ago. There appears to be less information about this aspect of the project. Our
questions and comments are as follows:
Sustainability: The project will demonstrate sustainability in that, we understand, diluent will be recovered in Chicago
for reuse in Alberta. The use of a pipeline as opposed to vehicular transport also can support environmental
sustainability.
Regulatory change—regulations and requirements for environmental assessment have changed since this pipeline
was first built. Does the pipeline as constructed fully meet 2007 standards? Specifically, we would like to see
double-walled pipe at the river crossing and other design redundancy as appropriate, as we believe that an extra
measure of protection is warranted at this major river crossing. This may necessitate total replacement of the existing
river crossing line. The risks related to the release of diluent into the river are much greater than the risks related to
most land-based line breaks. The increased risks relate to wide-spread environmental threats through moving water
and to the potable water of downstream residents. As an interim measure, we request that the South Saskatchewan
River crossing be hydrostatically re-tested and the cathodic protection system in the vicinity of the river crossing be
carefully evaluated.
Change in substance transported—Line 13 will be converted from a crude oil carrier to a diluent carrier. Please
identify the relative environmental effects in the event of a pipeline failure of this less viscous hydrocarbon? That is,
does the proposed redeployment of the pipeline increase or decrease the risk to the aquatic system and the residents
of the basin?
Morphological and hydrological change—it is not clear from the documentation provided exactly when the river
crossing was constructed. Please provide this information. As the pipeline crossing is downstream of Gardiner Dam
morphological changes of the river bed, particularly degradation of the river channel since the crossing was
constructed may affect the safety and security of the crossing. The longer the crossing has been in service, the
greater this concern may be.
In 2002 the province of Saskatchewan re-examined the probably maximum flood for the South Saskatchewan River at
Gardiner Dam and concluded that the peak discharge had increased by 25 percent. How does the potential increase
in extreme flows affect the security of the crossing? (Considering that extreme flows have been determined to be
higher that originally determined, one may consider that other design floods, such as the one-percent flood, have also
increased.)
Maintenance/repairs to minimize risk—a terrestrial pipeline leak can be very serious; a leak in the river can be
catastrophic. The statistics on pipeline failure show that the probability of a leak is almost certain over longer periods
of time. Saskatoon has only about six to eight hours of water supply in its system, should its supply become
contaminated. The effects of a shut down of the Saskatoon water system could be disastrous. Does the
maintenance/repair schedule provide for the serious consequences of such a leak?
How does Enbridge fund damage caused by failure of its pipelines; is Enbridge insurance or contingency funding
adequate to meet the potential cost is large-scale damage is done or loss of water availability is incurred by
downstream environments and communities?
Emergency response/Notification—we notice the emergency staff appear to be in Kerrobert, about two hours from the
river crossing. How will Enbridge monitor for potential leaks? How will Enbridge arrange to have maintenance staff
on site quickly in an emergency? Are emergency measures coordinated with the local authorities downstream?
Assuming that Enbridge’s SCADA system will shut pumping stations down in the event of a rupture, just how sensitive
is the system to leak detection? In the event of a rupture at the pipeline crossing, what quantity of diluent would enter
 the river before the system shut down?
Abandonment—What is the provision for abandonment and can removal of the pipeline be required? Enbridge
should establish a fund to pay reclamation, the restoration of natural and agricultural lands, and other abandonment
costs.
Cumulative Effects/ 1983 Pipeline—We have anecdotal information that the 1983 pipeline is causing the most concern
of any. Will the cumulative effect of that perceived “problem” pipeline add cumulatively to the new use for the
Southern Lights line?
Sincerely,
- original signed -
Susan Lamb
CEO
Eneirenrnent Enviren nement !

* Canada Eanede i
Envirenrnentel Freteetien I
Prairie Bi Herthern Regien
123 Main Street. Suite 1%
Winnipeg. MB
REE 4W2
June 25}. EDD? File: 419443—3232?
Mr. David ‘r‘eu hg
Acting Secretary
Netienel Energyr Beard
444 — 1"“ Avenue S- W.
Calgary. Alberta
T2P {1K3
Deer Mr. Yeung,
Re: Hearing ﬂrder DH-E-Eﬂt'i? fer the Eeuthern Lights Frejeet:

File: ﬂF-Fee-ﬂil-EEdE—Eﬂﬂﬁm {11

In eeeerdehee with the direetien previded hy Netiehel Energy Beard {the Beard} in
its Hearing Greer DH-S-Eﬂﬂ?’ ef April 1?. Eﬂﬂ'i". Envirenment Canada {EC} is
previclihg this letter ef eernment he the Beard ee apart ef its public: hearing inte the
Eeutherh Lighte Prejeet preeeeei- The eemmehte beeed en epeeieliet er expert
intermetien er knewleelge ereuiciee by EC tn the Reeeeneiele Autherity {RA} is
within the department‘s mendete as deﬁned threugh the specific etetuee end
regulatiene eeeighee te the Minister ef the Envirenment end threugh eur Federal
Authﬂﬁt'f {FA} reie end reepeneihilitiee in pursuant te eeetieh 12 E3} ef the Eenedien
Enuirenmentel Aeeeeemeht Act.
Enuirenment Eenede‘e eemmehte ere heeed en the teilewihg department‘s
reeeeneihilitiee as deﬁned by legieietien end eeeeeietee pelieiee:

{a} Department et the Envirenment Act

{b} Migretery Eiirtie Cenventien Act and Fteguietiene

{e} Speciee at Risk Act

I.“ t1] Benedien Envirenmentei Preteetien Act

iei The Federal F'iz'ilieyr en Wetiehd Ceneewetien
Canadﬁ

Envirenment Envirennernent l.
I‘I Canada Canada I
Envirenn'ient r{Jeneizle has reviewed the eeeumente euernitted fer the empeeed
Seuthern Lighte prejeet. These are {i} Seethern Lighte Preteet Applieetiene by i
Enhridge Seetherh Lighte GP lne._ en hehelf e1 Enhn‘dge Eeethem Lights LF’. end
Enhrictge Pipelines Ine. Uelurne ll 3: III. Fteperl en Envirenrnentel enizl 3eeie~
eeenernie Aeeeeement.

PHDJEET DESCRlP‘l‘IDN

Enuirenrnent |Il'jeneizle underetende lhet |llei'ieeien Seuthern Lighte LL13 preeeeee te
eenetmet end eeerete e new EEE- ltn‘i leng 533 mm Ell] pipeline frem Cremer MB te
the U3 berder neer Gretna, ME. The new pipeline will trenepert eil trem Eremer te
the U31 end is required te handle the uelumee displaced by the prepeeed revereel
el en Enhndge pipeline frei'n Gretne eree te Eementen. The prejeet will include
new pumee required fer the new ell pipeline at existing Enhriege Eeurie. 1‘31enlriei'er
3t. Leen, Meniteu end r3ietne etetiene.

Revereel e1 ﬂew en Line 13 frern the Canada - United Etetee herder neer l‘jrelner
ME te Ectrnenten. we will be required in entler te treneeert Diluent fren'i Chieege. ll.
te Edmenten. AB- Previeien hee else been made fer Diluenl Elelitieryr peinte el
Herdiety. AB and Herrelziert. SH. Te die this. mediﬁeetiene 1e existing pump eletiene
en Line 13 will he required. There are ereeentlllr 1? pump etetiene in service in
Canada en Line 13. Sixteen eltheee eletiene will he meeiﬁee fer reverse flew
eewiee end the seventeenth etetienr leeetee et Eclrnenten. #131 will he redeeleyed.
Hydraulic eetin‘ilzetien etudiee. which are new undemey. are investigating the
peeeible use ef edditienel DEA ferlhe trenepertetien el Dilueht. Shﬂuld theee
studies eenlirm that the use e1 edditienel DEF. is warranted. the number el existing
Line 13 pump etetiene which will ren'iein in eeniiee will be fewer than 13 end
eeneideretien weulizl then be given te ueing eeieting Line 13 pump etetiene in place
e1 new pump etetiene fer the new LSr pipeline-

F-‘reeently. it is anticipated that BRA injectien ekide will he inetellee at existing pump
stetiene eleng Line 13. Eeeh el-tld will he eellueenteinecL eneleeecl and have
dimeneiene ef eeenziiitirnetel1.r 12 metree leng. 2.4 metres high end 3.4 metres wide.
Theee elcicle will reside within existing preperty lenee lines at the existing pume
etetiene. With the exeeptien ef theee DEA ekiee, ne new etmeturee will he required
te reverse Line 13 end exieting Line 13 etnieturee will remain inteet.

At this time, it ie net entieipeteel that the Prejeet ereeenente will he eenetmeting
delivery {tenkegej leeilitiee et the Diluent eeliiiren,r peinte et Edmentem AB.
Hereiety. AEl er Henetzrert. 332.

The new L3r pipeline will be e 33.51313 M3lizley {135.3313 heli'dey}, 533 mn": {NPE 213—
ineh DESI) pipeline end will be et2:5::rtrattirnetel},r 3'31] km {135 miles} in length in
Cenede. Eenetruetien will he in er elengeiee end eentigueue te existing Enhriege
Cenedﬁ

l
Enuimnmsnt Et'l‘lnl'it‘ﬂnrtE-MEHI !
Eanada Canada i

right-sfnwajir tar almsst its sntirs lsngth. illissrsitir'hatsl1.r tsn km {sis miles} at haw

hah—sshtigusus right—sfwway will he rsquirsd. Thrss new as ms stations will hs built i

far this lins, all within ths hauntlariss sf Ehhh‘dgss ssistihg pump statishs. An

slsstrisal switshgsar building is rsquirsd at sash Insatish. This hsw pipslihs will

saws ts slimihats a mainlins light sruds ail bsttlsnssk and ashtrihuts ts insrsassd

srucls sii transpsrtatish capacity sat at Wsstsm Canada.

As s rssult sf ths rsssrsal si Lins 13. ssisting valumss prsvisusly transpartsd tram

Esmshtsn. AB sh Lins 13 will haw hs transpsrtsti sh Ehhhdgss Lins 2- Lins

2 will hs msdifisd by replacing 1s Lins 2 pumps and sis matsrs at ssistihg pump

statians- lh additisn. DEA ihjsstian skids will he rsauirsd and instaltsd at ssisting

Lins 2 pump statishs. Eash skid will has sslfmhtaihsd. snslsssd and has

simsnsians st apprssimatsly 12 mstrss tang, 2-4 metres high and 2-4 matrss wids-

Thsss sI-cids wilt tts sitsd within the ssistihg prspsrty isnss lihss rat ths ssistihg

pump statishs.

EDMMENTS AND REEDMMENEATIDNS

Envirshmsnt Canada has idsntiiisd ssusral majsr arsas far sshssrn mast nstahly

ths ranting thrsugh ssusral majsr wstlahd ssmplssss and the submissisn st ths EA

prisr is the ssmplstish st wildlifs and plant surveys-

1. WETLANDS Ssstisn 5-1-? Pg 5-33

This is a studs ail pipsiins that srsssss a Iargs numhsr sf wstlands and is thsrsfsrs

an arsa far sshssm. Asssrsing ts ths arapahsnt 33km ar 29 psrssnt sf ths tstal

lshgth st ths sipslihs srsssss wstlahsi habitat- This is ssrrsharatsd lay the

alighmsnt shssts. Ssvsral majsr marsh samptssss. including the ﬂak. Plum anti

Glsnhsrs samplssss ars srsssss- Ths sfisst sf ail spills an aquatic ssssystsms

ssh Isa devastating. as svidsnssd by rsssht Enuirsnrnsnt IBahada rsspshsss ts s

humhsr sf spill and [sakags EVEHIE. Altsmatws ranting sptisns wsrs nst prssshtscl

ih ths EA.

Environment Canada rsssmmsnds ths prspansnt prawids aitsrnativs

rantings that will avoid the majsr wstland ssmplssss. and athsr mitigatian

measures that will prstsst thsss wstlands tram pipeline failures. Areas of

ssnssrn that shsuld ha avsidsd include the dense knob and ksttls

tspagraphy hstwssn HIP BEE and QTT. the routing thrsugh ths DakiPlurn

wetland samples, the Ducks Unlimited Cabin Prajssts, and Glsnhsrsiﬂlaslt

Slaugh samples. This will st:r1I:-.I:Jrnitast|3,,r rsduss impacts ts ths assssiatsd hativs

prairis and parkland habitat.

E. WETLANDS Ssstish 3.2.12 Pg 5—14

Cansdﬁ

}.

Envirenment En'u'irennement 2
Eanada Canada I

The ereeehent etatee that impaete te wetland funetiee are reveteihte in the ehert

term and ef tew magnitude. In either eaee there 1t-tritl he a less ef wettahe funet'reh i

fer several years until the habitat reeeeere and in eeverat inetaneee the habitat wilt

be eemanently meeiﬁee. Reeeeery ef wetland hahttate are atee dependent upeh

envirenmental eenttl'tiehe and during extreme eenditiene. eueh as very wet er er}.r

yeare. rehabilitatieh et wetlahee Will heheme pretraeted.

Envirenment Canada recommends the preeenent previde meaeuree te

eempeneate fer the interim leeeee ef wetland tunetien.

The alignments sheets are at eueh a small eeale that it ie ditﬁeult te eieeeth fine

reetihge areune water hediee-

The prepenent is requested ta preetee the buffer distance between the

pipeline and the 1t1ﬂﬂ year high water mark fer Demare Sleugh and the

wetland at HP 1124.

The pipeline ereeeee a large wetland haein at HP 1161. in wet years this haste will

he very attractive te water letting hirtte.

Envirenment Canada reeemmende alternative reutinge that aeeid the baein

be used and ether mitigatien measures that will preteet thie haein frem

pipeline failures.

3- RARE PLANTS Seetteh 5.1.33 Pg see

The preeehent etetee that feur SARA Iieted plant species ranges everlae that at the

pipeline renting and further states that the reute eeee net eeepert the preferred

habitat at these tear eeeeiee. The reeert eeee net elaherate new the eeneluetehe.

her are survey reautte prettieett.

Environment Canada reeemrnende the prepenent prevtde the infennatien en

eaeh epeetee te substantiate their peeitien.

4- WILDLTFE Seetien 6-2-9 Pg ﬁ-‘Iﬂ

Ne wilettfe eurtreye were undertaken during the breeding eeeeen. Ae eueh

Envirehrneht IrGahae'a eahnet aeeeee tmpaete te wildlife eeeefee er whetherthere

are areae that may eehtain etgn'rﬁeant er unique eeneentrat'rene ef wildlife.

Er'wtt'ﬂan‘IEt'lt |Eahaea underetahde that euweye are etahhed fer EDEN.

Envirenment |[ianalzta reeemmende that wildlife surveys be undertaken an

and adjacent te the RDW end results he presented in the regulatery ageneiee

fer review prier te appreval ef the prejeet.

Canadﬁ

Enviranmant Envirnnnamant !
Canada Canada i
Ehwrahrnant Canada nataa that tha prapahant haa mmmittad ta amid aanatruatian
within the April 1 tan July 31 paak naating pariad aiang aagmanta that travaraa Ianda i
aaaaaiatad far hind uaa, and that anyr aauiatiaha will he in :anaultatiah with fadaral
and arawhaial wildlifa autharitiaa {Appendix EA. Pg EA-ﬁ}. The executive summary
atataa that thara will ha canatruatian aativitiaa a:haduiad hatwaan April 1 and July
31-
Envimnmant IIlianaiﬂa would Him the prapanant ta clarify apaaiftaallyr which
araaa will be auhjaat ta aummar aanatruatian.
5. SPECIES AT RISK 5-2.13 Pg 5-19
The propanant has not yet unclartaI-can auwaya far PLANT and WILDLlFE Spaciaa
at Rial: nar has the auway mathadalagy haah prauidaa. tJ'iarai-‘ara Enviranmant
Canada is unable ta aaaaaa the impacts ta thaaa apaaiaa.
Enviranmant Eanada undaratanda that auwaya will be undertaken in Elli]? Tha
prapanant prapaaaa a numhar at measures which they will “aanaidar‘, but until
auah time as the auwaya have been aamplatad with tha actual maaauraa ta ha
implamantad. and praaantad ta ragulatara. it ramaina apaaulatwa.
Environment Canada raaammanda tha prapﬂnant ha required to prauida fur
raviaw, tha auway raaulta, the survey mathndalagy, apaaiaa aaarahad far and
tha mitigatian maaauraa iapaaifia tn the survey raaulta} including timing
raatriatiana, aathaak diatanaaa and Etzintirtgan-ayiI plans, priar ta appraval and
aanatruatian.
E. EMERGENCY REEPDNSE PRDCEEDUREE
Tha prapanant daaarihad in its Eﬂntir‘lgﬂﬂﬁy’ plans {Appendix EB 1tr‘al. It}. amarganay
praaaduraa far apilla. diraatiana] drilling praaaduraa and inatraam drilling mud
ralaaaa aantinganay plan. The pmpanant rafara ta praaaduraa ta daai with
mntaminatad aaiia at variaua pump atatiana iaaatian 5313-23}. and a list at
EmEI'gEil't-Efy' aantaata Appendix ED. Alaa in aaatian Bi] —!napaatian1 Manitan'ng and
FE‘IHDWrUFl, aauaral managamant anti anwranmantal prataatian plans are daaan‘had.
Hawauar, halaw ia a Iiating at intarmatian that Ehwmnmaht Canada raaammanda
ha inaludad in tha Ematgancy Haapanaa Plan.
Environment Canada raaammandatiana far Emergency Frauantian,
Fraparadnaaa and Ftaapanaa Planning
1. Prajaat-ralatad Spill EUHtingEnﬁy and Ernarganay Haapanaa Plaha shall he
prawdad ta tha apprapriata ragulataryr aganciaa far rewiaw.
Canadﬁ

Enuirehment Envimnnement I
Cenede Eenede i
E. F'iene eheli be eeheietent with indUEl'l'jt etehderd publieettehe eueh es '
Emergency Ftenning fer induetw tCANiCSAEHt II. I
3. Envirenrhehtel Emergency Reeeenee Piehe eheuld include;
e. An inventer',r ef eetreieum preduete,ehen1ieete and ether hezerdeue
substances and eeeeeieted eterege teeilitiee end leeetiehe te he need
during eehetruetieh end eperetienel pheeee-
I1 Identiﬁcatieh ef reeeurees {equipment and etetf} te he eh-eite endier
eueiieble te reepehtt te envirehmehtel emergeheiee.
e. Preeeduree fer reeeei'itiinug,I te epilie end reieeeee including an incident
repertihg end hetiﬁeetieh system.
:1. A list ef reeeenee ergehizetiehe end their reeeeetive relee-
e. Eleehup ehe eieeeeei ereeeeuree fer generated weetee.
f. Mehtterihg end feilew-ue ereeeduree te ensure that mitigetiue
meeeuree are effective-
4. Envirehmentei En‘iergei'ii.";3.r Fteeeehee F'lehe eheeld eiee address:
3. The types at emergencies thet might reeeenehly he expected te
eeeur, including petehtiel en-eite end eft-eite eeneequeneee-
h. Preventieh {eveluetien ef riekeL Preparedness (reeeureee tit training),
Reseenee {netifieatien 3t mebiiizetien et resources} entt REEVEW
[eeeeeemeht ef damages and reeteretieh ef envirehment}.
e. Invehr'ement et eemrhunitiee ehtzl etel-teheltiere whe may he impeeted
by an envirehrnentel emergehey er inveiuee in en eh'ierg:_tehi:1u.r
reeeehee
DRAFT SEREENJNG REPDRT
Envirehmeht Cenede'e understanding et the NEE puhiie hearing preeeee ie that
feilewihg the :Ieee ef the erel pertien ef hearing. the NEE!- will reteeee e dreft
eeteehihg reeert fer eerhmeht.
Envirenmeht Eeheee reeeeete receipt ef the tireft eereehihg reeert enee it ie
eveilehie.
Sincerely
“561),. gm
(€51 ..____ .
Sheehe Sigureeeh
NDireeter
Envirehmehtel Preteetieh ﬂperetiehe Divieieh
Preirie end Nertherh
Cenedﬁ

I'll Envirunment Envimnnement !
Canada Ganaﬁa I
i
E: Helene Lung
Senior Reguiatnw Eﬂunsel
Enbridge Pipelines lnc.
ﬂﬂﬂﬂ 425 1st Street. SW
Calgary. Alberta TEF’ 3L8
Mr- E}. E. Davis
McCarthy. Tetrault LLP
Suite 330B. 421*?th Avenue S. W.
Calgary. AB TEF' 4H9
Canadﬁ

4 *6 1” A. .

Environmenta! Stewardship Division gig? em a {3% 52 H W 3,5
Environmental Assessment & Licensing Bianch 3mm 5i 5 5i 3% “E

123 Main Street, Suite 160

Winnipeg, Manitoba R3C 1A5 -
www.govmb.calcanservetion/envavggfovats

June 26, 2007 .

Michel L. Mantha

Secretary .
National Energy Board

444 7th Ave SW

Calgary, Alberta
T2P 0X8

Dear Mr. Mantha:

Re: Enbridge Southern Lights Pipeline GP Ltd. Project -- National Energy Beard - Hearing

Order OH ~3— 2007 File OF-FaC«Oil-T242~2007-01 01.

Please find enclosed letters of comment on the above referenced application filed by the
Manitoba Department of Conservation, the Department of Water Stewardship, the Department of
Intergovernmental Affairs and the Department of Infrastructure and Transportation.

4 ly,
Environment Officer
Environmental Assessment &
Licensing Branch
cc. Alvin Dyck
Karen McRobbte
Jeremy Angus
l I O I I
spirited energq

Page 1 0f 2
Blunt, Bryan (CON)
From: Dyck, Alvin (MIT)
Sent: Tuesday, June 26, 2007 1:48 PM
To: Blunt, Bryan (CON) .
Subject: Enbridge Southern Lights Pipeline Project - MIT Comments
Manitoba Infrastructure and Transportation (MIT) has reviewed the above~noted proposal as requested in the
below email. The following comments were generated:
~ In general, MIT wouid prefer ‘Altemate 1’ at the proposed relocation in the Souris Area (adjacent/across
Provincial Trunk Highway [PTH] 2 at Wawanesa) because ‘Alternate 2’ would require two new crossings
of PTH 2.
- Crossings of Provincial Roads and Highways shall be directionally bored to eliminate open cutting and
resulting settlement and /or traffic problems.
- Any disturbance of the right—of—way shall be repaired and returned to pre—extsting conditions, and
maintained for two years following construction.
- Erosion control devices shall be used where erosion potential is high such as steeper ditch gradients
and erodable soil conditions.
Alvin Dyck, B.Sc. (Env.)
Environmental Site Assessment Coordinator
Manitoba Infrastructure and Transportation
14th Floor ~ 215 Garry Street
Winnipeg, MB R30 321
Phone: (204) 945-6351
Fax: (204) 945-0593
From: Btunt, Bryan (CON)
Sent: Thursday, March 29, 2007 3:08 PM .
To: McRobbie, Karen (CON); Hill, Gordon C (CHT); Grift, Sheri (MAFRI); Romeo, Joe (MIT); Fox, John (STEM);
Jopling, David (IAF); McDougal, Rhonda (WSD); Beza-k, Dave (CON)
Subject: Southern Lights Pipeline Project
The National Energy Board has posted the EA for the Enbridge Southern Lights Project on their website. Please
review the information» in the EA as it relates to your department's mandate.
The NEB is expected to announce a hearing order for the project within the next several weeks. Any comments I
receive from you will be forwarded to the NEB for consideration in- advance of the hearing. Comments should be
forwarded to my attention by May 4, 2007. An e-response is preferred.
Please advise if your department pians to provide comments on the Southern Lights project directly to the NEB.
Ge to:
gggggﬁtgﬂwnebjgge.geeeitberzgftiveiinkexeﬁtenemitgtebii53%66078eebsﬁctéenxbrewseéﬂegijfname
Thanks .
Bryan Btunt
Manitoba Conservatiee
Environmentat Assessment & Licensing Branch
123 Main Street
Ste‘ 160 Union Station
6/26/2007

untuiiﬁé ’ Am;
DATE: May 7, 2007 Memo rand um
TO: Bryan Blunt FROM: Jeremy Angus
Environmental Assessment & Policy Analyst
Licensing Ecological Services Division
123 Main St, Suite 160 Manitoba Water Stewardship
Winnipeg, MB. R30 1A5 200 Saulteaux Cres.
Winnipeg, MB .
R3J 3W3
PHONE: 9454007
FAX: 945-7419
SUBJECT: Southern Lights Pigeline Pro‘lect
Manitoba Water Stewardship has reviewed the above noted project and submits the following comments
for your consideration:
. Please note that authorization under the Water Rights Act is necessary if construction dewatering is
required.
. Manitoba Water Stewardship is still waiting for some additional information from the proponent which
is required before authorization can be granted for the pipeline to cross Provincial Waterways.
Jeremy Angus
cc. R. McDougal
R. Matthews
P. Dhaliwal

Page 1 of 1
Blunt, Bryan (CON)
From: McRobbie, Karen (CON)
Sent: Friday, May 04, 2007 10:22 AM
To: Btunt, Bryan (CON)
Subject: RE: Southern Lights Pipeline Project
Bryan, this branch has received no concerns regarding the above proj ect.
Policy Analyst
Sustainable Resource & Policy Management Br.
Manitoba Conservation
Box 38, 200 Seulteaux Crescent
Winnipeg MB R3J 3W3
Ph: (204) 94256747
Fax: (204) 945—4552
Email: Karen.McR0bbie@gov.mb.ca
From: Blunt, Bryan (CON)
Sent: Thursday, March 29, 2007 3:08 PM
To: McRobbie, Karen (CON); Hill, Gordon C (CHT); Grift, Sheri (MAFRI); Romeo, Joe (MIT); Fox, John (STEM);
Jopling, David (IAF); McDougal, Rhonda (WSD); Bezak, Dave (CON)
Subject: Southern Lights Pipeline Project
The National Energy Board has posted the EA for the Enbridge Southern Lights Project on their website. Please
review the information in the EA as it relates to your department's mandate.
The NEB is expected to announce a hearing order for the project within the next several weeks. Any comments I
receive from you will be forwarded to the NEB for consideration in. advance of the hearing. Comments should be
forwarded to my attention by May 4, 2007. An e~response is preferred.
Please advise if your department plans to provide comments on the Southern Lights project directly to the NEB.
Go to:
“:3sz“eheeeeceemeeeﬁs8?“eexe?twceiieeetdeeéeeeaeeﬂeeeeemeeeeseemwe
Thanks
Bryan Blunt
Manitoba Conservation
Environmental Assessment & Licensing Branch
123 Main Street
Ste. 160 Union Station
Winnipeg, Manitoba R30 1A5
{204) 945-7085
(204) 945-5229 Fax
e-mei£z eweagieetg’é‘geymﬁgg
5/4/2007

Page 1 of 2
From: Brown, T erry O (IAF)
Sent: Wednesday, May 02, 2007 3:27 PM
To: Blunt, Bryan (CON)
Cc: Jopling, David (IAF)
Subj ect: FW: Southern Lights Pipeline Project 0
Bryan:
Having reviewed the info regarding the Southern Lights pipeline project as found on the web site and the Gazette
newspaper, I can advise that we have identiﬁed no land-use concerns with this proposal ~- the pipeline crosses
only 13 miles of the very northeast corner of the RM of Argyle which is part of the Deloraine ofﬁce area.

-- the CAO for the RM advises that they have been well informed of this project and went to the local hearing
held by the National Energy Board -— the RM has only one concern and that is with the potential damage to
municipal roads during the construction phase -- the RM is in process of adopting a policy with regards to
requiring, any road damage to be repaired at the time of construction.

-~ the RM looks forward to the new pipeline tax revenue -- existing pipelines already pay about 118‘” of the total
yearly RM budget.

Terry Brown

From: Jopling, David (IAF)

Sent: Wednesday, May 02, 2007 11:12 AM '

To: Leach, Chris (IAF); Pearce, Terry (IAF); Brown, Terry 0 (IAF)

Subject: FW: Southern Lights Pipeline Project

See link below regarding a proposed pipeline that will be constructed in your planning jurisdictions. Any
significant concerns please let me know. Sorry for forwarding this so late.

Dave J. .

David Jopling MCIP

Provincial Planning Services

Manitoba Intergovernmental Affairs

604-800 Portage Avenue

Winnipeg MB R3G 0N4

Phone: (204) 945—8353

Fax: (204) 945-5059

From: Blunt, Bryan. (CON)

Sent: Thursday, March 29, 2007 3:08 PM

To: McRobbie, Karen (CON); Hill, Gordon C (CHT); Grift, Sheri (MA-FRI); Romeo, Joe (MIT); Fox, John (STEM);
Jopli’ng, David (IAF); McDougal, Rhonda (WSD); Bezak, Dave (CON)

Subject: Southern Lights Pipeline Project

The National Energy Board has posted the EA for the Enbri-dge Southern Lights Project on their website. Please
teview the information in the EA as it telates to year department's mandate

The N’EB is expected» to announce a hearing order for the project within the next several weeks. Any comments I
receive from you will be fonlvarded to the NEB for consideration in advance of the hearing. Comments should be
forwarded to my attention by May 4, 2007. An e~response is preferred.

Please advise if your department plans to provide comments on the Southern Lights project directly to the NEB.
Go to: .
m1,“mv.\nm,1~.m\nmmﬂta Dnaa‘i Drn;onfo\D;no];npa\anfkpm i iohtchAF‘ nnmmen’r htm 6/26/2007

g: From: 06/28/2007 21:5? #316 P .001x’004
! I 3
Peepeeklsls Cree Natlon No. 81
9.0. Box 518 ’ ADMINISTRATlON CENTRE
BALCARRES. SK Telaphona: (806) 334-2578
see 000 Fax: (306) 334«ZZBO
Chief Bev Bellegarde m»?
Peepeekisis First Nation :3:
BOX 518 , 2w ~
Balcarres, Saskatchewan '
SOG 0C0 5% a; ' -
Work: (306) 334—25 73
Fax: (306) 334-2280 P -
June 28, 2007 :g
Ms. Lynda Roy
Regulatory Ofﬁcer
National Energy Board _.
444 Seventh Avenue SW ’
Calgary, Alberta . . ‘ _ .
T2? 0X8 . - "
Tel: (403) 2992795 .- 5 ‘ .
Fax: (403) 292-6503 ~ , . .
RE: Alberta Clipper Project Southern Lighthipelin'e Pquect
Dear Ms. Lynda Roy, '
On behalf of the Citizens and Government of 1,116: Peepeekisis First Nation, of which we
are a signatory to the intemational Treaty # 4"si'gned between the Crown of Great Britain
(now Canada in right of the Crown) andthe Original Nations of North America, I am
formally announcing our Opposition to the applications that Enbridge Inc. has ﬁled with
the National Energy Board speciﬁcally for the construction and operation of the Canadian
segment of the Alberta Clipper Project,’ and-Ithe Southern Lights Pipeline Project.
The basis for our oppésiticn is manifold and are indiéatéd herein:
> Enbridge Pipelines did mat cagsult With the ‘Peepeekisis First Nation Citizens 0r
it"s? Government as» required under the duty to consult regulations, and the
international standards of gaining ﬂee, prior and- informed consent;
33' ”m. proposes? seuthem Eights pipelim prefect Wiii ran thrwgh a Treaw Four
traditional and sacred burial grcund;
> The proposed southern ﬁghts pipeline project will exceed the maximum number
of six inches ear farefmhers ceded and agreed upon in the signing of T reaty Four;
> Pecpeekisis First Nation did not at anytime agree to the illegal transfer of the
natural resources to the Proﬁnce, as contai ned in the Natural Rasource Transfer
Act of 1930;
~ 1

From: 06/28/200? 21:57 #310 P 002004
> Enbridge in trmtsporting oil and gas to the United States via the Alberta Clipper
and Southern Lights Pipelines pmject is guilty and directly complicit in the
eXportation of “STOLEN” natural resources that rightfully belong to the First
Nations of Canada;
> Nowhere in, the Alberta Clipper nor the Southern Lights Pipelines Proj ects does it
mention or indicate how the First Nations Peoples will directly beneﬁt from this
project;
> Embridge, and the Energy Beard of Canada in cooperation with the Provincial and
Federal Govermnents are complicit in the denial, violation and abrogation of all
Rights accorded to Indigenous First Nations and Indigencus Peoples under.
International Law and International Standards including the UN Declarations on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, UN Free Prior and Manned Consent, UN Land
Rights Study of Indigenous Peoples, Indigenous Peoples Permanent Sovereignty
Over Natural Resources, UN Study on Treaties, Agreements and Other
Censtructive Arrangements Between States and Indigenous Pecples,
> Enbridge and the Energy Board of Canada in cooperation with the Provincial and
Federal Govermnents are complicit; in the denial and non-implementation of
observations and recommendations made by the UN Economic, Social and ~
Cultural Rights Committee - established to monitor Canada’s conunitmcnts to the
“International Covenant on Economic, Secial and Cultural Rights”, in the denial
and nonvimplementation of observations and recommendations made by the UN
Civil and Political Rights we established to monitcr Canada‘ 3 ccmmitméms to the
“International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”, in the denial and non-
implementation, and in the denial and non~implementation of observations and
recommendations made by the UN Committee on thc Elimination of Racial
Discrimination -- established to monitor Canada’s commitments to the
“International Convention on. the Elimination of A11 Fonns- of Racial
Discrimmation
The proposed 1,607 kiiometre (1,000 mile) Alberta Clipper proj act will “ensure that
timely new pipeline capacity is available to meet producers’ needs to transport growing
supplies of crude oil from Alberta's oil sands and the Northern United States to reﬁnery
markets in the US. Midwest,“ said Patrick D. Daniel, President and Chief Executive
Ofﬁcer, Enbridge Inc. "The combination of Alberta Clipper and Southern Access, which
is currently under construction, can ultimately provide Ransportation capacity of up to 1.2
million bpd from Albezta to the US. Midwest.”
The proposﬁd Southern Lights ij’ect will connect Canada's vast oil sands with key
reﬁnery markets in the; US; Midwgstg and. it will require new pipelina and use of some
segments» of existing. Enbridge: pipeline that will be reversed: fer seuﬂ1~to-nerth diluent
service. A 36pm diluent pipeline is propesed to be built ﬁom Edmonton, Alberta, to
the heavy oil sands region in northern Alberta.
The project also will require the construction of a new 313-mi1e, 20~inch crude oil
pipeline from Cromer, Manitoba, to Clearbrook, Minn, to replace the capacity of an
existing Enbridge pipekine that will be converted to diluent service.
2

t From: 06229200? 21:57 #316 P .008/“004
Therefore, Peepeekisis First Nation CANNOT and WILLNOT support the above
mentianed projects which in essence and purpose are transpoxting and experting our
natural resources to the US. market. Further, the Peepeekisis First Nation has not been
adequately consulted regarding the above mentioned proj ects. Awareness does not
constitute consultation and approval.

According te Enbridge’s Corporate Social Responsibility, they recognize the value and
importance of public consultation and stakeholder engagement as a key component of
business practice. Yet; Peepeekisis First Nation as e Stakeholder With a vested interest in
the land the proj ects will run through was not involved in personal consultation meetings.
Methods such as project information mailouts and public notices of the above projects
does not constitute consultation.
Despite that fact that Peepeeldsis First Nation’s speciﬁc claim has not been resolved for
over 21 years with the Government of Canada. As a signatory to Treaty Four, Peepeekisis
First Nation does have an interest and right within the propesed southern lights project
axea. .
The National Energy Board needs to recognize the importance of the issue of
archaeological ﬁnds for the Treaty Four First Nation Peoples. Therefore, should the
Certiﬁcate be issued, to ensure the protection and proper handling of any archaeological
ﬁndings, the Board will include a condition that directs Enbridge Southern Lights Project
to immediately cease all work in the area of any archaeological ﬁnd and
contact the Chief and Elders Council of the Peepeekisis First Nation rather than the
Saskatchewan provincial authorities. Only when approval is granted by the Chief and

_ Elders Council of Peepeekisis First Nation would the Applicant be able to resume work.
Should the executive members of Enbridge Pipelines wish to effectively consult with the
Peepeekisis First Nation Governing body and the Council of Elders, I extend an
invitation to the Executive of Enbridge Pipelines and the Minister of the National Energy
Board to meet with the Peepeekisis Chief, Council and Council of Elders at the River
Cree Resort in Edmontan, Albetta on July 17, 2007 @ 10:00 am...
Should the National Energy Board approve the Enhridge Southern Lights Project proceed
regardless of em implied and expressed opposition, and without consulting with the
Citizensand Gevermnent cf Peepeekisis First Nation, we will not hesitate to enact public .
ereteets end tegal challenges. efthis prejeeh eddiﬁemliy we will tanneh a major
intematienat and national. campaign. to bring this injustice to the attention of global
friends fer further actient
In closing. the Second Decade of the World’s Indigenous Peoples, the Millenium
Declaration and the UN Action Plan Against Racism among signiﬁcant other global
initiatives in which the World countries including Canada have endorsed and committed
themselves to achieving and implementing would be and in this particular instance

3

From: 00/39/200? 21:5? #816 P .0051? 00:11
constitute an outright denial, abrogation, and violation of the Indigenous Peeples Rights
and cxistences. If Bnbridge’s application is considered over the rights and existences of
Indigenous Peoples, it is sending out the message that indeed Canada through the
National Energy Board places capitalism as a priority over rights. Our peoples are
Indigenous to the Land and to their Environments and thus are afforded and protected
under International Status and International Law.

We ask that the National Energy Board consider ﬁrstly, the Rights of'Indigenous Peoples,
the traditional occupied territories in which we live, the unﬁnished business of New
Resources and a host of other issues contained herein before considering the Enbridge
application.
As can be noted that we have sent copies of this letter to many intematienal, national,
regional and local interested parties for their information and action. You will also note
that this. letter is sent to you on a Natienal Day of Action date, where the objectives are to
inform all civil and political society on the existence of rights of Indigenous Peoples of
Canada, the fact that this letter coincides with this date is probably no accident.
Should you wish to discuss this matter further, please do not hesitate to contact me at
(3 06) 334-257 3 or on my cell at (306) 331—8067. I look forward to your positive response
in this matter. .
Respec - y,
W U QM
1e ev Bellegard '
C.C.
Intematienai: Her Highness Queen Elizabeth Royal UK Landau, England
The Queen’s. Representative — Canada’s Governor General Michael]: Jean
United Nadens High Commissioner for Humm Rights
Ms. Louise Arbour '
United Nations Permanent Forum for Indigenous Peoples
President and Secretariat
Amnesty Intemational Headquarters London, England
S’urvivai International Headquarters London, England
National: Canadian Government Prime Minister Stephen Harper
Minister of Indian Aﬁ‘airs Canada Jim Prentice
MP Gary Mmsty Indian Aﬁhirs Critic ~ Liberal Party
Assembly ef First Natieee - Naﬁenai Chief P‘h‘ii Fcntaizne
Regime}: Federatien 9f Saskatchewan Indian Natiens
, Chief Lamenee Ieseph
Treaty 4» Chiefs,
Treaty 6 Chiefs
Local: Peepeekisis Ceuncil of Elders
Peepeekisis Citizens
4

EBI38X2QE? 18:53 284-983—5692 HEALTH CANADA SEP PAGE 82/83
l \P I Health Santé
Canada Canada
Healthy Environments Diregtjon générale, ‘
and Consumer Safety Santé'eﬁvironnementale et
Branch ‘ sécurité des consommateurs
Safe Environments Program :5? win “ 33; pa 3?: "L E
510 Lagimodiére Blvd. ’ ,, V M W“ W” ”mm
Winnipeg, MB RZJ 3Y1 g; W i; OF-Fac—OiI-§g§Z.-gagc0;;01 01
Mh—zooaé‘fos'i
June 29, 2007
Mr. Michel L. Mamba
National Energy Board
444 - 7th Avenue
Calgary, Alberta T2P OX8 '
Subj act: Enhridge Swthem Lights Freject Appiication Review
Health Canada has reviewed Enhridge Pipeline Inc’s Southern Lights Proj ect Application, dated
February 2007, as found on the National Energy Board’s website. Health Canada is providing the
following comments as a Federal Authority under the provi sions of the Canadian Envimnmenral
AssessmentAct with an interest in participating in. the NEE review of the Souﬂaem Lights Project:
Acoustic Eavironment ’
It is noted in Section 5.2. of the ESA that noise surveys and impact assessments were not
undertaken for some locations where residences exist in close proximity to pumping stations (e.g. '
Manitou, Kingman, and Metiskow) and increased levels of noise may be experienced during
operation. A complete assessment including predictive modeling is necessary for all locations with
nearby receptors that may experience increased noise emissions. '

' Mitigation measures were not proposed at pumping stations where the measured noise levels
where found to currently equal or exceed the allowable nightntime ch1 standard (e.g. Kcrrobert,
Cromer Terminal). As the ESA indicates that relative noise levels at local residences may
increase during operatiom mitigation of any cmnulative effects should be taken into consideration
prior to construction rather than reactively as part of a monitoring program.

Section 5.1.5 states that an increase in noise levels (due to the 131* pipeline) over existing levels
. will not occur dating aperations. This conﬂicts with infannation provided in the socio~economic
smnmaries found in Section 5.2 and also with Table 6.6, which statea that ambient noise levels at
pump statiens may or wiii incmase duriztg operation, respectively
Radiation Pratectitm ,
It is unclear if any assessment was undertaken regarding naturally occurring radioactive materials
(NORM) for the constitution and operation phases of the project. Radionuclide beating deposits
may be encountered dming construction or maintenance activities at pipeline facilities such as
pumpmg stations or valve sites. Mitigation measures should he provided as apprOpl-iate. The
Cangdz‘ctn Guidelinesﬁar the Management of Naturalbz Occurring Radioactive Materials (NORM)
prowde mformation regarding the assessment and control of potential sources or modes of
radiation exposure by workers er the public.
, m <
Ca 11 ada

88f38f2887 18:53 284—983-5592 HEQLTH caNaDA SEP P&GE 63f83

I can be reached at (204) 984—83 18 shcmld you have any questions regarding these corﬁmems.
Sincerely yours, ’ '
Rick Grabowecky
Regional Environmiental Assessment Coordinator
cc: Stan I-Inatiuk (HC)

Tak Nakmoto (HC) ,

Kent Lien (NEE)

Peter Booﬂ'lroyd (CEAA)

. I Page 2 of 2 ‘

853383288? 18:53 284-983-5892 HEﬁLTH CANﬁDﬁ SEP PAGE 81f83
'*. Health Santé
Canada Canada
Health Canada Santé Canada
Hveatthy Environments and Consumer Safety Branch Direction générale de la santé environnementare at
Manitoba and Saskatchewan Region de Ia sécurité des consom-mateurs
. 51:0 Lagimodiere Blvd. Région du Manitoba et de la Saskatchewan
WiNNiPEG, Manitoba RZJ 3Y1 5‘10, bNd Lagimodiére
WINNIPEG (Manitoba) RZJ 3Y1
Facsimile Transmittal Notice
Avis de transmission de fac-similé
DATE: June 30, 2007 ‘
TOIA: Mr. Michel L. Mantha, Secretary, National Energy Board .
Telephone/Tétéphone: (403) 2924800
Fassimﬂe/Facﬂ-simiié: (403) 292.5503
FROMIDE: Rick Grabaweeky, Regionai Environmental Assessment Coordinator ‘
Safe Environments Programme
Telephone/Téléphéne: (204) 984-8318
- FacsimiIe/Fac-similé: (204) 983~5692
SUBJECT/SUJ ET: EhbridgeISouthem Lights ‘Pipélin‘e Project ‘
#0 F~Fac3¥0il¥E242~2007-01 ~01
# OF PAGESI# DE PAGES: 3
(including transmittal sheetﬁnclus I’avis de transmission d-e fac-ssimilé)
. COMMENTSIREMARQUES
Piease ﬁnd attached, Health Canada’s comments regarding the review of Enbridge
Pipelines’s application for the Southern Lights Project.
Regards, ‘
Rick Grabowecky
l l'
Canadé

FiSheries and Oceans Péches et Océans
Canada Canada
501 Uaiversity Cres. 501 University Cres. :5 L: . . ‘Yéﬁfﬁie Vane référence
Winnipeg Manitoba Winnipeg Manitoba :" i“ w OF :Fac-Oil-E242~2007~01~01
R3”? 2N6 R3T 2N6 * a e“ z;
Fax (204)983—4180 Fax (204)983-4180 3:3? W; :5 E “03$;ﬁa Qm‘m reﬁrence
June 22, 2007 s.
Kent Lien
National Energy Board
444 7 Ave SW
Calgary, Alberta
T2P OX8
Dear Mr, Lien:
Subject: Embridge Pipelines Inc. (Enhridge) -- Southem Lights Pipeline Project Draft Scope
This letter is intended to provide further clariﬁcation regarding F isheries and Oceans Canada’s
(DFO) role pursuant to the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) as well as to
deﬁne DFO’s position relating to the draft scope for the Southern Lights Pipeline proposal as
submitted by the Nationai Energy Board (NEE).
As you may be aware, based on the proposed pipeline right of way DFO has identiﬁed the need
for the installation of multiple watercourse crossings. Enbridge Pipelines Inc. has proposed, via
their consultant Applied Aquatic Research Ltd, open cut crossings of several ﬁsh bearing
watercourses in Manitoba, which may require subsection 35(2) F isherz‘es Act Authorizations.
Based on this infonnatiom DFO is able to conﬁrm our role as both a F ederal Authority with
respect to the broadly scoped proj ect as well as a Responsible Authority with respect to aspects
of pipeline construction that Will result in a harmful alteration, disruption and or destruction of
ﬁsh, habitat. .
In considering the draft scape provided by the NEE and our discussions, it is our understanding
that the NEE, Transport Canada, and Indian and; Northern Affairs Canada are Responsible
Authorities purSuant t0 CEAA for” ﬁlis proposal and are reviewing a broadly seeped prej eat.
DFO Will not he commenting at: the prepesed bread scape 0f the prey? eat and Wm instead
iéentify a seeps 0f prejeet that meets ear regulatery {espehséhﬁities pars-aaat ta the Fisheries
zeta? aeé CEﬁA aaé that aireetiy seiates te effects te fish aha fish habitat resetting from:
eenstmetiea at the méiiaee Phase he assured" that BFG Witt werk eiesety With the federal
team ta eesare the eaaisemeata} assessment presses is. net dapiieateé and aay expert advice
fwm DPS is previéeé as aeeessary. EEG wit}; aaéeﬁake a screening Eevei assessment. pursuant
t0 CEAA ami the scape 0f pm} eat fer the purpeses 0f the DPS assessment will he asseciated
With the waterbody crossings where Authorizations pursuant t0 the F isheries Act are necessary.
At this time Enbridge has not provided sufﬁcient speciﬁc inﬂammation relating to stream
crossings in Manitoba; accordingly DFO is not able to identify a scope of project for our
. ., . see
Canada

. - 2 '-
CEAA review at this time. Once all required information has been received, our scope of
project will be determined and forwarded to the federal team.
If you have any comments or questions concerning the above, please contact me directly by
telephone at (204) 9'84~6080.
' Sincerely,
Beverley Ross .
Regional Manager, Envimnmental Assessment fer Majm Proj eats
Central and Arctic Regicm
0.0.: P. Boothroyd (CEAA, Winnipeg)
C. Churchward (DFO, Winnipeg)
G. Hopky (DFO, Winnipeg)
G. Faulkner (DFO, Ottawa)
J . Hovdeb-o (DFO, Regina)
T. Olson (DFO, Lethbﬁdge)

BQ?29~2667 55:14PM FROM—Mandell Finder 654 681 3959 T-BQB P. 802/383 F*TTB
’ 22 -1050 M s a v 3c v 8 3T
Manda“ P: nder ‘ $$th
0 V 9 ' WWW
B aWISt'e r5 & SOhC'tors M. LOUISE MANDELL, QC}? Gamma Dsrmva‘
BRENOA GAERTNER" Mam LQCKE MACAUUW”
, \ TthéGTHY HOWARS ROSNAN DANESH
{ V \ Casa‘ﬁ. SHARWT JANELLE. DWYER’
" " ‘ . x Q . », LINSSMWAODELL Shaw JACKSON
.2335“? ' Pawn! Law Ctrmwafion
3:3; m «3: 5:3: :55: 5:; 5333331333:
June 29’ 20 07
VIA FACSMLE: 1-403-292-5503
National Energy Board
444 Seven Avenue S.W.
Calgary, Alberta T2P 0X8
Attention: David Young, Acting Secretary
Dear Sir: '
Re: Southern Lights Pipeline Project, Hearing Order OH-3~2007
Further to the NEB’s letter of June 3, 2007, we provide the following letter of comment
regarding the Southern Lights Pipeline Project on behalf of the Roscau River Anishinabe F irst
Nation (“RRAFN”).
We have previously advised the NEE of the RRAFN’s view that the Crown is required to
consult with and accommodate the RRAFN regarding the Southern Lights proj cct, before any
decisions are made in relation to the project. In our letter ofMay 22, 2007 we conﬁrmed that the
NEB itself does not fulﬁl the Crown’s duties towards the RRAFN, which leaves the duty
squarely with the agencies of the Crown. To date, despite RRAFN’S requests for a process of
consultation, the Crown has taken no steps in that regard.
The Southern Lights project is one of several major pipeline projects which, if approved,
Will directly aﬂ’ect RRAFN’S Tenitory and constitutionally protected rights. For the RRAFN to
have a meaningﬁﬂ opportunity to assess these projects, and appreciate their implications for
RRAFN’S community and constimﬁonaily prctected rights, there must be resources provided to
retain the experts and legal counsel required to critically examine projects of this complexity and
magnimde. The RRAFN does not itself have the resources required to de that work, and without
funding support, the invitation to panicipate in the NEB’S hearing precess is a hollow invitation.
The: N53 has mass it siesta: that it {tees mt have mandate to provicie ﬁmdihg support to
affected First Nations. While the case law establishes that funding support is an essential
eiemen’t 0f 3. fair and honoma‘ble consultation prrmttsssa the Crown has in this case entirely failed
to initiate consultation, and has provided 110 capacity support to the RRAFN. The RRAFN’S
rights are therefore at serious risk of falling between the cracks created by the NEB ’5 limited
statutory mandate, and the Crown’s inaction.
ssomwoozs

Ug-ZQ-ZBUT 05:14PM FROM—Mandal I Finder 694 581 8959 T~896 ?.BU3/BU3 F475
- 2 -

In the circumstances the RRAFN are restricted to providing this letter of comment, by
which we wish to register the RRAFN’S objecticn to the Crown’s ongoing failure to act
honourably and initiate a process of consultation with the RRAFN. In our view, this failure has
direct itnplications for the exercise of the NEB’s statutory powers. The duty of consultation and
accommodatien is constitutional in origin and, as stated by Southin IA. of the BC. Conn of
Appeal in the Masqueam decision, lies ‘mpﬁsueam” of the statutory powers delegated to the
NEB. The conclusion to be drawn from the case 1aw,is that satisfaction of the Cromw’s duty
must precede the issuance of a certiﬁcate by the NEE.

In light of these concerns, and in the interests of better understanding the NEB ’3 process
and role, we ask that the NEB advise as to its practice, or policy, in regards to making decisions
on project applications in cases where the Crown has failed to comply with its duty to consult
with and accommodate affected First Nations. Speciﬁcally, will the NBB issue a certiﬁcate, in
the face of record of non-complianee by the Gram: with a high constitutional duty? Your
assistance with an answer to this question would be geatly appreciated. \

Yours truly.J
MANDELL FINDER
Tim Howard
Barrister & Solicitor
TH/lci
cc: Chief Terrence Nelson, RRAFN
Helene Young, Enbridge Pipelines Inc.
Lionel Bemier, Indian and Northern Affairs Canada
ssomxmozs

8%292887 35:14PM FROM-Mandall Finder 884 881 8959 T-SQB mamas F~7T6
Maude“ P; nder ‘22 ~ “??:?éﬁéé‘ﬁiel’s‘w‘ééoiﬁ‘é‘ii‘é‘éz
Barristers 8: Sohotors
DATE: June 29, 2007 CLIENT #: 330-00
TO: National Energy Board FAX: 1-403-292-5503
Atm: David Young, Acting Secretary
Cc: Roseau River Anishinable First Nation FAX: 1 4044212584
Atth: Chief Terrence Nelson
Cc: Enbridge Pipelines Inc, FAx: 1403-23 1.73 8-0
Atm: Helene Long
Cc: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, FAX: 1~204~983~3 629
Atm: Lionel Bernier _
F ROM: Tim H oward
RE: Enbridge Alberta Clipper Pipeline
ORIGINAL BEING SENT BY MAIL: YES: No: X
NUMBER OF PAGES INCLUDING COVER SHEET: 3
MESSAGE
Please see attached letter oftoday’s date.
Thank you.
CQNFIDENTEAUTY CAUTiON
Th3? message is intended only for the use of the individaai a: entity t9 wh' n 't‘ add . .. sed , . . 1 . ' * ' '
priyﬁeged and mnﬁdential- If {:he reader of this message 33 not the intencigd Lajgipienfir meagr1$33¥efgggézggiggg23:23"
2:;2’322? c216: {?Eessssgigc: ta mﬁ‘giggdelfd recigient. yam are hereby notiﬁed that any dissem§na-tion. distribution at coming of this
~ * r0: ». ‘ ' ' ' ' - - ~ .
and return the ofigma; gésage ta us 3:313:13 e :gggcaeégfedsf: gifgitglcahcn m error, pleése mufy us immedlatefy by {elaphone
IF YOU DO NOT RECEIVE ALL THE PAGES PLEASE CALL KIM AT (604)6314146
As SOON As POSSIBLE.
sao-omoaozs

July 1?, 2007
E H E R G Y L T D.
David Yeung
Acting Secretary
Natienal Energy Beard
444 — 7‘" Avenue sw.
Calgary, Alberta
T2P-0X3
Dear Mr. Yeung
Re: Hearing Order OH-3-200?; Seuthern Lights Pipeline Prej eet
MPLAXSJXPL Netiee ef Metien July 6, 200?
Baytes Energy Ltd. (Baytes) eppeses the metien ef MPLNSAPL.
Baytes is in fill] suppert ef the pesitien put fensard by CAPP in their letter dated July 17,
200? — see attaehment.
Baytex is a medium sized predueer ef eil & gas having appreximately 40,000 EOE per
day ef preduetien ef whieh abeut 55% is Canadian heavy sear etude eil. Aeeerdingly we
eensume signifieant quantities ef diluent (C5+, eendensate, naphtha). We are very
eeneerned abeut the petential fer supply shertages if this prej eet {lees net preeeed.
Any unneeessary delays in the implementatien ef this pipeline will be detrimental tn the
eeenemie health ef heavy etude eil predueers in the basin as well as that ef the peeple ef
Alberta. The diluent presided by the pipeline is essential te the eeenemie and erderly
develepment ef heavy erude eil in Alberta. CAPP has dene an eseellent jeb ef
deseribing the nature ef the prehlems ereated by a delay.
Baytes, with respeet, requests that the metien be dismissed.
Years truly, Hm.“
r” -
II. { j-E'ﬂfm K/ﬂ {Lib
R. Shaun Petersen
Viee President, Marketing
attaeh: CAPP Letter dated July 17, 200?
MiiﬂﬂiPPﬂﬂﬂﬂLeﬂer ﬂfSUppﬂl‘t - Sﬂuthﬁrn Lightg ?-]?-ﬂ‘?udﬂc ‘ :Lll:_LdLalinu:]1l:}r htltun'e I! | :ﬁll': II”: ﬂ LJ-Jlf:Iqu-J.‘
I. iaig‘ary .-"ti}'ic-.*a:. 'J'til‘ ta‘-.-"'__'- l..-:::J;Ir_:..e: -..-,-..n-~.t-,E,-;‘.:_al..;1._I._.I§;I_:.-:_~III1J II

ma." mrw .r’i'ﬁht It'll] IUN
H] H i Ht}: t i Wt I'ttt thin I It“.
July 1?, 200'?
FILED ELECTRONICALLY
Mr. David Yeung
Aeting Seeretsry
National Energy Beard
444 4 7 Avenue S.W.
Calgary, AB T2P 0X8
Dear Mr. Yeung:
Re: Hearing Order 011-34007; Seuthern Lights Pipeline Prej eet
Maniteba Pipeline Landewners Asseeistinn (MPLA) and Saskatehewan Asseeiaﬁen ef
Pipeline Landowners (SAPL) Netiee ef Metien J HI}; 6, 200?
The Canadian Asseeistien ef Petreleum Predueers (CAPP) eppeses the nietien ef MPLAHSAPL.
The Seuthem Lights Prej eet eemprises twe eempenent prejeets: the Diluent Pipeline Prej eet and the
Cspseity Replacement Prej eet. The prejeet sehedule is aimed at having the full Cspseity
Replseement Prejeet in serviee by the end st 2003: speeiﬁeslly, September 30, 2003 is the seheduled
in serviee fer the Line 2 Medifiestiens and Deeember 31, 2008 is the sehetiuled in serviee fer the
Light Seur Pipeline (LSI'). July 2010 is the date fer eempletien ef the Diluent Pipeline Prej eet
invelving the transfer ef Line 13 frem EPI te ESLLP and the reversal ef Line 13. The prejeet
sehedule fer the Seuthem Lights Prej eet is based en timely reeeipt of regulatory approvals by
Deeember 31, 2007. (See Applieatien s.1.3, p.1-4; s23, 132-4)
The sdjeumments requested in the alternative in the MPLAISAPL metien weuld all result in the
delay ef the in serviee ef Seuthern Lights Prej eet. In partieulsr, the in sentiee ef the Line 2
Mediﬁestiens and the LSr would be delayed. The espseity that will be presided by the Line 2
Mediﬁestiens end the LSI is very mueh needed. Canadian erude eil supply is grewing and will
eentinue te grew. Timely eenstruetien ef new espseity te respend te grewing etude eil supply is
urgently needed. The Beard reeegnized this in its Spearhead deeisien, Ressens fer Deeisien,
RH-l-ZDOS, Enbridge Pipelines Ine., pages 13-19, where the Beard meted the grewth in bi] supply,
meted the evidenee that eenstrsined market seeess was alreadyr exerting dewnwsrti pressure en heavy
oil prises, and tunnel that the need fer inereesed market seeess was immediate. The eest te Canada
frem etude oil that is trapped because ef leek ef pipeline etttzpseityr is enermeus: millions ef dellers
fer each day ef delay. Net enly is the supply that esnnet get te market sffeeted with shut in er
21m, 350 — rt Ave. s.w. 403. 235 Water Street
Gslgery, Alberta St. Jehn's, Newfeundlsnd

Canada TEF‘ 3N9 Gsnsde ME 155

Tel [403} EE‘H ms Tel {THE} s24~42se

Fe: {4H3} 2s1-4sss Fax {ms} :24-4225

Email: eemrnunjeetieriQeappes Website: m.tisppee

Nit. David Ynnng

National Energy Beard

Page 2

dieenunted prieee when supply is trapped by laek of pipeline eapaeity but the price for all Weatern
Canadian etude is signiﬁcantly depressed belew the prieea prevailing under nneenatrained market
aeeeaa eenditiene. Trapped supply is net in the Canadian publie interest as has been ebeewed by the
Beard in the Spearhead deeieien where the Beard found that timely aeeeae te markets and ensuring
that adequate markets are aeeeaaihle tn aeeemmedate grewth in eil supply was in the Canadian
pnhlie interest. (RH-1-2005, [3.20) In the Allianee Pipeline deeieien, the NEB reepended tn predneer
eeneerna regarding trapped natural gas supply and fennd that, in the leng term, adequate
transportatien eapaeity freni the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin te majer market eentrea was
in the Canadian pnblie interest and would have a positive impact on predneer netbaeke. (Reaenna fer
Deeieien, GH—3-QT, ﬁllianee Pipeline, 3.3.1, p.35)

It is the LSI‘ that is the main feeue ef the MPLAISAPL nietien and the main request is to link the
Senthern Lights Prejeet hearing tn the hearing ef the Alberta Clipper Expanaien Prejeet. The Alberta
Clipper Expaneien Prejeet has a targeted eenipletien date that is at least a full year after the
aeheduled eempletien ef the LSr and even lenger aﬁer the aehednled in aewiee ef the Line 2
Mediﬁeatiena. (Deeeniher 2009 is the aehednled eempletien date fer Alberta Clipper ahewn in the
Alberta Clipper Expanaien Prejeet Applieatien 5.2.3, 13.2.2 and JUly 1, 2010 is the date after which
penaltiee are inenrred under the Cemmereial Settlement thr Alberta Clipper with CAP]? neted helew.
Nete also that July 2010 is alee the eeheduled date fer in eerviee ef' the Dilnent Pipeline Prejeet.)
The urgent need fer timely eapaeity additiens is reflected in the Commercial Settlement ﬁled with
the NEE en J nne 23, 200? in suppert ef the Alberta Clipper Eapaneien Prej eet. The Settlement puts
Enbridge at risk fer aehieving timely in aerviee at Alberta Clipper with penalties triggered after July
1, 2010. July 2010 ie a full year and a halfafter the scheduled in eerviee date fer the LSI'. Thie
previaien ef the Cemniereial Settlement reﬂeete the impettanee ef timely expaneien tn predneera
and the risk that Enbridge is taking te ensure timely eempletien. It serves tn underline the
impertanee ef the 2008 in aerViee dates fer the Line 2 Medifieatiena and the LSr. Pushing the Line 2
Mediﬁeatiena and the LSr inte the aame time ﬂame aa Alberta Clipper wenld push eenipletien freni
the end {if 2003 intn 2010.

Mnreever, under the Alberta Clipper Settlement: Enhritige ie at risk fer capital eeat evennne.
Pushing Senthern Lights inte the same time frame as Alberta Clipper only adds tn the risk of east
evennna fer bath prej eeta. It alee adds tn the risk at the mneh larger Alberta Clipper Prej eet failing
te meet its in aewiee date.

The Alberta Clipper Prejeet and the Senthern Lights Prejeet are different prejeeta with different
applieants. The Alberta Clipper Prnj eet involves a full lnnp [if the Enhridge Canadian Mainline ﬁ'ﬂﬂ‘l
Hardiaty, Alberta to the ManitebaJUS harder fer a diatanee at 1074 Km. The new line is intended fer
heavy erude aeraiee and is driven by supply grewth. The prejeet will he a tell in tn the existing
Mainline with the eapaeity part of the ennininn carriage system. The applicant is EPI. Alberta
Clipper is a different applieatien hem the applicatien fer Seuthem Lights Prej eet. The LSr
eempenent ef Senthern Lights ie 508 Km freni Cranmer, Maniteha tn the ManitebanS harder. The

Mr. David Yeung
National Energy Beard
Page 3
line is intended fer light aeur etude aewiee. The laek ef diluent ie a keyr driving feree behind
Seuthern Lights. The Line 13 reversal is baeked by eentraet earriage en a stand alene basis with
payment ef the eeeta ef replaeement eapaeity. The We Applieante are EPI fer the Line 13 transfer,
Line 2 Mediﬁeatiene and the LSr and ESLGP en behalf ef ESLLP fer the Line 13 reversal.
The debate that eeeurred in Keyetene aheut prej eet splitting and staged apprevale has me relevanee
at all te the Seuthern Lights Prej eet. The Applieante have paekaged aIl eempenente ef the prejeet
inte ene entirely preper applieatien. They are entitled te have the applieatien heard in a timely
manner. The ruling in Keyetene eupperta thia eenelueien. The ruling was that Keyatene was entitled
to be heard and net delayed. Indeed the ruling applies with even mere feree te Seuthern Lights,
where there is he aspect ef staged apprevale, than en the faete ef Keystene, where the transfer
applieatien preeeeded befere the reversal applieatien.
The Southern Lights and Alberta Clipper prej eete are net the ﬁrst and will net be the last
applieatiene te eeme befere the Beard fer additienal eapaeity. The Alberta Clipper deeign allewe fer
eapaneien te an ultimate annual eapaeity ef 300,000 bpd. Oil supply is in an eapanaienary period.
Eaeh applieatien will need to be addressed by the Beard en its merits and in a timely manner.
Regulatery delay is net in the Canadian publie interest.
This is net the first time Canadian pipelines have been in an expansionary peried. The TranaCanada
Mainline went threugh a peried ef many expanaiena in the 1980’s and 1990’s with numeteus
separate applieatiena and ongoing eenetruetien aetivitiea.
CAPP, with reepeet, requests that the metien be dismissed.
Yeure eineerely,

M 62%
Nikel J . Sehultz
General Ceuneel and Viee President
Regulating»r and Tranepertatien Peliey
Cepiee: Paul Vegel, ICeheﬂ Highley Verge] & Dawaen

OH-3n2007 Interested Parties

t . . . 53%,? . . , .
Minister of the Enwronment éjgﬂggg Ministre de l Enwronnement
, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0H3 ‘
tu t a 2&9? .. ......
\ Ms. Julie Haubrich t i 3 e 3 3
Outlook, Saskatchewan .
SOL 2N0 .
Dear Ms. Haubrich: '

Thank you for your letter of March 7, regarding the Alberta Clipper
and the Southern Lights pipeline projects proposed by Enbridge Ptpelines Inc. I
have taken the liberty of forwarding a copy of our eorrespono‘en-oeﬁto Mr Michael
Mantha, Secretary of the National Energy Board. '

As you are aware, the National Energy Board has recently initiated
an environmental assessment (EA) for each of the pipeline proposals in
accordance with the requirements of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.
I have been advised that, as part of its review of the applications submitted. for

‘ these projects, the National Energy Board will be holding public hearings for each
project in order to obtain the views and concerns of members of the public. I have
been assured that the EA will take into account the kinds of concerns you raised
during the respective public hearings. __

’ . . In light of these circumstances, my intervention into the EAs
described above is not warranted at this time.

I appreciate your interest in this matter and encourage you to fully
participate in the projeot-essessment processes to be administered by the National
Energy Board.

Sincerely,
/<c/’\
John Baird, P.C., MP.
0.0.: Mr. Michael Mantha, National Energy Board §%
2%
Canada

’ Hee‘ «3 ICE! . QGE
March 7, 2007
National Energy Board ' ' £453 3: 5 2%?
444 Seventh Avenue SW. '
Calgary, Alberta T2P OX8 ﬁééié W? am
Attention: Mr. Michel L. Mantha, Secretary 3
" ee Minister of the Environment . '
Q The Honourable John Baird
Les Terrasses de la Chaudéere
10 Wellington St. 28th Floor .
Gatineau, Quebec K‘tA 0H3 ‘
Dear Sits: . .
Re: Proposed Enbrtdge ProjectsmAt-berta Ctipper/Southem Lights
I have recently moved to Outlook, Saskatchewan. After living 20 years on the shores of Lake Ontario - in
Toronto I was excited about living by “living” and “healthy” water. After years of worrying about the quality
of water that I drank t was relieved to be drinking water that I could trust.
I have recently heard about the tocat situation with the oil and gas pipelines in the area. I am very
concerned about the safety to my famtty and the environment when I hear that more pipelines are going to
be built through the river vattey upstream from here.
As Canadian citizens I ask that a full Environmental assessment be done with a com-p-l-ete-Revtew Panel on-
this new Alberta Clipper Pipeline project before construction begins.
I took forward to your early response.
Yours truly
Jutt aubch /
t/PQ Box 1643
Outlook, Saskatchewan
SOL 2N0 ‘
cc.
CAPLA attention: Dave Sore (pres), 3t22 Chamtaohie, Ont, NON 1E0 ‘
Larry Lechner -~ Director Environment Assessment Branch, Sask Environment
3211 Albert St. Regina Saskatchewan, S48 5W6

as~m-zear 04:24PM FROM—Mandell Pindsr 884 881 0959 T-BSZ P. 581/303 F-sm
“ .. o M s . B v
Mande“ Pg nder T:%;:,;§$§Jem:m:e§wiizzs
Barri stars 8: 50h crtors ”MW
DATE: August 1, 2007 CLIENT #: 330-00
TO: Natianal Energy Board FAX: 1-403-292—5503
' Attn: David Young, Acting Secretary
Cc: Roseau River Anishinable First Nation FAx: 14044274584
Atth: Chief Terrence N elson
Cc: Enbridge Pipelines Inc, FAX: 1-403~231-7380
Attn Hclcnts Lang
Cc: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, FAX: 1-204-983-3629
Attn: Lionel Bernier
F ROM: Tim Howard
RE: Enbn'dge Alberta Clipper Pipeline
ORIGINAL BEING SENT BY MAIL: YES; No: X
NUMBER OF PAGES INCLUDING COVER SHEET: 3
MESSAGE
Please see attached letter oftoday’s date.
Thank you.
CONFIBENTIALITY CAUTION
This message is intended only far the use of the Individual or entity to which It Is addressed and may contain infomation that is
priwzeged and mnﬁdential. If the reader of this message :‘s not the intended recipéent. or the empioyee or agent responsible fw
delivering the message to the Intended recipient, yuu are hereby notiﬁed mat any dissemination. distribution or copying cf this
cammuniwti’on is stricﬁy prohibited. If yet: have received this communimtim in error, piease notify us immediately by teiephone
and return» the crigina’! message to us at the above address at our cost.
IF YOU DO NOT RECEIVE ALL THE PAGES PLEASE CALL KIM AT (884)681 4146
AS SOON As POSSIBLE.
330-08\00013

Bzﬂeﬁi-Zﬂﬁ? 04:24PM FROM-Mandell Finder EB4 881 8959 T-ESZ P.892/003 F-QIG
. , .. Mmmn . v
Mandeil Pmder ‘22 “’50 meeeiargezizmzz‘;
’ V M
BEIUISIEFS & Sohators M‘ Wmmm, am CMNEWRW
BRENDA GAERTNER’ MARY Lows. Mmmv“
, ,, , Timmy mums Rosmn Omega
3: . V CHERYL swvw Jmsue Dwyea'
3W v ' UNOGAY wmﬁﬁt SHAW JACKSON
, 5:. i: 3% .mawﬁmg
32% Z: W E f} 5;; 5* ”WWW“
V August 1’ 2007 2
VIA FACSIMILE: 1-403-292-5503
National Energy Board
444 Seven Avenue SV.W.
Calgary, Alberta T2P OX8
Attention: David Young, Acting Secretary
Dear Sir:
Re: Southern Lights Pipeline Project, Hearing Order OI-I-3~2007
Thank you for your letter of July 19, 2007 requesting further infomation from the
RRAFN concealing how the Southern Lights Pipeline will speciﬁcally impact the interests of the
RRAFN, and suggestions for how these impacts may be mitigated-
We have previously advised of the RRAFN’S view that, having regard for the size and
technical complexity of the pipelines at issue, RRAFN’S panicipation in a review of Enbridge’s
projects must be supported by ﬁmding that enables the RRAFN to evaluate the projects, and
assess their hnphcatiene fer the RRAFN’S rights and interests. Without such capacity support,
the RRAFN’is not able to prepare the analysis and infomation required t0 answer your
questions.
We can advise that,» among came: impacts, the taking up of lands and resources within
RRAFN Territory for Enbﬁdge’s pipelines materially affects RRAFN’S ability to obtain
satisfaction of its timaty land entitlement Under Treaty 1. RRAFN has for many years sought to
have Canada honour its» obligations to set aside reserve lands for the W, consistent with the
terms and understanding recorded through the Treaty. Some progress in that regard was made
through an agreement reached in March, 1996 between Canada and the RRAFN addressing
Canada’s “per capital.” land allocation obligations under the Treaty. Pursuant to that agreement,
RRAFN is entitled to acquire up t0: 16,218 acres ef land in RRAFN Tenitory :9 be set aside as
reserve lands. Only a small portion (31’ this meant has been identiﬁed and acquired is date.
‘ ‘ As weih the havemade hem to Canada their claim that Canada is in breach of
addmonal land settlement cemmiuhents made pursuant to the Treaty, and the RRAFN have a
claim against Canada with respect to». reserve cut off lands presently before the Indian Reserves
Commission.
33o~ootoooza

88~UI-2007 04:24PM FROM-Mandell Finder 884 581 G959 T-DBZ P‘ 033/083 F~QIB
- 2 _

The question of the title to lands and resources Within RRAIN Territory thus remains
unsettled. Pursuant to the 1996 agreement, the RRAFN have an established legal right to
ownership of lands still to be selected, while pursuant to the unsettled claims, the RRAFN have a
primafacie case to ewnership of funher and additional lands. The taking up of lands for
Enbﬁdge’s pipelines materially affects these established and primafacz‘e rights, by alten'ng and
encmben‘ng the land base to which the RRAFN maintain legal rights and claims.

‘ In the RRAFN’S view, meaningﬁxl consuitation With respect to these issues? as well as
other Impacts to the RRAFN to be identiﬁed through a properly resourced review process, lies
thh the Crown. We provide this information t0 the NEE to assist the NEE in appreciating the
nature of some of the RRAFN’S concerns regarding the projects.

, , Yours truly, .
MANDELL FINDER.
Tim Howard
Barrister & Solicitor
TH/ki
cc: ChiefTerrence Nelson, RRAFN
Helene Young, Enbn'dge Pipelines Inc.
Lionel Bemier, Indian and Northern Affairs Canada
ssoeoxooozs

Hug 02 2007 12:01PM ' 3085843130 p.1
Cfiief fBev fBeiZ'ega cf
facsimié
August 1, 2007
To: David Young
Acting Secretary
From: Chief Bey Bellegarde National Energy Boa rd
Peepeekisis First Nation 444 Seventh Avenue
Box 518 Calgary, Alberta
Balca rres! Saskatchewan TZP 0X8
506 0C0 Phone: (403)292—4800
Phone:(306)331-8067 Fax:(403)292~5503
Fax:(306)585-3152 ..
Re: Alberta Clipper and Southern
Lights Pipelines Intervenor Status
Response to NEB.
M
Pages: 3 Reply« x Urgent- Revievw x
Attatched please find the response from Peepeekisis First Nation regarding the above
named projects and the interest of Peepeeki-si-s regarding these projects.
i Our legal council, Mr. Allan Braba-nt will respond to any further correspondance with the
National Energy Board . His contact information is included within our correspondance.
, Respectfully,
Chief 33v gegegaréﬁ 1‘

Hug 02 2007 12:01PM 3065843130 p.2
Pee eekis's Cr e Natio N 81
p 1 e . i x _ n o.
P.O. BOX 518 “J * - \ ?- OFFICE OF THE CHIEF
BALCARHES, SK Telephone: (306) 3-34-2332
see 000 gt“; : .2, :2: 3*} :3. 2} :3 Fax: (308) 334-2234
u: faw‘m -.. gm gig, :17; 32“
Chief Bev Bellegarde
Peepeekisis First Nation
Box 51 8
Balcmes, Saskatchewan
SOG oco ’
Bus :( 306) 334-2573
Fax: (306) 334~2280
August 1, 2007
David Young
Acting Secretary , , <22 .
o 5’ ‘42:. ;‘
Nauonal Energy Board % 11$ % g
444 Seventh Avenue SW “13%;:
Calgary, Alberta %%
£35. 3;? ﬁrm ﬂ. £331" * ‘gggf
T2P 0x8 .2: 2 :2:- 2 2wima2§
Bus: (403) 292-4800 ﬁgéigggg
Fax: (403) 292-5503 §§§§§¥WM
M22: ~§ {ﬁgﬂzgég 31.2.2:
Dear Mr David Young fgéigu ”gwg‘iwygyi“?
' *3 -“1’:.:2: 22' ' .- 4”“:
* ‘ 2:... :- x *2?” {1* 63:3"
«:25. “?:géhé '
. -»"’ *t . 4»:
Heanng Orders 0H-3 -2007 23923‘
Souﬂ'nern Li ghts Pipeline Pm j -Esﬁ‘i ‘
. . . @éﬁ? -233::2?~2<:§‘ -
Clanficatlon thme 28,2007 gjgw 25,332
2 ,.2... g: 25;" - 1 W» 5“ ”2
‘2“; '~ . _ " Q .r v 5 5?; g???
Please be advised that I - vm‘“‘§%ghfgfﬁgfﬂ 7'24??? 19 2007 tm’ g
. ' . 220%“:3323"? 2; .2. xWMﬁ ’ reques.
clanﬁcatlon as to ho , 2%§:2;w «2.2hrawgi: e interests of
%:§%020:%2§:
43. stated "1» my letter 22:22:3ée2gxéw ' " ,2 . 007, On behalf of the
eltlzens and Govemment’ is -e P ’9; :ﬁéiﬁﬁgﬁga n, of Wh] ch we are a signatory to
the mtemauonal Treaty #4 szgne 02-83% 5’3“: of Great Bmtam (now Canada m
right 0f the Crown) and the 5 ﬁt 3 America, I am formally
announcing our. opposition tothm-i Enbridge Inc. has ﬁled with the
Natienal Emmy Bead speciﬁcaliy for the construction and operation of the Canadian
segment 0fthﬁe‘A1bertaC‘lipper Project and the- Seut‘hem- Lights Pipeline Projecﬂ
Therefore be it clariﬁed that Peepeekisis F irst Nation has intervene: status on both the
Alberta Clipper Project and the Southern Lights Pipeline Project and not solely the
Southern Lights Project to which yeur correspondence implies.

Hug 02 2007 12:01PM 3085843130 p.13
‘2» Both Projects will run directly through Treaty F our territory which is our
traditional lands;
> The proposed projects Will exceed the depth of a plaugh as agreed upon in the
signing of Treaty 4, to which we are a signatory;
> The Crown has the duty to Consult with Aboriginal peoples as set out in section
35 of the Constitution Act, 1982
P Peepeekisis F irst Nation was not consulted by the Crown regarding these twe
above mentioned projects which were ﬁled with the National Energy Board;
The National Energy Board is fully aware that the cases of Sparrow and Delgamuukw
and subsequent jurisprudence have established that the Crown has a ﬁduciary obligation
to Aboriginal peoples When a government decision or action has the effect of interfering
with aborigined or treaty rights, Which 0-in gatien typicaiiy requires Crown consultation
with the affected Aboriginal peoples. "
The National Energy Board, in accordance with this obligation, has a responsibility to
determine whether there has been adequate Crown consultation before rendering its
decision in cases where the effect of the decision may interfere with an aboriginal or
treaty rights.
Our Legal Council, Mr Allan Brabant, will respond ﬁlrther on behalf of Peepeekisis First
Nation.
Respectﬁxlly, '
Chief Bev Bellegarde
Cc. "
Mr. Allan Brabant
Brabant & Company Law Ofﬁce
484 Hoffer Drive
Regina, Saskatche wan
S4N 3%:
Bus: (306) 5815-7575
Fax: {306) 5854580

