Page 1 of 11
Apgendix V — AQElication t0 Particip ate Form
Proposed Proj ect and Hearing Information
Company: Project N ame:
Enbridge Pipelines Inc. (Enbridge) Edmonton to Hardisty Pipeline Project (Proj ect)
NEB File Number: Hearing Order:
File OF-Fac-Oil-EIOI -2012-08 02 OH-OOl-2013
The Project to be assessed in this hearing is deﬁned as:
- construction of a new 914.4 mm (Nominal Pipe Size 36) outside diameter crude oil
pipeline, approximately 181 kilometres (km) in length, from Enbridge’s existing
Edmonton Terminal, near Edmonton, Alberta to its existing Hardisty Terminal, near
Hardisty, Alberta (the Section 52 F acility); and
- construction of a new initiating pump station at Enbridge’s Edmonton Terminal, a new
pump station at each of its existing Kingman and Strome stations, and associated
facilities and infrastructure at its Edmonton and Hardisty Terminals
(the Section 58 Facilities).
Step 1 - Important Information and Instructions
This form must be used to request participation in the OH-001-2013 hearing and must be ﬁled
appropriately with the National Energy Board (Board) and served on Enbridge, by noon on
17 April 2013, to be considered. A PDF copy of this form is available for download on the Board’s
website at www.neb-one.gc.ca in the Enbridge Application folder (refer to section 1.5 of Hearing Order
for how to get there).
The Board will use the information you provide to make a decision as to whether you will be allowed to
participate in the hearing. Previously-submitted infoxmation will not be considered. For more information,
the Guidance Document on Section 55.2 and Participation in a Facilities Hearing is attached to the
Hearing Order OH—001—2013 as Appendix VI.
You must provide all required information in order for your application to be considered. Ifyou do
not provide sufﬁcient information on this form, your Application to Participate will be denied.

Page 10 of 11

Step 6 - Access, Notiﬁcation, Service

If you are allowed to participate, which ofﬁcial language do you wish to English (9 French 0

use in correspondence with the Board and during the hearing?

Documents submitted electronically are available on the Board’s electronic document repository

(Livelink). If you have the capability to access the repository, the Board and other Participants in this

proceeding may serve you by notifying you that a document has been ﬁled and is available in the

repository, instead of serving you with a hard copy of the document.

Are you able to access the Board’s electronic document repository?
Step 7 - Privacy Agreement
The Board, as a quasi-judicial tribunal, is authorized to collect and use personal information in the context
of any Board Proceeding as set out in the NEB Act. The Board will collect, use and disclose that
information for the purpose of the Proceeding.
Please note that, under the federal Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act
(PIPEDA), the Regylations Sgecifzing Publicly Available Information state that personal information, as
deﬁned in PIPEDA, that appears in a record or document of a quasi-judicial body is publicly available
provided that the collection, use and disclosure of that personal information relate directly to the purpose
for which the information appears in the record or document. Personal information in a quasi-judicial
record or document may therefore be considered public for the purpose of collection, use and disclosure
without consent under section 7 of PIPEDA.
By submitting this form, you are acknowledging the above.

Date submitted: April 16,2013
Print Name: Dale Kirkland

Page 2 of 11
Once you have completed this form, you must ﬁle it with the Board by:
- sending it by fax, mail or courier, or
- submitting it through the Board’s electronic ﬁling system once you have created a PDF
version of your completed form. Instructions are provided in section 4.2.1 of Hearing
Order OH-001 -201 3.
Please read the instructions for each section carefully. N OTE: You are not limited to the space or
box provided in each section. The boxes are provided for your convenience and to indicate where
information is required. If necessary, you may attach a separate sheet.
If you need support to ﬁll out this form, please contact the Process Advisor, Debbie Kuchinski, by calling
403-299-3656 or toll free 1-800—899-1265. The Process Advisor cannot tell you what content you should
provide on the form. It is your responsibility to demonstrate that you should be allowed to participate.
You must provide an explanation to support your answers where spaces are provided.
Step 2 - Your Application to Participate
Applicant for Participation - Contact Information
Date:
April 16, 2013
Name: Address:
Dale Kirkland Transport Canada
1100 - 9700 Jasper Avenue
Title: City:
Manager, Environmental Services Edmonton
Organization: (only if you are representing an Province:
organization) Alberta
Transport Canada
Telephone: Postal Code:
(780) 495-6366 TSJ 4E6
Facsimile: Email:
780-495-4748 dale.ldrk1and@tc.gc.ca
Address for Courier/Personal Service: (if different from mailing address)
TSICphone:
Only check this box and provide information below if this is applicable to you.
DI have permission to speak on behalf of others and to identify those persons and their
interests on this Application to Participate.

Page 3 of 11
NOTE: If the persons you are representing are applying to participate and listing you as their authorized
representative, you do not need to complete this form or request to participate separately.
List the persons you are representing (only if applicable):
Only check this box and provide information below if this is applicable to you.
DI have an authorized representative who may speak on my behalf.
Authorized Representative — Contact Information
(If you do not have an authorized representative, please leave blank)
organizationﬁf applicable)
Telephone: Postal Code:
Address for Courier/Personal Service: (if different from mailing address)

Telephone:

Page 4 of 11
Step 3 — Your Interest or Expertise
- Before you continue with this form, refer to the Board’s Guidance Document on Section 55.2 and
Participation in a Facilities Hearing attached to the Hearing Order OH-OOl -2013 as Appendix VI.
I consider myself or the persons I am representing (check only one of the following):
0 directly affected by the proposed Proj ect
@ having relevant information or expertise
0 both
- If you checked “directly affected” or “both,” provide the following information in the box
below:
a) Describe your speciﬁc and detailed interest in the proposed Proj ect. Note that mere opposition to
or support for the proposed Proj ect will not be enough.
b) Describe how an approval or denial of the proposed Proj ect causes a direct effect on your interest.
0) Include information about: the degree of connection between the proposed Proj ect and your
interest; the likelihood and severity of harm you may be exposed to; and the frequency and
duration of your use of the area near the proposed Proj ect.
. If you checked “relevant information or expertise” or “both”, check all sources of knowledge
that apply and explain or outline your knowledge source in the box below.

Page 5 of 11

The source of my knowledge is

- I Academic

- I Local (regional) knowledge

. - Aboriginal knowledge

- - Traditional knowledge

0 Professional/I‘echnical/Commercial

- - Other
You are encouraged to attach some form of documentation to your application, showing your
qualiﬁcations/source of knowledge such as a cuniculum vitae, reference letter, etc.
Dale Kirkland
Manager, Environmental Services
Transport Canada - Prairie and Northern Region
1100 - 9700 Jasper Avenue
Edmonton, Alberta
TSJ 4E6
dale.ldrkland@tc.gc.ca
Step 4 - List of Issues

- Appendix I of the Hearing Order OH-001-2013 sets out the List of Issues (Issues) that the Board

will consider for this hearing. These Issues are all listed below for your convenience.
- Refer to page 1 of this form for the description of the proposed Project to be assessed in this
hearing.

Page 6 of 11
Check off the Issues you wish to speak to, and include for each:
0 an explanation of the information you will be providing related to that Issue;
0 how you will provide that information (i.e. format of the information); and
0 an explanation of why your information is relevant.

- If you check off an Issue you must indicate in the space below what you plan to submit.
NOTE: The Board will not consider, in this hearing, matters related to upstream activities,
including the development of oil sands, or the downstream use of the oil transported by the
Proj ect.

E 1. The need for the proposed Proj ect.

The information I will provide:
E 2. The economic feasibility of the proposed Proj ect.
The information I will provide:

Page 7 of 11
E 3. The potential commercial impacts of the proposed Proj ect
The information I will provide:
E 4. The appropriateness of the tolling methodology.
The information I will provide:
5. The potential environmental and socio-economic effects of the proposed Proj ect, including any
cumulative effects that are likely to result from the proposed Proj ect, as required by the NEB’s
Filing Manual.
The information I will provide:
Transport Canada may provide commentary on matters related to our mandate with respect to the Navigable Waters
Protection Act (NWPA), Navigation Protection Act (N?A), and future administration of section 108 of the NEBA.
These comments could be provided in a formal letter to NEB.

Page 8 of 11
E 6. The appropriateness of the general route and land requirements for the proposed Proj ect.
The information I will provide:
7. The engineering design and integrity of the pr0posed Proj ect.
The information I will provide:
Transport Canada may provide commentary on matters related to the engineering design with respect to a potential
interference to navigation. These comments could be provided in a formal letter to NEB.
E 8. Potential impacts of the proposed Proj ect on Aboriginal interests.
The information I will provide:
E 9. Potential impacts of the proposed Proj ect on landowners and land use.
The information I will provide:

Page 9 of 11
10. Safety, security, contingency planning associated with the construction and operation of
the proposed Proj ect, including emergency response planning and third-party damage
0 ' ‘ I ' 0 a
The information I will provide:
Transport Canada may provide commentary on matters related to navigation safety. These comments could be
provided in a formal letter to NEB.
Step 5 - Your Method or Level of Participation
Please talk to the Process Advisor for this hearing, Debbie Kuchinski, for general information on the
Board’s hearing process and a description of what each method or level of participation typically
involves.

- Commenters participate by submitting a Letter of Comment with the Board. Writing a
Letter of Comment limits participation to sharing your views on the Application in a letter.
Commenters do not ask questions about other Participants’ evidence or make a ﬁnal argument
at the oral portion of the hearing. This option is not eligible for participation funding.

- Generally, being an Intervenor requires a time commitment to the hearing process. Intervenors
are obligated to answer questions asked of them. Further, Intervenors may participate by asking
questions, ﬁling evidence, and presenting ﬁnal argument. They may also apply for and be
granted funding through the Board’s Participant Funding Program.

- Government Participants have participation rights similar to Intervenors, but may not be
subj eat to answering questions from other Participants. They are not eligible for funding. This
participation option is only available to government departments and agencies.

I wish to particépate: (select only one) ‘

G) as a ommenter ***

O as an Intervenor

O as a Government Participant
*** Do not attach any Letter of Comment to your application to participate. The Board will review
your application to participate ﬁrst and notify you if you are allowed to participate as a Commenter
before you may ﬁle a Letter of Comment. If you attach a Letter of Comment to this form, it will not be
placed onto the record. The deadline for Commenters to submit Letters of Comments will be
communicated at a later date. NOTE: The Board will not accept form letters and petitions.

I *I Trenspert Transports
Canada Canada
Environmental Services. Pregrerne
3rd Fleer— 344 Edmenten Avenue
PO. Bet: 8550
Winnipeg. Menitebe
R30 0P6
Yeur ﬁle Vetre Reference
E101-2012—DB 02
Our ﬁle Netre reference
?D?5-T3-ﬁ?
July 10‘“, 2013
Sheri Yeung
Natienel Energy Beard
444 Seventh Avenue SW
Calgary. Alberta
T2P 0X8
RE: Enbridge Pipelines Inc. (Enhridge) — Edmenten te Herdiety Pipeline Prejeet;
Potential lnvelvernent Relating to Navigable Waters
Hearing Order DH-OO1-2013
Tranepert Canada appreciates the opportunity te provide eernment with respect to our
departmental mandate. regarding the Edmenten te Herdiety Pipeline Preject (Prefect). The
prepeeed Prejeet has been deﬁned as: eenetruetien of a new 914.4 mm (Neminel Pipe Size 36)
outside diameter crude eil pipeline, eppreximetely 181 kilemetree (km) in length, frem
Enbridge’e existing Edmenten Terminal, neer Edmenten, Athena to its existing Hardiety
Terminal, near Hardiety, Alberta and eenetruetien of a new initiating pump station at Enbridge’e
Edmenten Terminet, a new pump station at each of its existing Kingmen end Streme etetiene
and associated facilities and infrastructure at its Edmenten end Herdisty Terminals.
The prepeeed Prejeet weuld ereee feur named wetereeureee (Mill Creek, Geldber Creek, Irvine
Creek and the Battle River}, twe unnamed tributaries te |an Greek. an unnamed ditch and twe
wetlandet Tranepert Canada - Neuigebte Waters Preteetien Pregram (NWPP) has reviewed
infermetien fer the watereeureee listed and determined that only the Battle River wetereeuree ie
navigable. The ether tributaries and wetlands are nen-nevigeble and thus the Nevfgebte
Waters Preteetfen Act (NWPA) weuld net apply.
Previeuety, Enbridge weuld be guided by and directed to the etenderdefguidelineetaete that are
applicable tn the Nevfgebfe Waters Preteetfen Act (NWPA) and would be required te submit a
fermel application to the NWF’P which would require detaited, ereeeing—epeeiﬁe infermetien
regarding the Battle River, in order to obtain NWPP‘e eppreual, premulgatien, er exemption
eeeerdingly fer the speciﬁc werk. However, as part of the Jebe, Growth and Leng-term
Presperfty Act, and amendments made to the Netfene! Energy Beard Aer {NEBPQ end the
Canada OH and Gas Operations Act (COGOA), responsibilities fer eppreuing NEBA power
lines, pipelines and their eeeeeiated works in? en, ever, under, threugh end eereee nauigehte
wetere have been transferred frem the Minister ef Transport to the National Energy Beard
(NEE), effective July 2, 2013.
Canad'ﬁ

To date, a formal application for Battle River watercourse crossing has not been received by the
NWPP therefore any concerns or recommendations associated with this watercourse crossing
cannot be determined. As a result of the transfer of the noted responsibilities, Transport
Canada recommends that Enbridge submit their Battle River application to the NEB, so that any
potential for concerns or mitigation measures may be become available during the course of
the project review.
Transport Canada will continue to support the NEB by sharing expertise and work
collaboratively to resolve questions from proponents concerning regulatory overlap during the
transition period. Should you have any questions regarding Transport Canada’s comments
concerning this project, please contact Dale Kirkland via email at dale.kirkland@tc.gc.ca or by
telephone at (780) 495-6636.
Regards, d
ﬂf/ Todd Frederickson
Regional Director — Programs
cc: Mr. Robert Bourne, Enbridge Regulatory Council
Mr. Rob Sihota. Enbridge Regulatory Analyst
Mr. Dale Kirkland, Regional Manager - Environmental Services. Transport Canada
2

