30x 31, Site 6, RR #1
. geave riodga, Aiberta, T88 0C9
ﬁatitmaﬁ Emergv Baaré . I _
£344 Seventh Ave, SAN.
Caigary, Aiberta, TZP 8X8
083:“ Sir;
R&r SEMCEMS PRGPOSES ?GESGN (3&3 PEFEEJNE P303812? ?UMQLSR REQGE, 3.6. T8 FOXCREEK, ALBERYA
Attached for your info is a withdrawa! of objectioa datezi Jar: 29,2068. This was signed at the
exmanation of the Semcams representative that the AEberta {mfg project was canceifed and jurisdEctEon
was now fedemt rather than provincia'i.
We stiﬂ have concerns and object to the project for safety reasons.
it seems very iogicai and madam to us that a gas resource as poisonous as that which Semcams propose
to transport shouid be processedand made safe as close to the scarce as possible. Transporting 30% 3
pius H25 from Yambier Ridge 33! the way 20 Fax Creek is not seasibie.
if the mpeﬁine has to be bui-Et we have: concems mm the safety pmgram outﬁned by Semsams at their
open house. -
~ Sémcams pfOpéSe to have cniy three staff avaiiabie in the area and En the event of a
probiem they wauid use comty emergency services staff arid RCMP as‘back up. i don’t
beiieve that the WWW aadfor RCMP ﬁave emugh staff with H25 safety training ta do the
jab. ?miniag arid safety equigmem {a ﬁt) this wsrk shoafﬁ be previded t0 the county ané
RCM? by Semmms a: Semcamg cast ?&?E’Eﬁ? mar: taxgayer cast.
~ Semmms magma a Eimiiﬁ mmmg“ 6E" amargmw 5mm vaivas begausa {hey exmaéﬁeé
EEwE Em aﬁeve gmmé vaéves swam a wwk $962 33.39;“: {a {iamage E33; riﬂe ﬁuiiets m
amEéa-Esmﬁy mmg E??? 2% Raw eangmem Evae y‘aives sﬁwiﬁ Em EasEaEEeeﬁ md- aEE wave
gmmé wmk $§§§$ SEEwiﬁf $8 S§€§£§€§§ £33 Eméigé mm mm? mEEzziéngg w-EE‘E‘E vééw maﬁ-Eiaarg‘
~ Samm-mg $$$$ng :3 arm am mmma‘im teEegEsem {Eiai 13g; and megsage {a warm resédems 0f
say pmbiems. “E’hEs wiff mt €30 the jab. We work w? {m hayEaaé or mageEané most of the
EE-mg am} me EEG? g2? 22% wgméﬁg. géﬁézémaﬁy mas: www.ateé phage messagas am fem»
marketers ami we don’t answer when we are in. Given the nature sf our neigh-barhaod the l:
E

mh; 323% gafety mates? is £33; gamma? phage caﬁ {wowed up by ﬁeiimpter check 3n the
resﬁdeme and farm if there is m answer.
— We be'iieve Semcams have underesﬁmated the seriousnegs of. aa 82$ ieak given the
preio-rsgeci 3i? invez’smas we often experience in cm area. “?he rapid diSpersaE 0f the H23 that
Semcams expect wit} not happen ands? thew Coaéitims.
m sammary we wwid prefer that the gas be pretessed near Tambier Ridge ané the H25
removed. Failing that; if a pipeiine ﬁas to be buii‘t there are serioas safety cencems that need to
be addressed.
Yams twig;
Jim Pearson i
g; [I 5
§ ' g 5
l/gﬁf/gﬂﬁ a . tiﬁw i
2;. ’ é
Margaret Pea rsoa g
{WﬂﬁK'
CC: 593 Granda Prairie
County of Grande Prairie
~~ RCMP Beaveriodge
;
. é;
RMA Land Servicesfor Semcams E
g
E
E
g
E”:
g;-

33mm? 2% 2808 ‘
Eﬁergy Resource Conservatioa Board
848-52” Aveme SW.
Caﬁgary, AB T2P 364
Re: ERCB Objection Letter #17536, ”5?? and 17578 .
. Jim Pearson, Margaret ?eamon and R3. Pearsen
With regard to cm: Ietter of objecﬁon dated February 1 5 and 6*“, 2007, fomarded to yeu
aad subsequenﬁy tracked as EUB Latter of Objection #17576, @7577 am 17578, we,
Jim Pearson and Margaret Pearson, wish to formaliy withdraw this obfecticm. We have
m further issues or concerns with regard to the SemCAMS ULC proposed pipeiine
prefect.
Dated this 523 M day of .. géﬁgﬁm‘aﬁi .. . g 2608.
SW- PEARSON
mewm .
m. PEARSON

Jamaw 29‘ was
Energy Resaume Conservation Board
8406‘“ Avenue S.W.
Calgary, AB T2P 36-4
Re: ERCB Objection Letter #17576, W57? and ”578 . '
Jim Pearson, Margaret Pearson and R3. Pearson
With regard to our {after of objectiorz dated February 1, 5 am: 6‘“, 2.097, forwarded to yau'
and subsequenﬁy tracked as EUB miter of Objection #17576, 175?? and 17578, we,
Jim Pearson and Margaret Pearson, wish ta formally withdraw this objection, We have
no further issues or concerns with regard to the SemCAMS ULC proposed pipeiine ~
project.
. a ”2*”
Dated this day Of .. . . . . .. ; 2908. if
.2

$3M ?EARSGN
RA; PEARSON '

                                                    Letter of Comment
Date: 4/9/2008 4:38:59 PM
                                                      Proceeding Information
Project Name:     Redwillow Pipeline Project                                 Company Name:      SemCAMS Redwillow ULC
Hearing Order No:     GH-2-2008                                              File Number: OF-Fac-Gas-S393-2007-01 01
                                                        Contact Information
Name: Megan Jamison                                                          Address: #10, 704-8th Avenue
Title:                                                                       City: Canmore
Organization:                                                                Province:   Alberta
Telephone:     (403) 609-1023                                                Postal Code: T1W 2E3
Facsimile:                                                                   Email: meganjamison@hotmail.com
Please ensure that your letter of comment includes:
      ·   the nature of your interest in the application
      ·   comments on the application
      ·   any relevant information that will explain or support your comments
For further information, please refer to the Hearing Order on the NEB website at www.neb-one.gc.ca.
                                                                Comments
                                                        Attach additional pages if necessary.
Megan Jamison
#10, 704-8th Avenue
Canmore, Alberta
T1W 2E3
April 8, 2008
Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry
Secretary of the Board
 National Energy Board
444-7th Avenue SW
Calgary, Alberta
T2P 0X8
Re: Hearing Order GH-2-2008
SemCAMS Redwillow ULC
    My interest in this project stems from having grown up in the Sylvester Creek area, approximately 2.5 miles from
the proposed pipeline route. My parents and family friends still live in this area adjacent to the proposed route. I am
opposed to the proposed pipeline carrying up to 30% concentrations of H2S, a known poisonous gas, being built and
operated.
    One major concern of mine is that of safety for the residents of this area whose homes the pipeline would pass
near, and their livestock, as well as the wildlife. The ESD valves are quite far apart in the Sylvester Creek area, and
the proposed route of the pipeline is upwind of people's homes; therefore, in the event of a leak, there is the potential
for quite a large amount of sour gas to be carried downwind towards the residents. Also, my parent’s home is in a
valley, and H2S gas will move quickly to the lowest place when spreading out from a leak. SemCAMS has stated that
“pipelines are very safe means of transporting commodities.”, but sour gas pipeline leaks do happen. The most recent
one that I am aware of was a few months ago, near Beaver Mines, Alberta. This leak occurred in the morning of
November 19th, 2007, and required the evacuation of 10 families from their homes. These families had also been
assured from the operating company (Shell) that there was only an extremely small possibility of then having an
uncontrolled (hydrogen sulfide) release.
    There has not been an emergency response plan completed that is satisfactory to local residents. I am concerned
about how the residents will be notified in the case of an emergency. For example, my parents are usually working
outdoors on the farm, and don’t have an answering machine. In addition, because they live in a valley, there is no
cell phone coverage. The remote monitoring of the pipeline from Edson, Alberta, raises concerns over the reliability
of the monitoring, and the time it may take to respond to a problem. Dispersion modelling based on the topography of
that area as well as the prevailing winds, has also not been satisfactory to date. There is an inversion effect in the
valley resulting in smoke from nearby forest fires collecting there rather than dispersing. H2S, being denser than air,
would most likely behave similarly. Basing any dispersion modelling on actual site measurements should be required,
as well as keeping in mind that the weather will change over time due to changes in climate.
    The effects of the construction and operation of the pipeline on the wildlife, birds, fish, water quality, vegetation
and the environment in general is another concern. The proposed route is a high wildife use area, and passes through
identified Environmentally Significant Areas such as the Wapiti River ESA, Pinto Creek Elk Range ESA, and others.
Caribou and other ungulates would be affected permanently by the pipeline right of way causing fragmentation of
their habitat and leaving them more visible and vulnerable to predators. The cumulative effects on the environment of
the construction of this pipeline combined with the extensive oil and gas development and forestry operations in this
area need to be examined and taken under consideration.
    Related to the issues of safety and environmental effects is another concern that the value of the land in this area
will decrease. The pipeline will not result in any added employment in the area, and I believe the pipeline will
decrease the land value in this area because of health and safety risks, and decreasing aesthetic and wilderness
values. The socio-economic effects of the proposed pipeline are not congruent with the values of the people who
choose to live in this area. If the pipeline is built, it will most likely be a catalyst for even more oil and gas
development in the future, further compromising the peace and quiet, health, safety and aesthetic values of the
residents.
    In closing, in addition, to the above stated concerns, I am questioning the need for the pipeline in the first place. It
seems much more prudent to process the gas closer to the source, rather than transporting it to be processed
elsewhere.
    I wish to make an oral statement (in English) at the hearing as well as submitting this letter of comment.
    Sincerely,
    Megan Jamison
‘3?
Seven Canada Corporation 403 232 7160 Phone :1
2606, 460 { 3rd Avenue S.W. www.devonenergyxem 3»:
‘ Caigary, Aiberta "RP 4142
, 8:: {88 { { 8: g {:8
Apnt 10, 2008 $
National Energy Board
444 - 7*:h Avenue S.W.
Calgary, Alberta
TZP 0X8 g
Attn: Ms. Claudine Dutil~Berry
Secretary of the Board
Dear Ms Dutil~8erry:
Re: Letter of Comment - Redwitlow Pipeline Project
SemCAMS Redwillow ULC
Hearing Order GH—Z- 2008
File No. OF-Fac—Gas~5393~2007~01 01
Devon Canada Corporation (“Devon") is writing to express our support for
SemCAMS’ proposed Redwillow Pipeline Project.
Our company is active in natural gas exploration and development activities
throughout Western Canada. Devon believes the SemCAMS project will be
beneficial to Canadians and gas producers by providing additional gas gathering }
and processing alternatives in Bfitish Columbia and Alberta.
In particutar, Devon as one of the owners of the K3 processing plant supports
SemCams efforts to attract gas to this presently underutilized facility via the
Redwillow Pipeline.
We respectfully request that the National Energy Board take our comments into 3
consideration when considering SemCAMS’ application to construct their
Redwillow Pipeline.
Sincerely,
ﬂ
WW ”T? WWW g,
f «8“ . ~
:8”
W. Yakymyshyn
Vice-President - Exploitation
cc: SemCAMS Redwiilow ULC- Ms. Laura 1.th

“WEI: ° '9 E
ConocoPhpaéhs
Aprii 14 2008 E ﬁamacemﬁﬁms 6393333 E E E
’ 221-3301;? "xfz-z-Eifey Si‘guara': EL" “q E
EEEE EEEE E a E: ?*S 2 :E E
Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry VK' E
Sec retary of the Board ‘ ,3 E
National Energy Board ”WE W” E
444 - 7*”Avenue S.W. E
Calgary, Alberta E
T2P oxa E
Dear Ms. Dutii—Berry E
Re: Letter of Comment ~— Redwillow Pipeline Project E
SemCAMS RedwEllow ULC
Hearing Order GH-2u2008
File No. 0F~Fac-Gas-S393-2007~01 01 E
ConocoPhillips Canada (BRO) Ltd. (“CPC (BRC)”) is writing to express our ' E
support for SemCAMS’ proposed Redwéllow Pipeline Project. E
Our company is active in naturai gas exploration and development activities in
Northeastern British Columbia. CPC (BRO) believes that the SemCAMS project
will be beneficial to NEBC gas producers by providing gas gathering and
processing alternatives and encouraging competition for gas gathering and
processing services in NEBC. _
We respectfully request that the National Ehergy Board take our comments in
consideration when considering SemCAMS’ appIication to construct the
Redwillow Pipeline.
Yours truly,
ConocoPhiHips Canada (BRC) Partnership
by its Managing Partner, ConocoPhillEps Canada (BRO) Ltd. E
an Afﬁliate of Conocophmips Canada
f: ’E x“; E
ﬂT/Ev—anwm
4-“ ‘xﬁw ’ E
89rd Gaedmam
Managea Engineemg -- Ner’zh Regém
cc. Mr. Paul Jeffrey, Biake Cassels & Graydon LL? {via e—mai! gauiéeﬁreyﬁz b&akescom}
Ms. Laura Lam, SemCAMS Redwiilow ULC {via ewmaii ZawaﬁuntﬁQ semcamscom) g

APRJEJOGB 11:44 643 33364 ACKROYD LLP e3276 13.302.3083
”W m
CK RQYDW , {780) 412-2713
‘ bmgefhanneycéackmyeiew.com
Bezzmsrm & Smeayz‘cms M :
ASSiSTANT: JEAN K.
“W e E 3 _. , ?80 423-8995 xszze
oummm. Maseeww EEEE 22%: EE A 3'. E3 jéank)@eckreyd¥:w.cem
YOUR F£LE Ne. j E a E:
Aprii 14, 2008
FAXED T0: (403) 2926503
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue SW
Caigary, Aiberta T2533 OX8
Attention: Ciaudine Dutil-Berry
Secretary of the Board
Dear Madam:
Re: Hearing Order GHez-ZOOB
SemCAMS Redwillow ULC (SemCAMS)
7 December 2007 Application for the Redwillow Pipeline Project ;
Pieese be advised that we are the soiicitors for the Horse Lake First Nation whose traditional
iands will be traversed and directly and adversely affected by the SemCAMS Redwiilow project.
On April 11, 2008, the writer met with representatives of the Horse Lake First NetEon Industriat
Resources Corporation and was presented with a copy of Hearing Order GH-Z-ZOOS. Upon
review of the Order, it became readily apparent to the writer that, not only was Horse Lake First
Nation identified as an interested party pursuant to Appendix VI but that there were significant
deadlines included in Appendix H to that Order which had not been met by Horse Lake First
Nation.
E
3
Upon directing a call to representatives from SemCAMS, we were alerted to the fact that on E
March 20, 2008, a further directive from the Board reieﬁng to suspension of the hearing schedute E
was pubiEshed for the reason that “SemCAMS indicates that it wﬂf be unable to ﬁle detailed i
Enfermeiéen about the potentiai impacts on traditienei land use by potentially affected First Nations, E
Metis and other Aboriginal groups...ae well as infermetiee en the environmentef impacts of its E
proposed route changes anti! after the completien {3f the era? hearing echeduied to begin er: 3‘” E
Jame 2008."
”The 8:33:13 goes cm ﬁe state that once SemCAMS has me the Enfermetiee with the Beere‘ eee
served if on the ﬁst of parties (which would include Horse Lake First Nation), the Board win eeE
new dates to replace those in the timetable of events, beginning with the date for Information
Reguests te SemCAMS.
E
m: ...,___..__.._ ...._-_ _,._,..____ , , H“... m, M ~ ”I, ml. ......... . _,.___ H...“ w~mﬂ,..m. E
E
@500 FERST EGMONTON PLACE, 10665 jAseee Avewe, Eemomezxz, Aeeee‘m TSJ 389 E
Tememee (780) 423~8905 FAx: (78(3) 423%946

APR.1§.2008 lizaa 6&3 3954 ACKROYD LL? #33?6 ?.033 /003 g
ACKIQYDW
Hmawrm 8.: Smmrmzzs

The water has reviewed the Appendix and this would appear to eliminate. the opportunity for aw
Ciient to make an appﬁcation to intervene which presumably woutd have expired on the 29m of E
?ebruary 2008. This wouid seemingly limit our cﬁent to letters of comment and carat statements i
which would preciude the ability of our ciiem‘. to advance a rigorous review of the appii‘cation and f
the ether documents and would aiso seemingly precmde our client from entering into the fiﬁng of ;
evidence, the abiiizty to ask questions at the hearing, the ability to submit ﬁnal argument or, in any
other way, pa’rticépate during the proceeding. We would respectfuiiy request that the Board 1
reconsider its cut~off date for the ﬁﬁng of interventions in order to affaw our client to at the very i
least explore that possi-biiity, given the fact that our client has not had an opportunity to review the
Application in the detail required. ;

' m the aitemaﬁ‘ve, in the Want that‘the BOard is mt prepared to amend £15 timetable as suggested,
Hcrse LakeFirst‘ Nation intends to ﬁle its letter of comment by noon, Apri!‘ 15, 2008 but this filing
would be of murse subject to what we would hOpe to be a positive response to our earlies'
request.
Yours very truly,
ACKROYD LLP
{VWL ( L) MCELHANNEY
WLM/jk
0: Danielle Yeager
c: Paul R‘ Jeffrey
c: Laura Lunt

A?R.l&.28i}8 £1238 61.33 3‘364 ACKROYE LL? #33"?: P.?Qi; JUOE E:
AC KWYD E 1500, 10665 Jasper Avenue, Edmontom, Alberta TESJ 389
"“ E.» Phone (780) 423-8905 Fax (780) 423-8946
R «5:4'1‘2R5 8; Samarrtmg g .. . , ii;
. . ZEEEE E??ii EL: A ?%E: 33, E
To: Claudine Dut1l~Berry Fax: (403) 292-5503 E:
Of: National Energy Boa rd : E E:
E3
W E:
Date: 14 Aprii 2008
From: W.L. (Bill) McElhanney 5
Direct Line: (780) 412~2713 E
3%
Our Fiie: 143660 WLM E
Number of pages sent (including cover): 3 E
E
Originai to Foﬂow: No 2
. E
Re: HearmgOrder GH~2-2008 E
SemCAMS Redwiilow ULC (SemCAMS) ‘ ‘
7 December 2907 Application for the Redwillow Pipeline Project E
WWWWwWWWM‘WM W E
Remarks:
If transmission parablemE please (:33! Jean KE at (780) 423-8905.,
TEE CONTENEE OF mts ?AX ARE CONNDENW AND SUBJECT TO S&iCWORICLiENT PRIVELEGE. 3? THE READER {8 NOT THE iNTEN'DED
RECIPES NT OR £78 AGENT. 8E3 ADVISED THAT ANY DiSSEﬁiﬂAﬁON. DISWBUWON, OR COPWNG OF THE CONTENT OF "(HES FAX 13 PRGHiBWED‘
IF YGU HAVE RECEIVED WIS FAX IN ERROR. PLEASE NOTiFY US {MMEDIATELY AND DESWOY THE ORIGINAL FAX. THANK YOU.

W”

ConocoPhiHIps

AP {31 14s 2008 i233630 \ie:i’£a:f:fguz:::i :
, _ 235:3 :2??? :3 ya; :3: 23

MS. Ciaudme Dutherry w 2x
Secretary of the Boa rd
National Energy Board “w“ ”m
444 - 7*’* Avenue SW. é
Calgary, Alberta g
T2P 0X8
Dear Ms. Dutil-Berry
Re: Letter of Comment — Redwillow Pipeline Project
SemCAMS Redwillow ULC
Hearing Order GH-2-2008

File No. OF~Fac-Gas-S393—2007~O1 01
ConocoPhiHips Canada Limited (“CPO”) is writing to express our support for
SemCAMS’ proposed Redwillow Pipeline Project,
Our company is active in naturai gas exploration and development activ'ities in
Northeastern British Columbia. CPC believes that the SemCAMS project will be
beneficial to NEBC gas producers by providing gas gathering and processing
attematives and encouraging competition for gas gathering and processing
services in NEBC.
E

We respectfuiiy request that the National Energy Board take our comments in E
consideration when considering SemCAMS’ application to construct the
Redwillow Pipeline. E
Yours truly, E
§

3 ' a I g
ConocoPhxlkps Canada Limited ;
’7‘: ,3: g

E r; i

a M *

Gard Goodman E
Managea Engineering - North Regien E
E

E

cc. Mr. Paui Jefffay, 8%ake Casseés 8: Graycierz {1? {via e~maé§ Qaué.ge‘ffreygﬁbiakesmm} E
Ms. Laura Luna SemCAMS Redwiiiow ULC (via e-maii~ iaura.fmt@semcamsycom) g

E

E;

n‘ am: HLFN IRS ?88 938 2812 8?)”‘181’2888 [33: 41 “2&5 P‘ 801 f 00?
" ’ﬁ
"1‘ .
I
anieﬂe Yeager
From: Danielle Yeager ..
Sent: Wednesday, Juiy 89, 2608 6:50 EM . : ‘~ ~ . ‘
To: ‘ciauciime.dutil—berry@z'miz-oneig<3i33€géf5?w ~ ~ ~~ . ,
Cc: ’Biﬁ McEihanney‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ '
subject: SemCams Redwiiiow P/L ‘ _
Attachments: SKMBT_C25008070918330.pdf M :
Ms. Duti£~Berry, ' '
Referencing page 6 of the attached letter, please consider this my formal written request to receive a copy of the Draft
Environmenta? Screening Report via registered maii to the address below.
SKMBT_C250
)918330‘pdf (‘
Thank you.
Danielle: Ycagcr, MHA
ﬂimcﬂar. Home Lake First: Nation industry Relaticns Corporation
Santa Fe Piazza
138186 - 102 Avenue
Edmonton. AB T58 18?
Tet: [7801833201 '3
Fax: [780] 930201 2
Cell: [780} 9194-1788
WebIMﬂ-haﬁﬂiksﬂtﬁnmnm
Canﬁdentiaﬁty Warning: This message and any attachments are intended only for the use of the intended recipienﬂs), are conﬁtientiai, and
contain persona}. and/er privileged information, If yen are not the intended recipient, you are hereby notiﬁed that any review, copying,
disseminatian or other use of a1} or any portian of this message and/or attachments is strictiy prohibited. Ifycm are not the intended recipient;
piease notify the sender immediately by reply email, and delete this message and'attachments from your system.
g
3
g
1
:j

ngglsz2o933:3::ggjzwmgmgsgmgg 7294 ENVIRONMENT CANADA :3: 002
"l Environment Envimnnement ‘
a Canada Canada .
Environmental Protection Operations :2 :3;
Environmental Stewardship Branch
PaC§ﬁC 3nd YUan ??:?:g} C":3 f“ K C; r} L:
201 ~ 401 Burrard Street “”3 é“ "J '
Vancouver, BC. V60 385
September 15, 2008 « , h
‘ File OF~FacﬂGas-*CQ19«ZOO7uO1 _
: Claudine Dutil-Berry, Secretary of the Board ECPT: 0743715
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue SW
Caigary, Athena TZP 0X8
Dear Ms. Dutil~8erry1
Re: Canadian Environmental Assessment Act Review 2
Redwiliow Pipeline Project -~ Environment Canada Comments i
This ietter is further to the Environment Canada letter to the National Energy Board dated
August 8, 2007, in which we indicated that Environment Canada would provide specialist or
expert informaﬁon or knowiedge with respect to the subject project pursuant to Section 12(3) of
the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.
Environment Canada has now completed a review of sections of the “Environmental and Socie-
Economic Assessment for the Preposed SemCAMS Redwiilow ULC Redwillow Pipeline Project”
(ESA), “Supplemental Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment for the Proposed
SemCAMS Redwiilow ULC Redwitlow Pipeiine Project” (Supplemental ESA) and
“Environmental and Socio»Economic Assessment for the Proposed SemCAMS Redwmow ULC
Redwilisow Pipeline Project ~ Mount Notogosegunwetchi Reroute" (Mt. Not ESA) documents.
which are relevant to wiidlife and. wildlife habitat management and air quality management. g
Pursuant to our mandate related to wildlife and air quality , our review comments are as foliows. g
1. Wﬂdlife and Wiidlife Habitat: ~
1.1 Migratory Birds and Incidental Take
‘l’ncidentai take’ refers to the killing of migratory birds, andlor the disturbance or destruction of
their nests or eggs resulting directly or indirectly from human activities: where the primary
objective of the activity is not the kiﬂing of m§gratory birds andlor the disturbance or destrucﬁon §
ef their nests or eggs. Environment Canada expects due diligence be exercised to avoid harm
ta migratery birds.
Uedey the eeeeet regulates}! framewerk pursuant ie the Migretow Birds Cenvenffen Ac?
{mew}? Eﬁvimnmem Canada reeemmende met prepeeeete avoid eeeduc’tieg prejeet~re§etec§
actévities during times that have the petentiei to harm migratory birds or their active mete The §
migratery bird breeding season varies across British Coiumbia. The period, of March 15th to
August 15th wiil generally include breeding activity for most though not at! avian species across g:
the province. Shouid the proponent wish, based on project specific information (Le, me region :
2 §
2 . ~ , E

.ﬁMff:fff__i393§3§_E§Z__E‘iﬁﬁfﬂiﬂ§§_§lﬁéw_wm ENVIRONMENT CANADA [g] 00 3
. - i E
.2-
~ E
E
and eievetEon in which a project is Iocated), Environment Canada can advise on more specific E
general breeding periods. ‘ E
E
in the event a proponent determines that its activities win unavoidably overtap with the breeding E
bird season, Environment Canada expects due ditigenee be exercised to avoid harm to E
migratory birds, and recommends that the Preponent employ an Active Migratory Bird Nest
Survey (AMBSN) program to reduce the likelihood of disturbing er destroying active nests. E
Doing so reduces the likelihood that the Proponeet Witt be in contravention of the MBCA. E
Environment Canada recommends that an AMBSN be emptoyed when potentially harmful E
activities are proposed immediately before, during or after the general breeding bird season.
Environment Canada can provide advice to the proponent in the deveIOpmeht of an AMBSN if
the Propenent makes that request.
For a ﬁst technicat reports, occasionat papers or other information regarding migratory birds and
their habitats that might pertain to your project area and activities, please contact Environment
Canada.
1.2 Wetlands
The Federal Policy on Wettands Conservation (Government of Canada 1991) (Federal Poticy)
endorses a ‘No Net Loss’ of wettand functions as its target for conservation of wetlands. The E
Federal Policy recommends a hieratchicat approach to wetland conservation that: (1') avoids g
impacts to wetland functions; (2) reduces residual impacts that cannot be avoided; and finatty‘ E
(3) provides compensation for residual impacts to wetiand functions that cannot be avoided or
' mitigated.
Atong the above lines, we remind the preponent‘: “‘No net loss of wetland functions’
recognizes that further degradation of the wetland resource is not acceptable. However, all
wetland loss cannot be avoided. Some loss occurs naturally, some results from past activities,
and some losses may result from beneﬁcial human activities. The intent, however, is to balance E
the unavoidable loss of wetland functions, through rehabilitation of former degraded wetland or
enhancement of heah‘hy, functioning wetland. As a last resort, compensation for lost functions
could be sought through non~wetland replacement of functions or creation of wetland where
there was none before. In short; ‘no net loss of wetland function’ means that unavoidable losses
of wetland functions must be compensated”.
Our specific comments and recommendations are:
. According: to Appendix 4 of the Supplemental ESA, the proposed route Witt traverse
. approximately 27.8 km of wettand habitat which comprises about 1-8.5 percent of the
proposed pipetine route Consistent with the hierarchical approach of the Federal Poticy
as welt as sound environmentet practice, was there any eﬁert'mede to avoid impacts to f-
wettehee he the manning cf the pipetine route? We eeetd ﬁnd no evidence of such effort '2
or any discussion to eetehtish that impacts Ee wetlands are unavoidable before the 5
discussion en minimization em mitigative measures fer the eeiectect mete
o it is noted that the report does not quantify the size of the at? the wettandete be
impacted Environment Canada would like see reference to the baeetine data for these
E The Federal Peticy an Weﬁend Consetveﬁee {mpfemenzatien Gufde for Federei Lend Managers (1996). f
Canadian Witdtife Service, Environment Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. K1A 0H3.

,.___f3i_,_}f§:f93§_____EE_EEEEE_-,,,E,‘}f‘_‘§__?.?Aifﬁﬁlﬁgédmtm ENVIRONRENT CANADA @ 00 4 E
,3-

wettahds. Environment Canada woutd like to see how the wetiahds have been
deﬁneated and described as part of the report.

o The proponent should implement a post construction monitoring program to ensure "
proper hydrologic conditions and that vegetation is established. ' '

. The report ESA states that ‘ho residual effect is identified, yet immediateiy fotlowing this E
statement it lists four very significant potential residual effects (Section 62.7.2), and E
acknowtedge that 'project construction and maintenance activities within wetia-nds wit! E
likely result in some disruption to the habitat function of wetlands“ This has not been E
adequately addressed in the mitigation Options or compensation strategies when it E
comes to impacts to wetland function. E

. Where project impacts to wetlandlripahan habitat cannot be fully mitigated, the _
proponent should incorporate riparian compensation concepts into the Wettand Habitat E
Compensation Piah. ' E

. Environment Canada recommends that the draft Wetland Habitat Compensation Piah be E
developed for agency review and comment as part of this project environmenta! g
assessment review. E

a We have a concern with the discussion of mitigative measures for peatlahds in a couple E
of ptaces in the documents (there is 3 tot of repetition in these documents). For ;
exampte, in 5.1.1 Effectiveness of Mitigation Measures of Appendix 4 of the E
Supplemental ESA, it states: ‘Wetiand species diversity: often, a greater number of
wetland piants are observed on the right—of~way than in the adjacent nature! area’ as if
this was a good thing. The reason the right~of-way has increased plant diversity is likely
because it has been disturbed; peatiands are acidic and low in mineral nutrients,
thus the diversity of plant species is naturally limited.

a In Tabte 6.2 of the Mt. Not ESA, mitigative measures for aﬂeration of peaﬂahds are listed
as ‘Cut/ mow I walk down shrubs and small diameter deciduous trees in peatlahds at
ground tavei. Avoid grabbing along the access road where practical. Restrict grading in E
peatlands to the extent practical.’ These are not mitigative measures; grubbing and
grading in peatiands should be avoided at all times. . E

. At the end of atmost every section, the reports state ‘no significant resEdual [or ' E
cumutative] impacts to [wettanda wildlife, air quality water quality, etc.) resulting from i
construction and operation of the Project identified’. However, no information. on what 3
criteria were used to determine significance of impacts was readily apparent. Are we
supposed to take their word for this, even when. it's clear from the list of potentiat impacts E

that they are indeed ‘signiﬁcant’?

. There are. severat- repetitions of ‘If mitigative measures do not completeiy protect the
site, some loss or alteration of .may occur’, Evidence of enough baseline data £3
iackihg such that factors such as wettand function can be accurateiy monitored and i

' measu red, yet quantitative assessment of wetland function is critical for the successfu! i
impieme‘ntation of mitigation measures. Regarding wetland function, there is some
confusion in the documents hehzveen wetE‘and function (naturai processes—physicaig
chemicai, btietogicak—t-thatt are associated with weﬂands) and wetland vatues (ecosystem
services that wetiiahds provide t0 humans and the sccietai values pieced Upcm. these
services). ‘E‘he wettand vainatior: precess of 80m 9*? at {$92}, med in Ehisassessmehé

is not recommended as a wettand ecoiogicat function as3essmant method. The US
Army Corps of Engineers have produced guidebooks for applying the hydrogeomorphic
approach to assessing wettand function for speciﬁc wetiand types, including peatiahds.

o h is hot clear if different hotanists/ecoiogists did the vegetation studies for the BC section
than for the A8 section, but we would have expected more ecologica! community types

ah the 80 side than were reported.

______.,£’2£E?_ZEEB§_Q§;§Z_§§L§QL§6LJ 2 94 ENV IRONMENT CANADA {Z} 0 0 5 E
2. At? Quality: g
E
2.1 General E
. E
A in general, Environment Canada is satisfied that construction and routine operation of the g
pipetine wit! not cause adverse effects on air quality or significant releases of greenhouse ’g
gases. E
g
22 Pipeline Construction E
§
. . . . . E
With regard to the disposal of landclearmg debris, the proponent shoutd investigate and g
impiement alternatives to open burning where possible. Where open burning is unavoidabte, E
the proponent should conduct burns so‘ as to minimize emissions and impacts to nearby i
communities, including: ?
o adhere to the BC provincial Open Burning Smoke Contra! Regulation and any g
equivalent legisiation in Alberta; E
0 use air curtain burners to minimize PM” emissions; and . E
e conduct bums as far from residential areas as possible and during appropriate '
meteorological and venting conditions.
2.3 Air Emissions during: a Pipetine Rupture (Worst Case) ‘
Given that the design gas contains 30% H28, it will. be necessary to ensure that appropriate
setbacks are in place from the nearest surface improvements and residences. g
' What is the probabiiity of the worst case scenario occurring wéthin the project fife? We note that
according to the Atberta Energy and Utilities Board study of pipettne performance from 1980
1997 (avaiiabte‘ at: httg:llncsgtamu.edu/regorts/AEUBlr98g.de), there were 276 sour gas
pipeline failures (inctuding leaks and ruptures) during this period.
Why was the maximum pipeline segment between emergency shutdown valves increased from
15 to. 27 km? According to National Pollutant Release Inventory data, if a pipeline failure occurs
in this segment releasing 217.5 tonnes of H28, it would represent one of the single targest g
releases of H28 in Canada for any facility during the entire year. .
in closing, given the sheer votume of documenta workioad challenges and the short timetines f:
for providing a tetter of comment, the foregoing comments are not based on an exhaustive '
review of the documents. Consequentty, in scanning the materiats’ provided, it may be that
there Ee relevant information within the votumineus reports which we did not notice that may
addressed our preceding comments to. some extent. if so: we woutd appreciate being directed
ice the appropyiete de‘eum‘entatien. Thank yet: for providing Environment Canada the eppertunity
te eem-meet; en this pregeet.
Yours sincerely,
Phi? Wong '
Senior Environmentat Assessment Engineer

9gx15x2-0w 08:56 FAX 604 666 7294 ENVIRONEEENT CANADA @361 E?
I *5 I Environment Environnement g
- Canada Canada
Environmemat Protection Operations
203 - 4-01 Burrard Street :;
Vancouver, 8.6. g;
vac 385 E
TRANSMITTAL FORM §;
§:
To: Nationa! Enefgy Board Date: Segtember 15, 2008 g
‘ $5
444 Seventh Avenue SW ‘ Pita No: :5
____ﬁ.i__._———C31 ar ' AB .. Subiect: Redwillow Pipeiine Project 1:
1'2? oxs . NEB Hearing Order AO-T»GH—2~2008
Attention: Claudine Dutii‘-Berry, Secretarwto the Beard E
Sir/Madam: We ate seﬂding you the follcwing items: ,
Deiivery will be by: [ 1 Mail [ 1 Courier [ } Hand [x] Facsimile N0. 403~292~6503
N0. COPIES DESCRIPTION ' g
‘— Letter cf Comment from Environment Canada ‘ :
These are transmitted as checked below:
I 3 For approvai/review and comment {x} For your u'se/info-rmation
i } As requested 5 i 1
Remarks: Original! of latter being sent by Canada Post.
E“? anciasures are mm as; acted, piease aetify ass at onca a
KN a 3%
EA ,{ E g W E
$9“? 3 ﬂ ”4‘
Phii Wong, MJELSCU ?.Eng. «gig
86mm Environmentai Assessment Engineer ?&W‘Eﬁiﬂ;
Teiephone Nan: {804) 6664699
Facsimite No‘: {604} 656-7294 .
e-m-aii: phEi.wonQ@ec.gc.ca
MI
Canada WW9

I I
                                                                                      Pacific Region
                Transport Transports                                         Environmental Services
                Canada             Canada                                   620 - 800 Burrard Street
                                                                           Vancouver, BC V6Z 2J8
                                                             RDIMS: 4379031
                                                             NWPD: 8200-08-8151
                                                             NEB: OF-Fac-Gas-S393-2007-01 03
September 15, 2008
Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry
Secretary of the Board
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue South-West
Calgary, AB T2P OX8
Amended Hearing Order AO-1-GH-2-2008
SemCAMS Redwillow ULC (SemCAMS)
Redwillow Pipeline Project
7 December 2007 Application to the NEB
Dear Ms. Dutil-Berry:
Re: Redwillow Pipeline Project - Letter of Comment
Transport Canada (TC) Environmental Services has reviewed the Redwillow Pipeline Application
(December 7, 2007) submitted by the proponent to the National Energy Board. The resulting
comments are based on Transport Canada's mandate, roles and responsibilities.
TC Involvement
Transport Canada has identified itself as a Responsible Authority for this project, pursuant to
Section 5 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEM), on the basis that the route
proposed by the proponent will be passing through, in, over, or under multiple watercourses that
may require authorizations pursuant to section 108 of the National Energy BoardAct (NEBA)
(Law List triggers) for the proposed pipeline stream crossings and s. 5(1) of the Navigable Waters
Protection Act (NWPA) for any proposed temporary road crossings
TC scope of project:
Transport Canada's scope of project for the screening level environmental assessment includes
the construction, operation and decommissioning of the following:
    .   Pipeline crossings
    .
        Staging areas for.the equipment used for construction of pipeline crossings; vegetation
        clearing of areas required for this construction; areas required for containing and storage
        of sediment discarded from this construction;
    .   Temporary and permanent vehiclerroad crossings; and
    .   Temporary workspaces and staging areas within fish stream riparian areas.
 Ifnot done so previously, the proponent should submit specific application(s) to the NWP
Program (contact information below) for the following crossings deemed navigable under the
Navigable Waters Protection Act:
1) British Columbia:
Murray River, Babcock Creek, Unnamed tributary of CalamagrostisCreek d-57-k, Flatbed Creek,
Unnamed tributary to Redwillow River b-49-e, Redwillow River, Unnamed tributary to Redwillow
River d-70-f, South Redwillow River; and,
2) Alberta:
Wapiti River, Pinto creek, Unnamed tributary to Iroquois Creek, Bald Mountain Creek and Big
Mountain Creek;
3) As well as any other proposed new or upgraded bridge crossings in either British Columbia or
~~~.                                                                                    ~
NWPP Contact Information:
British Columbia:                                      Alberta:
 Navigable Waters Protection Program                   Navigable Waters Protection Program
 Marine Safety, Transport Canada                       Marine Safety, Transport Canada
620 - 800 Burrard Street                               9700 Jasper Avenue, 11th Floor
Vancouver, BC V6Z 2J8                                  Edmonton, AB T5J 4E6
TC has no comments to make pertaining to Table 6.2 (page 6-120); and, Section 11.0 (page 6A-
 53) of the NEB application by SemCams where it states TC-specific information.
TC-Environmental SerVicesis requesting a copy of the watercourse crossing and contingency
 plans for each proposed crossing listed above. Once specific applications for the watercourse
 crossings have been made to TC, the NWPP will review the crossing information pursuant to the
 applicable section of the NEBA. Transport Canada will require conditions to be applied, in the
 Approvals for the watercourse crossings. These conditions will be sent to the proponent with a
 copy to the National Energy Board. It is noted in Volume 2 Part 1 of 3 in Section 6A-2 that an
 "Onsite Checklist for Pipeline and Vehicle Crossings of Watercourses" is to be provided to the
 NEB. Transport Canada is requesting a copy of this information (to be sent to the undersigned).
 The need for approvals under the NEBA requires that Transport Canada consider the
 environmental effects likely to result from issuing these approvals, including the effects of any
 change on the environment on the current use of lands and resources for traditional purposes by
 Aboriginal peoples as well as potential adverse impacts to potential or established Aboriginal or
 treaty rights. In order to both assess the potential effects on First Nations' current and traditional
 activities and prevent or mitigate any adverse effects, Transport Canada believes it is important to
 understand the nature of any such current or traditional activities. As such, federal agencies have
 been in contact with First Nations to obtain this information. A summary document of discussions
 with Aboriginal groups and the Government of Canada will be forthcoming from the Department
 of Fisheries and Oceans on behalf of Transport Canada. Any information that is received from
 Aboriginal groups will be forwarded to the National Energy Board for their review.
 It is our understanding that a draft copy of the CEM screening report will be forwarded to our
 office for review prior to sign off. If you have any questions or comments please do not hesitate to
 contact Paula Doucette of our office, at (604) 666-5719.
 ~sn
Robert Sisler
Regional Manager, Environmental    Services
Transport Canada
CC:
Jennifer Van de Vooren, TC-Environmental Services
Nairn Albrecht, TC-Navigable Waters Protection Division
Allen Cadenhead, TC-Navigable Waters Protection Division
Allasdair Beattie, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Peter Delaney, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Louise Niro, NEB
Nick Thomas, NEB
Laura Lunt, SemCAMS
                                                                                        Pacific Region
I I              Transport
                 Canada
                                    Transports
                                    Canada
                                                                              Environmental Services
                                                                             620 - 800 Burrard Street
                                                                             Vancouver, BC V6Z 2J8
                                                               RDIMS: 4404990
                                                               NWPD: 8200-08-8151
                                                               NEB: OF-Fac-Gas-S393-2007-01 03
September 26, 2008
Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry
Secretary of the Board
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue South-West
Calgary, AB T2P OX8
Amended Hearing Order AO-1-GH-2-2008
SemCAMS Redwillow ULC (SemCAMS)
Redwillow Pipeline Project
7 December 2007 Application to the NEB
Dear Ms. Dutil-Berry:
Re: Redwillow Pipeline Project     - REVISED Letter of Comment
Transport Canada (TC) Environmental Services has reviewed the Redwillow Pipeline Application
(December 7, 2007) submitted by the proponent to the National Energy Board. The resulting
comments are based on Transport Canada's mandate, roles and responsibilities.
TC Involvement
Transport Canada has identified itself as a Responsible Authority for this project, pursuant to
Section 5 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA), on the basis that the route
proposed by the proponent will be passing through, in, over, or under multiple watercourses that
may require authorizations pursuant to section 108 of the National Energy Board Act (NEBA)
(Law List triggers) for the proposed pipeline stream crossings and s. 5(1) of the Navigable Waters
Protection Act (NWPA) for any proposed temporary road crossings
TC scope of project:
TransportCanada'sscopeof projectfor the screeninglevelenvironmentalassessmentincludes
the construction, operation and decommissioning of the following:                         .
      .   Pipeline crossings
      .   Staging areas for the equipment used for construction of pipeline crossings; vegetation
          clearing of areas required for this construction; areas required for containing and storage
          of sediment discarded from this construction;
      .   Temporaryand permanentvehicleroadcrossings;and
      .   Temporary workspaces and staging areas within fish stream riparian areas.
 If not done so previously, the proponent should submit specific application(s) to the NWP
 Program (contact information below) for the following crossings deemed navigable under the
 NavigableWatersProtection      Act
              1)BritishColumbia:
             Murray River, Babcock Creek, Unnamed tributary of Calamagrostis Creek d-57-k, Flatbed Creek,
             Unnamed tributary to Redwillow River b-49-e, Redwillow River, Unnamed tributary to Redwillow
             River d-70-f, South Redwillow River; and,                                     .
             2) Alberta:
             Wapiti River and Pinto Creek
             3) As well as any other proposed new or upgraded bridge crossings in either British Columbia or
             Alberta.
             NWPP Contact Information:
             British Columbia:                                      Alberta:
             Navigable Waters Protection Program                    Navigable Waters Protection Program
             Marine Safety, Transport Canada                        Marine Safety, Transport Canada
             620 - 800 Burrard Street                               9700 Jasper Avenue, 11th Floor
             Vancouver, BC V6Z 2J8                                  Edmonton, AB T5J 4E6
             TC has no comments to make pertaining to Table 6.2 (page 6-120); and, Section 11.0 (page 6A-
             53) of the NEB application by SemCams where it states TC-specific information.           .
             TC-Environmental Services is requesting a copy of the watercourse crossing and contingency
             plans for each proposed crossing listed above. Once specific applications for the watercourse
             crossings have been made to TC, the NWPP will review the crossing information pursuant to the
             applicable section of the NEBA. Transport Canada will require conditions to be applied, in the
             Approvals for the watercourse crossings. These conditions will be sent to the proponent with a
             copy to the National Energy Board. It is noted in Volume 2 Part 1 of 3 in Section 6A-2 that an
             "Onsite Checklist for Pipeline,and Vehicle Crossings of Watercourses" is to be provided to the
              NEB. Transport Canada is requesting a copy of this information (to be sent to the undersigned).
             The need for approvals under the NEBA requires that Transport Canada consider the
              environmental effects likely to result from issuing these approvals, including the effects of any
              change on the environment on the current use of lands and resources for traditional purposes by
              Aboriginal peoples as well as potential adverse impacts to potential or established Aboriginal or
              treaty rights. In order to both assess the potential effects on First Nations' current and traditional
              activities and prevent or mitigate any adverse effects, Transport Canada believes it is important to
              understand the nature of any such current or traditional activities. As such, federal agencies have
              been in contact with First Nations to obtain this information. A summary document of discussions
              with Aboriginal groups and the Government of Canada will be forthcoming from the Department
              of Fisheries and Oceans on behalf of Transport Canada. Any information that is received from
              Aboriginal groups will be forwarded to the National Energy Board for their review.
               It is our understanding that a draft copy of the CEM screening report will be forwarded to our
              office for review prior to sign off. If you have any questions or comments please do not hesitate to
               contact Paula Doucette of our office, at (604) 666-5719.
              'fours sincerely,
                 f~{!~
..-f /1'1ft;~obert      Sisler
               Regional Manager, Environmental Services
               Transport Canada
 CC:
Jennifer Van de Vooren, TC-Environmental Services
Nairn Albrecht, TC-Navigable Waters Protection Division
Allen Cadenhead, TC-Navigable Waters Protection Division
Allasdair Beattie, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Peter Delaney, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Louise Niro, NEB
Nick Thomas, NEB
Laura Lunt, SemCAMS
 10/10/2008 13 : 11 FAX 604 666 7294 ENVIRONMENT CANADA , @002
'*I Environment Environnement
Canada Canada
Environmental Protection Operations .
Environmental SteWardship Branch ; '  .:‘ '- ' . ,
Pacific and Yukon E}; ‘.
, 201 - 401 Burrard Street 3
Vancouver, 8.0. V60 385 A 55 55 W E321 e;
October 10, 2008 .
File OF~Fac~Gas«0919-2007~01
Claudine Dutil~Berry. Secretaw of the Board ' ECPT: 07~O715
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue SW <
Calgary, Alberta T2P 0X8
Dear Ms. Dutil—Berry:
Re: Canadian Environmental Assessment Act Review
, Re'dwillow Pipeline Project -- Information Request Response
W
This letter is an interim response to. your letter dated Octeber 2, 2008 regarding information
Requests directed to Environment Canada with respect to the subject project, and does
consider an October 8, 2008 e-mail from Ms. Rose Marie Zanin, Counsel, National Energy
Board (NEB), which provided requested clarification on the October 2, 2008 letter.
Environment Canada does have the ability to answer the Information Requests that have been
brought to our attention by the NEB. However, in the interest of providing more informed
' responses, we will await our receipt and review of the proponent’s response to the September
15, 2008 EC letter of comment rather than provide our responses by your requested date of
October 14, 2008. An October 2, 2008 e~maii received from TERA Environmental Consultants
noted. that a reepenee to 50’s ietter eheuic} be submitted te the NE?» eh er befere October 21,
2008.
I trust that the foregoing approach is acCeptabie to the NEB.
Yours sincerely,
€ 2g 1 . g; C O W
PhilWong
Senior Environmental Assessment Engineer

10/10/2008 13:11 FAX 604 666 7294 ENVIRONMENT CANADA I001
.~~> l*l Environment Environnement
Canada Canada '
Environmental Protection Operations
“ 201 - 401 Burrard Street
Vancouver, 8.0.
VBC 385 '
TRANSMITTAL FORM I
' To: National Energx Board Date: October 10, 2008 6
444 Seventh Avenue SW File No: ECPT 07—071 5
, Calgary, AB ' < Subject: Redwiuow Pipeline Project
T2P 0X8 NEB Hearing Order AO-1~GH-2-2008
Attention: Claudine Dutil—Berry. Secretary to the Board
Sir/Madam: We are sending you the following items:
Delivery will be by: [ ] Mail [ I Courier [ ] Hand [x] Facsimile No. 403-292—5503
I N0. COPIES DESCRIPTION . ' .
f- Letter from Environment Canada
These are transmitted as checked below:
[ ] For approvaI/review and comment [x] For ycur use/infcrmation
[ 1 As requested I 1'
Remarks: Original of latter being sent by Canada Post.
. . g
' 5
1f enclasums are not as noted; please nmify as at ame‘ A g
PhH Wong, M.A.Sc., P.Eng. , £3
Senior Environmental Assessment Engineer ’2" of
Telephone N0; (604) 6652699 ""‘“°
Facsimile No.: (604} 66651294
e~ma£l= phi£.wong@ec‘gc§ca .
[a '
Canada * WWW

From: Megan Jamison [mailto:meganjamison@hotmail.com]
Sent: Saturday, October 18, 2008 5:01 PM
To: Louise Niro
Subject: RE: Proposed Red Willow Pipeline
Hello Louise,
This is to inform you that I have juggled work and other commitments around, and am able to
make it to the Redwillow Pipeline Hearing in Dawson Creek. As I mentioned in my letter way
back in April, I would like to make an oral statement at the hearing. The link on the web-site for
registering an oral statement never worked for me.
Regards,
Megan Jamison
335 Oughtred Street
Kimberley, BC
V1A 1J3
phone: 250-427-5012
1W 2? 2B 3 :
I e e2 15 eeeﬁezeee? F%E e1
H i; = 5- Megan Jamieen
SALLE; _ i - . 335 Dughtred Street
Kimberley. Britieh Celumbia
2353 GET 2‘! i3 2: 52 WM“
. . October 27. 200E! .
l3; :1. t. .
Me. Claudine [Zhitii-Eierryr
Secretary of the Beard
Natienal Energy Beard
444 - ?th Avenue SW.
Calgary. Alberta
T2P 0X3
Dear Me. DutilaEerry
Re: Hearing Order 61-14-2003
SemCAMS Redwillew ULC (SemCAMS)
7 December 2007 Applicatien fer the Redwillew Pipeiihe Ptejeet
Applicatien fer Adjournment
As the Natienai Energy Beard ie aware. it issued hearing arder GH-Z—ZDUB en February 3.
2003 with mepeet tn the abtwe referenced applicatien by SemCAMS Redwnllew t_JLC_te _
eehetruet a eeur gee pipeline appreximately 150 kilometres in length hem an englnatlng pemt
in nerth-eaetern Britieh Columbia to an end point near Grande Prairie. Alberta. The
empeeed reuting ef the pipeline passes in eieee preximity tn the farm where I grew up and
where my parents still live. I have an deep bereenai eenneetien te these lands and have
eerieue eeheeme abeut the potential effects at the pipeline prejeet en the health and safety of
my famin end their liveeteelt and about the tihely effecte ef the prepeeed prejeet en the
environment. in early 2003 t eentaeted the NEB about the preieet end in feet I was included
as art intereeted patty in Appendix VI ef the Hearing Order-
in April of 2003 l eentacted the NEB, bath by telephone and by email, eeeking infermatien
abeut hew I would ge abeut seeking intervener etetue in the NEB‘e publie hearing mm the
erejeet. At ehe point I spoke te Me Leuiee Hire, a regulately ofﬁcer with the NEE, and she
advised me that I did net qualify to be en intervener. A5 a direct reeult of that advice i
pursued what I thought were my enly ether eptiene te participate in the Public Hearing and
wrete a letter ef eemmeht summarizing my eeneerhe. ee well as preparing an eral statement
that i wee te present at the hearing. Hewever, witheut intervener statue, i will net be able te
present evidence, aek queetiene of Sam CAMS repreeentativee, make ﬁnal argument er
etherwiee participate in the pmeeedinge. The NEE has made it clear that eeneeme ef these
pereene whe db participate as intervenere will be given ieee weight in their deliberations.
Additienaily, Sent CAMS, by way of its letter dated June 23. 2003, indicated ite intentien te
vigereuely eppeee any attempt by myself te exercise theee rights that | week! have had if!
was an intewenur.
I ﬁnd this all very fmetrating. I have he brevieue experience with the NEE er with regulater
proceedings like this. And while the Applicatien eentaine a lot of highly epeeialized and
technical infenhatien. it is my understanding that the NEB'e preeeee deee net, unlike the
previneial Energy Reeeuree Ceheewatien Beard, previde intervenere with funding te retain
eeuneel er expert witneeeee. I believe that the NEB‘e breeeee Is very unfair and ie biased
tewarde the interests ef SemCAMS ever the interests ef the public who might be affected by
the prepeeed prejeet.

lEXEWEEEiE 32.15 433552339? PﬁGE ﬂ?
_ 2 ..
In light ef all_ at this1 I have recently seught El advlﬂﬁlﬂhﬁﬁ ﬂair: :gﬂﬁig 1:: 1-2;“ Efﬁe“
te participating as an mtewener tn the pres ng en _ _ _ di s and
was inesrrect when she informed me that I eeuld net participate In the preeee ngord r the
hearing 35 an intervener. It is new my understanding that nething tn the Heanng uldal'iave
Natienal Energy Beard Act er in the Board's Rules Of IE’IHCIIEE QHULEGWUEEE ”:33
prevented me from participating as an intervener In thus matter If 1 set C se -
tittttrlitienaliyi it is my understanding that the perpesed plpehne emeedsfttl'tl‘: tgrisahtﬁgintﬂst 01‘
greater than 75 kilemetres at new right-ef—wayr and as per EEG'IEIDI‘I‘QO e _a the
Envimnmentai AssessmentAct. and the Comprehensive Study i—fﬂi REQUI'HWHS. _ fth'
prepesed preject eught to have been assessed as a eemprehenswe study. The hails e If
assertien is that SemCAMS has used existing disturbances In its ealeulat lens whit: are ﬁt:
rightrnf-ways end theretere when these distances are dlseeunted. thﬁ length Di the PWJEG
net aleng existing rightef-ways exceeds T5 kilernetres.
' in effectivel denied intewener status threugh erreneeus adsiee‘ef NEE
Islitiiigilgtngfhrgiabjsegthe -:.:I.It'renir Ilitpplieatitztn end the NEB'E handiing Of ”131' APPI'CBm”: ‘55” “ﬁt
eemply with the requirements at the Canadian Envirettmentat Assessment Act, Ilam hereby
fermally requesting that the NEE adjourn this pl'D-GBEdlng se-that my nghts as an Intervinrr
may be restated. I submit that the rights which the NEE eented me can enty he restate 1 l .
am given time te properly prepare and participate and ﬂ'liﬁlWDllid melusle participating In an
intermatien request process, submitting evidence and hawng ettpert witnesses attend te
assist me. In the absence ef an adjeurnment. my fundamental rig hts to a fair preeess will .
have been denied. In sum, the NEB has the respensibility te preside members of the public
with accurate and unbiased infennatien about the NEB‘s preceedings and given that I was
speciﬁcally and inmnﬁﬂtly instructed that l seuld net intervene and that instmetien was
pivotal in my deeisien to net intervene, the NEE sheuld tie the eerrect thing and grant my
request fer an adjeumment ef these proceedings.
At eensiderahle petsenai expense. I will be attending the Public Hearing scheduled te
eernmenee en Octeber 23, 2008 in Dawson Creek. British Ceiumhia. it is my intentien te
raise my adjeumment request as a preliminary matter and I will be asking the NEE te rule en
my request at that time. Having said that, the NE! needs ts recognize that I will be witheut
legal eeunsel. and that I have not as previeusly mentiened, participated in this type of
pmeeeding befere. l weuld therefore request that the NEE grant me seme leniency with
respect to any at its preeeclural requirements that I may net be aware ef er have ever leeked.
I weuld speciﬁcally ask that the NEB facilitate the distribution of this letter te parties to the
Preeeeding as I de net have that capability.
As the Public Hearing is scheduled te start en October 23, 2003. time is ef the essence with
respeet te my request.
if yen have any questiens about this adjeumrnent request at any ether matter relating to the
Apptieatien, please sentaet me by phone at 25042715012 er via email at
W. The NEB sheuld lee aware that i will be travelling enmute te Dawsnn
Creek fer much at Menday Oeteber 2?”.
Sincemiy.
11
Megan Jami en
es. SemCAMS

