                    RATH & COMPANY
                                      Banisters e Solicitors
                                        ESTABLISHED 1995
May 13, 2009
Our File: 99162-1)06, 99166-001
                                                                                                U,
                                                                                          ‘U,
                                                                                                 --
Claudine Dutil-Berry
Secretary of the Board
National Energy Board                                                                      Cr
444 Seventh Avenue SW.
Calgary. Alberta
T2POXS
                                                                                           CD
Dear Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berrv:
Re:       The Sweetgrass First Nation and the Moosomin First Nation
          TransCanada Keystone Pipeline CF Ltd.
          Keystone XL Pipeline Project
Please be advised that we represent the Sweetgrass First Nation and the Moosornin First Nation
with respect to this matter, and have received instruction from our clients to write to the National
Energy Board (the “NEB”) in that regard.
The Swectgrass First Nation and the Moosomin First Nation are Indian Bands within the
meaning of the indian Act, and the forebears of the Sweetgrass First Nation and the Moosomin
First Nation signed Treaty 6. Members of the Sweetgrass First Nation and the Moosoinin First
Nation have Treaty rights pursuant to Treaty No. 6, these Treaty rights are protected by s. 35(1)
of the Constitution Act, 1982 as such, there exists legal obligations and duties upon the Federal
and Provincial Crown to consult and accommodate both the Sweetgrass First Nation and the
Moosomin First Nation.
As this proposed pipeline wiLt infringe upon the Treaty and Aboriginal Rights held by the
 Therefore, please be advised that it is our clients’ position that under no circumstances are any
approvals for this pipeline to he granted until such finie as meaningful md adequate consultation
has occurred between Canada, Saskatchewan and Pdberla with the Sweewrass First Nation and
the Moosomin First Nation. To date, no consultation has occurred between the abovernentioned
parties.
I trust you ‘viii comply with the ahovementioned request. Should you have any questions or
concerns please do not hesitate to contact me.
Yours Truly.
RATH & COMPANY
Per:
         Jeffrey R.W. Rath
Cc:      Chief Standinghorn Sweetgrass First Nation
                             —
         Chief Blackstar N4oosomin First Nation
                         —
         Mr. David Cole; TransCanada Keystone Pipeline
         The Honourable Chuck Strahl: Minister of Indian AtThirs and Northern Development
         The Honourable June Draude; Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations
         Saskatchewan
         The Honourable Gene Zwozdeskvu Minister of Alberta Aboriginal Relations
Ta.
      fl
      .
         Affl
         i>;      ,;‘                                                             ?,.
                                              BRITISH SLL
                                             COLUMBIA
                                           TheBcstPIacconEanh”fl      y 20    1 58
    May 19, 2009
                                                                Via Facsimile: 403-292-55D3
    National Energy Board
   444 Seventh Avenue SW
    Calgary AB T2P OXS
   Attention: Claudinc Qutil-Berry
    Dear Madam:
    Re:    Hearing Order OH-1-2009 regarding
           Transcanada Keystone Pipeline OP Ltd. (Transcanada)
           Keystone XL Pipeline Application of 27 February 2009
   The writer serves as duty caunsel for the Attorney General of British Columbia.
    We have received your materials with respect to the above-noted matter,
   The Attorney Genera! will not be appearing.
   Yours sincerely,
   Richard ButJer
    Barrister and Solicitor
   RB/rr
   isUy of             Legal Servicas Brandi         Maing M&ass:              Loalon:
   AflomeyGeocral                                                              11 DougStx.€L
                       ccjis*4ionsj&
                                                     Vidoria BC V 937          orie BC
                       M177411
                                                     Tepta: 230 3%8S59
                                                                230 3M.0154
                                                   Letter of Comment
Date: 6/10/2009 12:42:16 PM
                                                     Proceeding Information
Project Name:     Keystone XL Pipeline                                      Company Name:      TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd.
Hearing Order No:     OH-1-2009                                             File Number: OF-Fac-Oil-T241-2009-01 01
                                                       Contact Information
Name: David Whiteley                                                        Address: 224 Munro Street
Title:                                                                      City: Carleton Place
Organization:                                                               Province:   Ontario
Telephone:     (613) 257-5765                                               Postal Code: K7C 1G8
Facsimile:                                                                  Email:
Please ensure that your letter of comment includes:
      ·  the nature of your interest in the application
      ·  comments on the application
      ·  any relevant information that will explain or support your comments
For further information, please refer to the Hearing Order on the NEB website at www.neb-one.gc.ca.
                                                               Comments
                                                       Attach additional pages if necessary.
I'm a concerned citizen who believes our governments should not allow the direct shipment of raw resources out of
Canada. As such I am totally against this project as I believe it provides no long term benefits for Canada and can
only deepen our dependence on the U.S.A tenuous infrastructure.
                                                                           Saskatchewan
3211 Albert Street, Room 486                                                               27 July 2009
Regina, Saskatchewan
S4S 5W6                                                                             Our File: 2008 - 064
Claudine Dutil-Berry                                              (Submitted electronically with hard
Secretary of the Board                                           copy sent by mail with attachments)
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
Calgary, AB       T2P 0X8
Dear Ms. Dutil-Berry:
                                   Keystone XL Pipeline Project
                                   Hearing Order No. OH-1-2009
                               File No. OF-Fac-Oil-T241-2009-01 01
This Letter of Comment is submitted regarding the proposed TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP
Ltd. Keystone XL Project (“the Project”) (Hearing Order No. OH-1-2009 / File No. OF-Fac-Oil-
T241-2009-01 01). Saskatchewan Ministry of the Environment appreciates the opportunity to
participate in the National Energy Board’s (“the Board’s”) review process and to comment on this
project.
The comments which follow are based on review of the Environmental and Socio-Economic
Assessment (February 2009) (“the ESA”) presented by TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd.
(“TransCanada,” “the proponent”) in support of their Keystone XL Project (“the Project”). The
comments, which are limited to the Saskatchewan portion of the Project, are based on review of the
ESA by Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment (“Environment,” “the Ministry), the principal
environmental-protection agency in Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Ministry of Agriculture
(“Agriculture”). Saskatchewan’s and Environment’s interest in the Project is based on the scope of
the project in the province (259 km) and the number and significance of environmental issues raised
by the Project.
Saskatchewan is pleased with TransCanada’s co-operative approach in planning the Project and in
responding to concerns raised by provincial agencies. We welcome and encourage TransCanada’s
continuing consultation with provincial agencies as Project details are finalized. Your principal
contacts for land- and resource-management issues are:
 with Environment for wildlife and other resource-management issues: Ken Dillabaugh, Senior
    Ecological Protection Specialist, Lands Branch, Swift Current, phone: 306-778-8260;
 with Agriculture on Saskatchewan Crown lands: Lorne Veitch, Regional Manager, Crown Land
    Services, Lands Branch, Swift Current, phone: 306-778-8300.
As a general comment, Environment found the information provided in the ESA, including planned
mitigation, to be comprehensive and detailed. We have, however, identified a number of issues on
which we wish to provide advice or to recommend additional consideration on the part of
TransCanada and / or the Board. Some of these points pertain to provincial regulatory requirements
while others pertain to more general issues and outstanding concerns.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 2
1.       Within Saskatchewan, the Project will be located in the watersheds of the South
         Saskatchewan River, Cypress Hills North Slope, Swift Current Creek and Frenchman River.
         It crosses 10 watercourses with defined beds and banks, a larger number of watercourses
         with no defined channels and a single wetland.
         The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority’s (SWA) licences surface and groundwater projects
         in the province. Since not all projects are necessarily licenced (e.g., dugouts, farm water
         wells), SWA recommends that all landowners / occupants within 2 km of the Project be
         contacted to ensure that any unlicenced water projects are identified and any owner concerns
         resolved.
         SWA regulates surface drainage in the province and any alterations of existing drainage
         patterns require the Authority’s prior approval.
         Pipeline-spacing details (i.e., in relation to the existing Foothills pipeline) for all water
         crossings are to be provided to the SWA regional office. An as-constructed plan for the
         pipeline including pipeline marker locations for each navigable river, creek or lake crossing
         also should be provided to that office. This requirement to provide as-constructed plans to
         SWA may also apply to any authorized water projects crossed by the proposed pipeline.
         The proponent is advised to contact SWA as follows prior to initiating construction:
                regarding surface water use or diversion, alterations to surface drainage, pipeline
                 spacing and as-constructed reports: Gord Hagen, Swift Current regional office, phone
                 306-778-8266;
                regarding use or diversion of ground water: Cas Rogal, Moose Jaw, phone 306-694-
                 3149.
2.       As noted, the Project will cross several watercourses and wetlands. The ESA provides
         detailed evaluations and plans for each of the crossings. The following points provide
         additional comment on stream crossings and related issues:
          a)     The ESA proposes open-cut crossings of all streams when the streams are either dry
                 or frozen, or by isolating flow if that is not possible. Environment considers that
                 approach to be acceptable, with the exception of the Frenchman River crossing.
          b)     Environment has initiated and is continuing discussions with TransCanada regarding
                 a trenchless crossing of the Frenchman River. It is Environment’s opinion that a
                 trenchless crossing will minimize impacts to the bed, banks and boundary of this
                 watercourse, minimize potential deposition of deleterious substances and minimize
                 sedimentation from exposed soils. Environment strongly encourages TransCanada
                 and the Board to ensure that a trenchless crossing of this river is effected unless a
                 sound geotechnical rationale to the contrary is identified. TransCanada recently
                 confirmed following geotechnical testing that their primary option for this crossing is
                 a low-pressure horizontal directional drill (HDD), likely originating on the south
                 bank of the river
          c)     Environment wishes to continue to be engaged in discussions between TransCanada
                 and Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO) regarding development of a contingency
                 plan for the Frenchman River crossing [isolated open-cut crossing (dam and pump or
                 flume)].
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 3
          d)      TransCanada has also indicated that they are considering a trenchless crossing of
                  Piapot Creek for reasons of constructability. Environment is supportive of a
                  trenchless crossing of this stream.
          e)      Details of the proposed crossings should also be discussed with SWA (Bart Ogema,
                  Senior Hydrologist, Basin Operations, 306-694-3957).
          f)      Discussions regarding details of all stream crossings should continue with
                  Environment Swift Current. Aquatic Habitat Protection Permits will be issued
                  once water-crossing plans have been finalized and details are considered acceptable.
3.       The ESA indicates (Section 1.4.1.4 Supporting Facilities, page 1-5; Section 2.5.3, Mainline
         Valve Assemblies, page 2-7) that mainline valves will be installed at all pump stations, on
         both sides of “major watercourse crossings” (Red Deer, South Saskatchewan, Frenchman
         rivers), near “sensitive areas” and “other locations as necessary to facilitate system
         operations.” The ESA does not identify or provide criteria to identify either these “sensitive
         areas” or other locations which may be necessary for system operation.
         Environment considers that at a minimum the following additional streams should be
         considered “sensitive areas” which should be isolated by valve assemblies to ensure that any
         loss of pipeline fluids is identified and curtailed immediately in order to protect watersheds,
         fish habitat and water quality:
                 Piapot Creek, which feeds into and is the principal water source for Crane Lake
                  which is a major breeding and staging area for migratory waterfowl and shorebirds;
                 Bone Creek, which is an important trout fishery;
                 Swift Current Creek, which is an important fishery, a tributary to Lake Diefenbaker
                  and the City of Swift Current's drinking water supply.
4.       Discharge of hydrostatic testing water requires approval from Environment under The
         Environmental Management and Protection Act (WHPA). Contact Wes Kotyk, Executive
         Director, Industrial Branch, Saskatoon, 306-933-6542.
5.       The Project crosses “wildlife habitat lands” designated pursuant to The Wildlife Habitat
         Protection Act. In addition to implementing general and specific measures described in the
         ESA to minimize Project impact on wildlife habitat, The Wildlife Habitat Lands Disposition
         and Alteration Regulations (Section 5) prohibit alterations to wildlife habitat lands except
         where permitted pursuant to the regulations or as may otherwise be authorized by the
         minister. While alterations to wildlife habitat land necessary for maintenance of existing
         pipelines may be made, an approval from the Minister of Environment will be required for
         the new pipeline sections crossing WHPA lands. Contact Ken Dillabaugh, Environment,
         Swift Current in this regard.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 4
6.       The right-of-way (ROW) crosses lands which were the subject of the Great Sand Hills
         Regional Environmental Study, May 2008 (“the RES”), as follows: NW 31 and NW, SW &
         SE 2-13-24 W3M. No concerns specific to the RES were identified and no lands affected by
         the Project were recommended for protected-area designation (either Core Biodiversity Area
         or Additional Core Biodiversity Area). As such, the Project does not appear to raise specific
         or unique concerns in relation to the RES (note that general concerns not specifically related
         to the RES but applicable to the areas identified above are identified elsewhere in this letter).
7.       The ESA identifies a high potential for heritage resources along the ROW, and notes a
         number of areas crossed by the Project where heritage resources were identified during
         planning for and construction of the Foothills pipeline. Additional information may be
         obtained from Nathan Friesen, Heritage Resources Branch, 306-787-5774.
8.       Weeds, particularly noxious weeds, are of concern, especially in areas of native rangeland.
         Rural Municipalities have identified Downy Brome, Leafy Spurge and Scentless Chamomile
         as particular concerns. Invasive, non-native agronomic species (e.g., Smooth Brome, Crested
         Wheatgrass, Sweet Clover) are of major concern in native rangeland. For purposes of this
         discussion, the term “weed” includes both weed species and (on native rangeland) invasive
         agronomic species.
         The ESA incorporates a Weed Management Plan (WMP) (Attachment A9). The Plan
         describes an approach to weed management (treatment thresholds, priorities, options) but
         lacks specifics. The following points apply to the WMP:
         a)      The ESA / WMP identifies species of concern (including invasive agronomics) but
                 does not provide site-specific information on where these species occur within or
                 adjacent to the right-of-way. Similarly, the ESA / WMP does not identify areas
                 where specific measures are required to avoid construction-related spread along the
                 ROW or spread from the ROW onto adjacent lands (or vice versa). The ESA
                 establishes as a short-term objective of the WMP (page A9-3) the identification of
                 weeds on facility sites, along the ROW and access roads and indicates (page A9-4)
                 that TransCanada will undertake “baseline assessments” of the ROW and facility
                 sites. Environment emphasizes the importance of undertaking detailed weed
                 surveys / risk assessments prior to initiating construction and developing plans
                 for prevention and control of spread based on those assessments.
         b)      The ESA also establishes a number of long-term objectives regarding weed control
                 during the life of the Project. Environment is in agreement with and endorses these
                 objectives, in relation to both the currently proposed Project and the existing ROW.
         c)      The WMP defines risk levels (Table A9-2) as a means of identifying treatment
                 priorities. These priorities appear to be based on risk of spreading from the ROW.
                 While that is important, avoiding introduction of weeds onto the ROW and / or
                 moving weeds along the ROW from infested to non-infested areas also require
                 attention. A clear protocol for cleaning of equipment when moving to “clean” from
                 infested areas for any of the priority weeds is required.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 5
         d)      The WMP indicates (Monitoring, page A9-4) that “regular inspections to determine
                 the aerial extent of weed and invasive species problems” will be undertaken. The
                 WMP indicates that monitoring will consist of a low-elevation helicopter survey at
                 least once every three years, with follow-up on-ground monitoring (ground
                 assessments) of areas where the over-flights identify concerns. Environment
                 considers these measures inadequate: by time a weed issue is visible from a
                 helicopter, particularly based on a triennial survey frequency, the problem species
                 will be well-established, spreading both on and off the ROW and very difficult to
                 control. This situation is particularly of concern on native rangeland such as the
                 Great Sand Hills where disturbed areas are prone to invasion by Downy Brome and
                 Leafy Spurge and where control options are limited (e.g., chemical control is
                 undesirable).
                 Environment recommends development of a weed-survey and -control protocol
                 based on annual (or more frequent, if indicated) ground-level inspections of
                 priority areas (as determined by baseline surveys and modified as required by
                 post-construction surveys). Such surveys should continue until local weed issues
                 are resolved. Provincial agencies and affected RMs should be invited to participate
                 in development of this protocol.
         e)      A system of tracking / monitoring weed-management efforts should be developed to
                 complement the survey / management recommended above.
         f)      Environment supports preparation of a Guidebook identifying all weed species of
                 concern and providing a ranking of control methodologies for each species or group
                 of species. This Guidebook should include non-native agronomics (for use on native
                 rangeland) and should be prepared in consultation with provincial Agriculture
                 officials and affected Rural Municipalities.
         g)      Weed-control measures (e.g., mowing, chemical treatment) in high-risk areas prior to
                 initiating construction may be appropriate.
         h)      Reports of weed monitoring / treatment should be provided to the relevant RM and
                 Agriculture offices (Saskatchewan Crown land).
9.       While not currently a significant problem in Saskatchewan, clubroot is a potential issue.
         All machinery entering from out-of-province and which has a potential to spread this species
         should be cleaned. Consultation with Ministry of Agriculture prior to construction is also
         advised to ensure that their current recommendations are followed. Further information is
         available at: http://www.agriculture.gov.sk.ca/Clubroot_Disease_Canola
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 6
10.      Stabilization and reclamation of areas of native vegetation should be a priority.
         a)       The extent of surface disturbance on native rangeland should be minimized. The
                  ESA indicates (page A-23) that “soil disturbance in native prairie will be minimized
                  as much as practical,” with stripping typically limited to “blade width.” The ESA
                  indicates (Page A-31, Table A-2) that blade width on native prairie will be between
                  8 and 12 m. Environment considers that stripping an area this wide on native
                  vegetation is excessive – the width stripped should be limited to what is
                  essential to accommodate the trench.
         b)       Areas of sandy soil in particular are vulnerable to significant disturbance by
                  construction under non-frozen conditions (disturbance associated with the trench as
                  well as heavy-equipment traffic is of concern). The pipeline crosses the
                  southwestern corner of the Great Sand Hills, an area highly vulnerable to
                  construction-related disturbance and post-construction erosion and invasion by
                  weedy species. The following points apply to this area:
                       construction under frozen-ground conditions is recommended to minimize
                        surface disturbance and to enhance trench stability;
                       freezing down (snow padding, water application) before construction will help
                        protect the ground surface and vegetation from traffic and equipment;
                       The ESA indicates (Specific Measures, page A-48) that a “detailed
                        Reclamation Plan” will be developed in consultation with regulatory agencies.
                        Environment supports the development of such a plan and requests /
                        recommends as follows:
                        o provincial agencies (Agriculture, Environment) should be involved in
                              preparation of the plan;
                        o affected Rural Muncipalities / Great Sand Hills Planning District should
                              be invited to participate in preparation of the plan;
                        o the plan should include experience gained from reclamation research
                              associated with construction of the Foothills pipeline in the same area
                              (e.g., vegetation trials undertaken by Dr. David Walker).
                 In general, Environment encourages prompt and aggressive erosion control as an
                 essential component of successful reclamation. The following additional points are
                 provided:
                       Prompt and effective stabilization of exposed areas should proceed as soon as
                        construction is complete (subject to considerations of weather), with emphasis
                        on a rapid return to pre-development conditions and native species
                        conservation.
                       Seeding should occur in early spring.
                       Erosion control should be a priority, to prevent loss of topsoil and propagules
                        and to provide a stable substrate for revegetation. Measures should be
                        consistent with each site’s erosion hazard, and typically should precede
                        reseeding.
                       Reseeding should not be relied upon as the primary method of erosion control
                        in high-risk areas since seedlings may require several years to establish an
                        effective protective cover. Proactive mechanical erosion-control measures
                        such as straw crimping, matting and wind fences should be implemented
                        immediately following construction on erosion-prone areas.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 7
11.      Reclamation of all areas of Saskatchewan Crown land which support native vegetation must
         use approved native seed mixes. The following additional points apply:
              seed mixes for use on Saskatchewan Crown land must be discussed with and approved
               by the regional Agriculture office;
              seed mixes to be used at watercourse crossing and riparian areas must be approved by
               Environment (see point 2, Aquatic Habitat Protection Permits). Where reseeding is
               considered necessary, seed mixes should resemble the species mix at the location in
               question;
              the reclamation schematic included with the watercourse data sheets (Attachment
               A10) indicates that the banks of Maple Creek and Skull Creek will be seeded with
               canary reed grass [sic]. Reed Canary Grass has been described as a major threat to
               marshes and natural wetlands because of its hardiness, aggressive nature and rapid
               growth, resulting in rapid displacement of native wetland and wet-prairie species.
               This species is NOT to be used at these or other locations pending discussion with
               Environment of the most appropriate species for reclamation of riparian areas;
              all seed for use on native rangeland and riparian areas must be assayed by a qualified
               independent seed lab to confirm that the seed mix is weed-seed free. Results of these
               assays are to be provided to the responsible authority prior to seeding;
              the ESA (page A-23, points 62, 63) lists agronomic or introduced species to be
               included in seed-mix assays. The more lengthy list of weeds and invasive species that
               could pose a problem for reclamation (page A9-4) should be included in the list of
               species to be considered in the seed assays;
              any cereal straw used for reclamation (e.g., straw crimping) should be treated with
               anhydrous ammonia to minimize potential for weeds. Use of native hay mulch from
               adjacent areas is recommended where available;
              subject to landowner approval, Environment recommends use of native seed mix when
               reclaiming areas of native vegetation on privately owned land; and
              all equipment should be cleaned before entering areas of native vegetation to minimize
               potential for spread of invasive species (weeds; agronomic grasses) and as often as
               required during construction.
12.      The ESA indicates that habitat exists for numerous plant species of concern, including
         species listed under The Species at Risk Act (Canada) (SARA) and The Wildlife Act
         (Saskatchewan) / Wild Species at Risk Regulations (WSRR), as well as species otherwise
         tracked by provincial authorities (Conservation Data Centre – CDC). These species occur
         and have potential to occur in areas to be crossed by the Project.
         The ESA did not report occurrences of plant species listed in either SARA or WSRR, but did
         report (Table A14-1) a number of “rare communities” (pages A14-6, A14-7) and “rare
         plants” (pages A14-7 to A14-9). While occurrences of these communities and species is
         documented, the ESA does not provide detailed information on the species’ biology, the
         numbers encountered, or the particular risks posed by the Project to the individuals or
         communities encountered.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 8
         Additionally, the ESA limits proposed mitigation to SARA-listed species. Environment
         considers that the following mitigation should be applied to all species classified by the CDC
         as S1 or S2 as well as to SARA-listed species:
                there should be a 50-m buffer between the edge of construction activity and the plant
                 record (ROW narrowing is advisable where feasible);
                if avoidance is not feasible and if >5% of the population will be affected, other
                 measures should be considered (e.g., transplantation, winter construction) as may be
                 appropriate to the species, its population on and off the ROW, and the location.
         Environment requests that TransCanada provide more detailed documentation on each
         identified “rare plant” occurrence, planned mitigation and conflicts that may not be mitigible
         prior to initiating construction. Environment will require that areas with potential for species
         of concern be resurveyed and that the results of these surveys be reported to Environment
         prior to construction if construction is planned in areas of suitable habitat during the growing
         season.
         Environment wishes to be involved in finalizing mitigation plans in relation to species of
         concern where identified mitigation is not feasible.
13.      The ESA indicates that habitat exists for numerous wildlife species of concern, including
         species listed under The Species at Risk Act (Canada) (SARA) and The Wildlife Act
         (Saskatchewan) / Wild Species at Risk Regulations (WSRR), as well as species otherwise
         tracked by provincial authorities (Conservation Data Centre – CDC). These species occur
         and have potential to occur in areas to be crossed by the Project.
         The ESA reports numerous occurrences of SARA / WSRR species (Table A14-1, pages
         A14-15 to A14-23), together with planned mitigation. The following points pertain to the
         various wildlife species-at-risk encountered during surveys reported in the ESA:
         a)       Burrowing Owl (SARA / WSRR: Endangered). Two areas with active Burrowing
                  Owl burrows were identified along the pipeline ROW, both in close association with
                  the existing Foothills pipeline (< 10 m separation). One location is on private land
                  and the second (in association with a Black-tailed Prairie Dog colony) is on
                  Saskatchewan Crown land leased by the PFRA (Masefield Pasture). A 2009 survey
                  by Environment reported six adult Burrowing Owls within the Prairie Dog colony.
                 Environment’s Activity Restriction Guideline stipulates that high-intensity
                 activity is to be curtailed within 500 m of active Burrowing Owl burrows
                 between April 1 and July 15 (planned construction or other Project activity within
                 the buffer distance during that period must be preceded by a survey to confirm that
                 the burrows are not in use). After July 15, or if the burrows are not active,
                 preservation of the burrows must be ensured.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 9
         b)      Black-tailed Prairie Dog (SARA: Special Concern; CDC: S2). An active colony is
                 located on Saskatchewan Crown land leased by the PFRA (Masefield Pasture). The
                 proposed ROW is approximately 200 m from the colony, which is associated with
                 Burrowing Owl occurrences (previous point). A May 20, 2009 field inspection of
                 the proposed ROW by Environment reported the colony as being located in a shallow
                 depression, with a ridge to the north and the east of the colony restricting line-of-
                 sight towards the proposed pipeline route.
                 Environment evaluated three routing options in relation to the colony: 1) the
                 proposed route following the existing Foothills ROW, 2) a route following the
                 Masefield pasture boundary, and 3) a route which diverts around the colony along the
                 existing pipeline with a detour to the east boundary fence line and continuing south
                 along the fence line.
                 Saskatchewan’s Activity Restriction Guideline stipulates that high-intensity activity is
                 to be curtailed year-round within 500 m of Prairie Dog colonies. In the current
                 situation, however, Environment considers that the proposed route (i.e.,
                 contiguous with the existing Foothills line) will have less overall impact on
                 native vegetation (fragmentation, direct disturbance) and habitat for all species,
                 including species at risk, than would establishing a new ROW in order to avoid
                 the colony by 500 m. Additionally, construction is a one-time, temporary event and
                 the colony is at least partially isolated from the ROW by topography.
                 Assuming that approximately 9 m of workspace from the existing ROW will be used
                 (in addition to 21 m of new ROW), the proposed route will minimize the total loss of
                 native grassland. Route 2 would create more linear fragmentation and disturb slightly
                 more native grassland while Route 3 would create even more linear disturbance.
                 Environment supports the route proposed by TransCanada (contiguous with the
                 Foothills line) and recommends the following additional measures to minimize
                 potential impact on the Prairie Dog colony:
                       that a detailed plan (including a traffic-management plan) be developed to
                        minimize total activity and length of construction within the 500-m buffer to
                        the extent feasible. (As noted above, if Burrowing Owls are breeding / nesting
                        in the Prairie Dog colony, high-intensity activity including construction is to be
                        curtailed within 500 m of active burrows between April 1 and July 15);
                       that a qualified monitor should conduct pre-construction, construction, and
                        post-construction observation of the Prairie Dog colony;
                       that reclamation should ensure that the disturbed area is returned to native
                        grassland as quickly as possible. Reclamation should be monitored for a
                        minimum of five years, or until reclamation standards has been met, with
                        annual status reports provided to Environment and Agriculture;
                       that reclamation / monitoring requirements should also address any concerns on
                        the existing ROW.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 10
         c)      Ord's Kangaroo Rat (SARA: Endangered; CDC: S2). Three populations of Ord's
                 Kangaroo Rats were identified, at NW 1, SE 15 and SE 21 / SW 22-14-25 W3M
                 (alignment sheets 105, 106 and 107). All three populations are within ~ 50 - 200 m
                 of both the existing Foothills pipeline and the proposed ROW.
                  Based on the alignment sheets, populations at SE 21 / SW 22-14-25 W3M
                  (alignment sheet 105) and SE 15-14-25 W3M (alignment sheet 106) are in closest
                  proximity to the proposed construction. The alignment sheets indicate that the
                  proposed ROW diverts from the existing ROW in the vicinity of these two colonies,
                  but that these diversions do not resolve concerns associated with the route in
                  proximity to the Kangaroo Rat colonies. The ESA indicates (Table A14-1, pages
                  A14-21 to A14-23) that TransCanada will complete further surveys in 2009 to
                  identify den locations prior to construction.
                 Environment considers that the proximity of the occupied dens to the proposed
                 construction is of significant concern. Certain dens are ~50 m from construction,
                 much closer than the 500-m setback recommended by Environment for heavy
                 construction and potentially within the 50-m setback recommended for pipeline
                 operation (http://www.biodiversity.sk.ca/Docs/SKactivityrestrictions.pdf ).
                 Similarly, the Canadian Wildlife Service’s recommends (Draft Petroleum Industry
                 Activity Guidelines for Wildlife Species at Risk in the Prairie and Northern Region,
                 2009) a 500-m setback for activities such as large-diameter pipeline construction.
                 Environment remains concerned regarding potential impacts of pipeline construction
                 in close proximity to the Kangaroo Rat colonies and recommends the following:
                        that status of the colonies be re-evaluated based on 2009 field surveys. Since
                         colonies may be established / re-occupied during fall dispersal of young, fall
                         surveys of all suitable habitat within 500 m of the ROW should be included;
                        that potential alternate routings be identified by TransCanada wherever the
                         ROW is <500 m from active Kangaroo Rat dens. Detailed evaluations should
                         be done of these potential alternatives;
                        that final routing / mitigation decisions be made in consultation with
                         provincial and federal agencies once current distribution of the species is
                         known and alternative routes have been fully evaluated.
         d)      Ferruginous Hawk (SARA: Special Concern; CDC: S4). The ESA identifies 8
                 Ferruginous Hawk nests within Environment’s recommended 1000-m breeding- /
                 nesting-season buffer (Table A14-1, pages A14-18, 19). Seven of these occurrences
                 are within about 500 m of the ROW. Site-specific information (e.g., line-of-sight to
                 nests) is not provided.
                 Environment will require the following:
                         that construction at less that 500 m from occupied nests be avoided between
                          March 15 to July 15 (nests greater than 500 will be evaluated depending on
                          site-specific details);
                         all activities, including operational activity, should be restricted within 100
                          meters of occupied nests between March 15 and July 15.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 11
         e)      Northern Leopard Frog (SARA: Special Concern; CDC: S3); Canadian Toad;
                 Great Plains Toad (SARA: Special Concern; CDC: S4). The ESA identifies 14
                 occurrences of Northern Leopard Frog and one occurrence of each of Canadian Toad
                 and Great Plains Toad (Table A14-1, pages A14-15 to A14-17). All of these
                 occurrences are within Environment’s activity-restriction guideline of 500 m (90 m
                 for Canadian Toad) from ponds used for breeding, living and hibernating.
                 Environment will require the following:
                         that the ROW be cleared of amphibians prior to construction (except during
                          winter);
                         that frog-proof fences be erected prior to construction (except during winter);
                         that no wetland which provides documented or potential breeding or
                          overwintering amphibian habitat be drained or significantly altered for or
                          during construction without prior approval of Environment;
                         that the planned mitigation plan for SARA-listed amphibians be prepared, in
                          consultation with Environment.
         f)      Other Species of Concern / tracked species. Several other species of concern have
                 potential to occur in the area, including:
                         Sprague’s Pipit (SARA: Threatened; CDC: S4). This species is not
                          mentioned in the ESA, but has been documented by Environment in the
                          Masefield Pasture;
                         Sharp-tailed Grouse. There is a historic lek at NE 28-05-17 W3M
                          approximately 1 km from the ROW;
                         Greater Sage Grouse (SARA: Endangered; CDC: S1). There is no
                          consideration in the ESA of potential habitat within on near the ROW;
                         Swift Fox (SARA / WSSR: Endangered). Swift Fox have been observed
                          north of the Masefield Pasture and south of the Prairie Dog colony.
         Environment will require that areas with potential for species of concern be resurveyed and
         that the results of these surveys be reported to Environment prior to construction if
         construction is planned in areas of suitable habitat during the respective breeding / nesting
         season. Environment wishes to be involved in finalizing mitigation plans in relation to
         species of concern where identified mitigation is not feasible.
14.      Crossings of Crown land administered by Saskatchewan Ministry of Agriculture (including
         lands leased to PFRA) will be subject to an easement requirement. Additional information
         (e.g., detailed reclamation plan) may be required by Agriculture as part of their approval
         process.
         The following Agriculture regional manager should be contacted: Lorne Veitch, Swift
         Current, 306-778-8300.
 Claudine Dutil-Berry
July 27, 2009
Page 12
Please contact Graham Mutch of this office (306-787-6241) with any questions regarding the
foregoing.
Yours truly,
 Original signed by Graham Mutch for:
Randy Seguin
Director, Environmental Assessment Branch
Phone: 306-787-5786           FAX: 306-787-0930
c.c.     G. Mutch
         M. Sigmeth / K. Dillabough (Environment) (by e-mail)
         R. Stilling (Environment) (by e-mail)
         W. Kotyk (Environment) (by e-mail)
         L. Veitch (Agriculture) (by e-mail)
         P. Gehl (SWA) (by e-mail)
         C. Germann (Heritage) (by e-mail)
         J. Hovdebo (DFO) (by e-mail)
         P. Gregoire (CWS) (by e-mail)
         L. Quinnet-Abbott (Environment Canada) ((by e-mail)
         P. Boothroyd (CEAA) (by e-mail)
         I. Cameron (Regulatory Project Manager, TransCanada) (by e-mail with follow-up letter)
         E. Swanson (Associate General Counsel, TransCanada) (by e-mail with follow-up letter)
         W.M. Moreland (Stikeman Elliott LLP) (by e-mail with follow-up letter)
         C. Nicholls (Jacques Whitford / AXYS) (by e-mail)
pipeline/ transcanada keystone xl 2008-064.003
Environment Environnement
I*' Canada Canada

Environmental Protection

Prairie & Northern Region

123 Main Street, Suite 150

Winnipeg, MB R30 4W2

July 28, 2009 File: 4194-10-5/2985

Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry

Board Secretary

National Energy Board

444 — 7th Avenue S. W.

Calgary, Alberta

T2P 0X8

Dear Ms. Dutil-Berry,

Re: Hearing Order OH-1-2009 regarding TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP

Ltd (TransCanada) Keystone XL Pipeline Application of 27 February 2009:

NEB File: OF-Fac-Oil-T241-2009-O1 01

In accordance with the direction provided by National Energy Board (the Board)

in its Hearing Order OH-1-2009 of 12 May 2009, Environment Cana a (EC) is

providing this letter of comment to the Board as a part of the pubic hearing

regarding TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd (TransCanada) Ke stone XL

Pipeline project proposal application of 27 February, 2009. The commﬁgts based

on specialist or expert information or knowledge provided by E to the

Responsible Authority (RA) is within the department’s mandate as defined

through the specific statues and regulations assigned to the Minister of the

Environment and through the Federal Authority (FA) role and responsibilities in

pursuant to section 12 (3) of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.

Environment Canada is providing comments based on departmental

responsibilities as defined by the following legislation and associated policies: E
(a) Department of the Environment Act 5‘
(b) Migratory Birds Convention Act and Regulations E
(c) Species at Risk Act g
(d) Canadian Environmental Protection Act
(e) The Federal Policy on Wetland Conservation 1::

m-

Canada wwecgaca

C" O
0 o
n- , C '—
-_ :3 O
' Q. :3
.4 ‘ m ‘< l ,
N? : .‘o.’ 2
o ‘3 ."l"*9 ’
. . 1i 5 , .
' J " "‘r -‘- ‘ “ .
. f . ' I...“ w'f‘»: 1’s 5
in? 6‘ 3 3;?) I f "
.4 ‘ ‘ ;
p
" ! ... ‘ ’**
’ \T o" . I ' “ ’ ' ,
¥ , 1-;
o - b ’..‘.I\ ‘i . .i‘"
. "I 1 .. 1a!
‘ 3' ,._-: a I ‘ 32'" - L! . j
' , ‘ 1"" i ’1‘ 'ia‘: " '
H. . “d: r
. - . ,. .31.“! '
‘ . .17 , ; t . Lr :. " 1!
. ‘2“ ‘ ‘1’.“ n“
,‘ $ ‘ .13.”; l! , _.‘-; .
' arr. 'ib";-'~ «f
_ ‘ . agﬁ'é.’
3 4" ¢ ' r . £2; ‘j P .l
. . .4
0 .r . .
'1.) ‘ 1 r
N
O ‘ = ’
O - ‘ ‘ .
‘0 ?
g I
‘9.
c3; ‘ 4»
C) ‘ . ,
6- r. 4‘
U‘ A . .
’9 Q
I
f
i
'2
ﬁ
"‘9‘“ ‘ ‘fﬂ' 1... ' u’_‘:";-,, I .4 ~ V‘ _ 3 V ;% .‘I
. 3"”, “Irv ‘ M ff: aw .: ‘ ’ - _ .
" _ ' ¢ ~ 31+»!- ' ~ A. ' SE- 3
1': “‘23:: ‘ ‘ ‘3 f; m' .r“ 7-:;‘,,.'J-.~{ “ $8.? 1 l, c
' _.:. T" ‘ .4516“- . 1%; - ‘r‘. , _ ~ _ L~_. ‘5 ___‘.
. ' , ? wu- ' 331$ 10. 3%,. ..l ' .
'" f: ’ n 3.1.” "~" ’ i .' 1 ‘ ' .‘51 1
n, ‘73. 3“" “ta. ' I "-_7
. _ ‘ _ n... 0‘ . ~. ‘ g -\ 1,.
w i
3 O 3
~ ‘ ._ ..
N - | | luouumulljlnmnuool +’.‘
4 __ .
'J

                             National Energy                        Office natiDnal
                                          Board                     de lAnergie
                                     Letter of Comment
Date: July 29, 2009
                                         Proceeding Information
Proect Name: Keystone XL Pipeline
Hearinc Order No: OH-1-2009                                File Number: OF-FAC-OIL-T241-2009-O1 01
                                            Contact Information
                                                           Address Attention: Dorothy First Rider
Name: Councillor Kirby Many Fingers                        Blood Tribe Tribal Government
                                                           Box 60
Ti:ie: Councillor and Chairman, Blood Tribe                Cit   Standoff
Tribal Government Committee
Orqarizaficn: Blood Tribe                                  Provnce: Alberta
Telephone: (403) 737-8236                                  Postal Code: TOL IYO
FosimiIe: (403) 737-2336                                   Email: dfirstrider@bloodtribe.org
                                                                                                            (0
Pease elsire that your etter of con-ment nclues:                                             -
                                                                                             .-     C
      .    the  nature of your interest ir the aQIication                                      2
      .    comments on the application
      .    any relevant information that will exnla?n or sunort your comments
                                                                                            ru-
 Por further information, please refer to the Hearha Order on the WEB website at             -
www.neb-one.gc.ca
                                                   Comments
                                        Attadi addiuona pages 1 recessary.
 Please see attached letter of July 29, 2009
                                                                               Telephcnelfelóphone (403) 292-4800
  444 Seventh Avenue SW                                                        Facs,nIIefTtécopieur (403) 292-5503
  Caigary, Alberta T2P 0X6                                                                  htlp:Uwwwneb-cn goes
  444, SepèrteAvor.je S-C.
  C&gary (AThena) T2P OXA                        Canaua                        F&nslaicelTéioØew; l-Bfl-285-8808
                                        KAINA1WA
                               Tribal Government & External Affairs
                                Box 60                    Phone: (403) 737-3753
                                Standoff, Alberta TOL 1YO   Fax: (403) 737-2336
July 29, 2009                                                                         (n
                                                                                         -—
                                                                                  U-,
 National Energy Board                                                        çJ  C    F
444 7 Avenue SW
Calgary AB T2P 0X8
                                                                                 CD
Re:                      Keystone XL Pipeline
Hearing Order No.        OH-i -2009
File No.                 OF-FAC-OIL-T241-2009-Oi 01
This is a Letter of Comment submitted on behalf of the Blood Tribe (Kainai) with respect
to the above-noted project.
The Blood Tribe has an interest in this application in part because a substantial
component of the proposed route crosses through traditional Blood Tribe territory. As
well, the Blood Tribe entered into Treaty 7 with Canada in 1877 and the proposed route
also crosses territory encompassed by Treaty 7.
An autonomous First Nation, the Blood Tribe has a population of 10000, most of whom
live on the Blood Reserve, the largest in Canada, in southern Alberta. Our traditional
territory, which as noted encompasses part of the proposed pipeline route, holds many
sites of cultural and spiritual significance to us
Our traditional territory holds much more than our history. Throughout the territory, our
people continue to practice traditional use activities. Steps thus need to be taken to
protect both our cultural heritage and current practices.
We have been in communication about the steps necessary to protect our interests with
the project proponent, TransCanada Keystone Pipeline OP Ltd. (TransCanada”).
Regrettably, those discussions have not yet resulted in a mechanism to accomplish
that. The Blood Tribe is continuing to work towards that end.
However, to the present date, no meaningful consultation with the Blood Tribe has been
undertaken by TransCanada. It appears that TransCanada has dealt directly with other
First Nations, possibly in part on the assumption that those other First Nations can
speak for the Blood Tribe. That, of course, is not the case.
 As noted, the Blood Tribe is an autonomous, independent First Nation. No other First
Nation is authorized to speak for the Blood Tribe. We are confident that no other First
Nation would purport to do so. That is especially so in matters, such as this project, that
require direct engagement with the Blood Tribe on the potential impact of a project on
the interests of the Blood Tribe.
We are concerned that TransCanada has failed to meaningfuUy consult or engage with
the Blood Trtbe on the potential impact of this project on the interests of the Blood Tribe.
In the absence of that meaningful consultation we urge the NEB not to grant this
application.
We trust that this is satisfactory and will advise the NEB if this situation changes.
Yours .truly.
     ‘cillor Kirby Many Fingers
Chairman, Blood Tribe Tribal Government Committee
cc     Chief Charles Weasel Head, Blood Tribe
       Annabel Crop Eared Wolf, Director
       Dorothy First Rider
       Government of Alberta Sustainable Resource Development
                                    lilba! Government & External Affairs
                                 SLLLE.
                                                              September 5, 2009
National Energy Board
                                      EP IC t\
       7
       th
          Ave S.. .W.
Calgary
T2P 0X8
Attention: Ms. C. Dutil-Berry
Dear Ms. Dutil-Berry
        Re: Letter of comment; Hearing Order OH-1-2009 regarding TransCanada
        Keystone XL pipeline application
This letter of comment is regarding the recent information requests and written evidence
on this project made by Enbridgc and the Alberta Federation of Labour.
Enbride System Demand and Capacity
In general, the Enbridge system accesses a refinery market bounded on the west by the
Mandan refinery in North Dakota, the United refinery in Pennsylvania on the east and
Chicago area refineries to the south. Also within this area are the Ontario refineries. A
review of the refinery data available in the Energy Information Administration (ETA a   -
copy of EIA home page attached) or the CAPP refinery map indicates the above area has
a combined refinery capacity of approximately 2.2 million bpd. The refineries located in
Wood River, Robinson, Cattlesburg, Lima and Canton have not had a historical
connection from the Enbridge system and are not included. Additionally it needs to be
noted these latter refineries are only a few months from having a connection through the
Keystone pipeline at Patoka.
The volume of oil needed by these refineries requires a little math to determine the true
market needs. The ETA database provides crude oil production data on a state-by-state
basis. A simple summation of the EIA data, combined with Ontario production, indicates
the local production is near 270,000 bpd in 2008 thereby reducing the need for imports
from 2.2 million bpd to about 1.93 million bpd. The Mustang pipeline transports oil to
southern markets thereby increasing the above demand but Line 9 supplies offshore oil
into the Ontario market decreasing the needed volume. When combined the above result
in a demand of approximately 1.9 million bpd on the Enbridge system. The Spearhead
pipeline volumes are also excluded and is discussed later.
The capacity of the Enbridge system also requires a little math to make a compatible
comparison. The attached Enbridge System Configuration of Quarter 2, 2009” shows a
total capacity of 2,285,000 bpd. Before a comparison can be made to the above noted
 market Iwo revisions are needeth a reducIon for the Western Canadian refined produel
 deliveries and the removal of the line 13 capacity because of its upcoming reversal for
 diluent movements. So before construction of the Clipper project the Enbridge capacity is
just over 2 million bpd which exceeds the above noted 1.93 million bpd. Therefore from
this simple math the Clipper project is not needed to meet or expand within the historical
market.
The above is suoported by written evidence and other literature of Enbridge indicatirg
the Clipper pipeline was developed for new markets including crude oil needs by the BP
Whiting refinery expansion, Marathon Deiroit refinery expansion. Line 9 re-reversal,
Texas Access. Southern Access Extension. Spearhead and Trailbreaker. Implementation
of all or even the majority of these above projects has to be rated as highly speculative.
The Wood River refinery expansion is not included within this list as the earlier in
service Keystone pipeline project serves the market area. The Spearhead project
competes directly with the Keystone XL market.
Enbridge, by constructing Clipper, ovcr-expaiided their system for specuLative
downstream projects.
Fnbride North Dakota and Bakken Crude Di] Field
On June 4. 2008 Enbridge received appro’ a] from the State of North Dakota Public
Service Conrnission, in case PU-07-791 (attachment) to expand the Enbridge North
Dakota pipeline system from 110.000 to 161.600 hpd to meet the increased Bakken
production. This expansion project ti-ansports an additional 51.600 into the Fnbridgc
market and competes uith the existing Western Canadian Enbridge svsteni by reducing
the need for Weslem Canadian crude oil production in the market.
The EIA data indicates the Bakken oilfield is ihe 25 largest in the US with the U.S.
Geological survey estimating the most-likely recoverable volumes al 3.65 billion barrels.
Other sources have indicate recoverable volumes over 4 billion barrels. Literature
obtained from the Enbridge home page and public infoimation discusses Bakken
expansion projects and states ‘Enbridge is exploring additional expansion opportunities
beyond these leveLs in order to provide timely and cost effective transportation for up to
an additional 100,000 bpd” (attachment). The recent North Dakota commissioned study,
on additional pipeline capacity for Bakkeii produefion, notes a 55.000 bpd volume
thereby supporting an expected increase in prodtLction. Again additional volumes going
into the Enhridge market, competing with the existing Western Canadian Enbridge
svsteni and reducing the need for \Vestern Canadian crude oil production in Enbridges
downstream market.
The Enbridge North Dakota past and planned expansion plans also compete with
Fnbridges o”n Clipper project. The above noLed incremental North Dakota voumes are
24% to 34% of the Clipper capacity.
 Enbride Toll Impact
Enbridge written evidence indicates a $ 0.75 toll increase but does not provide the
information to permit understanding of the derivation of this number.
An explanation of the calculation is appropriate and the information should provide a
complete picture as per the table below:
                        Year     Enbridge         Enbridge        Incremental        Enbridge
                                 Pipeline         Forecast        Power Cost        Edmonton
                                 Capacity      Throughputs        Edmonton to       to Chicago
                                     (bpd)          bpd)           Chicago (i)          toll
                                                                 (million S/yr)    (Cdn S/bbl)
Enbridgc toll           2008           X              A               Base
- before Clipper
Enbridge toll with      2011   X +    400,000   A +  400,000
Clipper full
Enbridge toll with      2013   X +    400,000         A
Clipper empty
Enbridge toll with      2013   X -4-  400,000                                         M (sec
S 0.75 toll increase                                                                discussion
                                                                                      below)
Notes:
    (i)      Based upon Forecast Throughputs
    (ii)     2009 Cdn S.
Within this table, ‘M’, representing the S 0.75 toll increase, should illustrate the forecast
throughputs and powcr costs used in determining the $ 0.75.
Enbridae Written Evidence Statement
Enbridge written evidence uses the wording “Keystone XL Pipeline project, as it is
currently proposed by Keystone, would not be in the overall Canadian public interest”.
This seems inapplicable in a competitive business environment where a private company
can delay or cancel a competing project because it takes the position the project is not in
Canadian public interest.
With the Enbridge business model, long-term well-established Enbridge shippers became
part of the financial supporting system; but in the bottom-line Enbridge made a major
business error by over-expanding the pipeline system
Enbride Gretna Option
This just released option appears as a strategic tactic that can easily follows the script of
Keystone XL delaying for about 2 years to do activities such as stakeholder consultation,
  right-of-way activilies and enviromnental studies. In that time Enhridge will deveop a
 position flipper is now available to Superior and sufficient capacity also exists on the
 Enbridge system into the general Chicago area so a Chicago to GuifCoasi pipeline
 becomes the project that can meet the need plus timing.
 Crude Oil PricinQ
 The Echridge wrircn evidence includes a C.\PP ohsenaton The benchmark WTI crude
 oil 1 price dropped from a peak in July 2008 of over US$ 110 per hsrrel to less than
 US$40 per barrel by year-end”. The EJA database, the “Official Energy Statistics from
 the U.S. Govcrirnent” publishes crude oil prices on a weekly basis and the weekly price
 never reached US S 140. The data shows a weekly price over S 130 for only four weeks
 and a weekly price under S 40 also for only four weeks.
 Within the general business environment financial reporting is done on a quarterly basis
 and many companies also budget on a quarterly basis. On a quarterly basis, the NA data
shows the crude oil price first going above $ 55 per barrel in the 3
                                                                   d quarEer of 2005.
From quarter 3 of 2005 to July 31, 2009. the ErA price of crude oi[ has been within aS 55
to $ 65 range for 9 quarters. above S 65 for 5 quarters ard heow S 55 for 3 quarters. This
  Official Government’ data dettonstrates an oil price range between S 55 and S 65 for the
last 4 ears, The S 140 and S 0 generate significant media attention but the U.S. official
 government data demonstrates a relativel\ stable pricing enviromnent except for a short
term period of time in 2008 that can be described as an overheated market.
Enhride Gateway Pipeline
Enbridge shies Thus, if the Keyslone XL Pipeline is placed in service in late 2012, it
will offload vo]umes from the Enbridge system”. By this argument. ihe Gateway project
also will offload volumes from the Enbridge system a few years kiter; but in contrast
Enbridge has resumed activities on the Gateway project. The Enbridge Inc. 2 quarter
2009 report (attached) states “The company continues to hold consultation meeting and
open houses” and also “Enbridge expects to file its regulatory application with the NEB
in 2009”.
Alberta Federation of Labour
The Alberta Federation of Labour written evidence hc(udes a figure attachedi (kied
“United States Refinery Expansions and Conversions to Handle Aiherta Bitumn which
notes a “2.S02.000 bpd capacity for the cNpansion and con’ersion projects.
The CAPP June 2009 Crude Oil Forecast, Markets & Pipeline Expansions” details
incremental production within Appendix B.3, the moderate 2rowth forecast (attached). In
that data the conventional heavy volumes decrease from 350000 hpd in 2008 to 150.00(3
bpd in 2025 and the oil sands bitumen blend volumes increase from 933.000 bpd in 2008
to 2,403.000 hpd in 2025. From these numbers, over the next 17 vers the incremental
Western Canadian heavy volumes increase by 1,270,000 bpd, which is only 45% of the
 “2,8022,000 bpd”. If one utilizes the CAPP data for only a 10 year period then the
incremental heavy volumes increase by 812,000 bpd which is only 29% of the “2,802,000
bpd”. Thereby the majority of the cmde oil supply for the noted expansions and
conversions needs to conic from sources other than Western Canada. Western Canada, as
a smaller supplier, appears to be following a trend.
Western Canada’s Heavy Versus Synthetic Production
The CAPP June 2009 “Crude Oil Forecast, Markets & Pipeline Expansions” forecasts
synthetic production to increase from 564,000 hpd in 2008 to 1,339,000 bpd in 2025.
This is an increase of 137% above the 2008 volumes. The same forecast indicates total
heavy volumes increasing from 1,283,000 bpd in 2008 to 2,553,000 bpd in 2025. This is
an increase of 99% above the 2008 volumes.
The synthetic component of the production is increasing more than the heavy, a fact
ignored in market discussions.
Pipeline Oyeratinp Capability
Pipelines have the capability to traisport more than one commodity type as illustrated
within the Enbridge Pipeline System Configuration. Additionally pipelines can transition
from a light (or synthetic) to heavy service and a heavy to light service. A historical
example is the 1980’s transition of the Enbridge line 3 from light to heavy and the
simultaneous transition of the Enbridge line 2 from heavy to light.
An other example of pipeline capability is the Edmonton to Vancouver TMX pipeline
which transports heavy, light and refined products in the same pipe.
A Keystone XL pipeline thereby has the capability to transition to meet the supply
provided and does not put a constraint upon the product transported within the pipeline or
on the type of product produced upstream.
Conclusion
TCPL, at great cost and effort, quietly and effectively found new markets for Western
Canadian Crude Oil production with a pipeline connecting one of the world’s largest oil
reserves to one of the largest markets. That effort has attracted considerable criticism.
In contrast Enbridge over expanded their system into an existing market in order to serve
a large number of new highly speculative projects. Their evidence states Keystone XL
“will offload volumes from the Enbridge system” and in the meantime Enbridge also
develops their own projects that will offload the Enbridge system.
Enbridge is now asking the NED to reward Enbridge for their error by denying approval
of the Keystone XL project. This contrasts to the vast majority of companies who
acknowledge their errors, cancel projects and/or take the appropriate write-downs.
 The NEB should not reward Enbrdge by usilig the Enbridge argumeuts to deny approval
ofhe Keystone XL project and should note some [iniiatons in the information provided
by the Alberla Federation Labour.
a
Yours truly
Ivai Dixon
14017-23 St
EdmoLton
T5Y 1C3
Cc:    Mr. (3. Nettleton
       Osler, Hoskin and Harcourt LLP
       Suite 2500, TransCanada Tower
       45O I St. SW.
       Calgary
       T2P 5H1
  Energy Jnformaton Administration                                    -  BIA Official Energy Statistics from the U.S. Gover... Page 1 of I
                                                                                      -
   (9.) Energy Information Administration
                              Official Energy Stat,slics from he U                 S      Government                                                       Glossa
                                                                                                                                                           A  —  Z TcçEs
                                                                                                                                                             A    B    C   U    E   F   0    H
                                                                                                                    F,e4EnaçyRevww                           J    K    L   V    N   0   P    Q   R
                                                                                                                                                                       w:i;-1tf cJ         r U
 Enew SR                                                                      TcpIcs                                                                     - RM G-*’e PriDe 1l VaJY -
                                                                                                                                                                  --;a t•’ 1tI jz-
 —s •/ Petroleum                                                                   :‘
                                                                                                  Forecasts & Analyses                                 -                                   .‘  C7
                                   -                          p3ne,        -   -
                                                                                        -
                                                                                                   .:-:                                                                                            .9
                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                             -
 r_                                                                                                                                                                 Market  Updates
                  Natural Gas
                l
                                                                                                   Environment                                                On-Highway    Retopi DresI Prices
 F—i
 •
                  t-xaIni tIon ar reserveS cio,age
                  expoiis. p,oucton,               s&es.
                                                           PO’I5 and                              Gr     ‘Thou
                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                  oeciric l)nv;er ole ii
                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                              Gasoline and Diesel Fuel UpdaIe
                                                                            -             -
                                                                                                                                                           —  Natural Gas Storage   Rep(gl
 I                                                           —          ..
                                                                                                                                                           -  This Week in Peluolauni
                  Electricity                                                                     Households. Buildings & Industry                         —
                                                                           EJ
                                                                                                                                                              Weekly Pewoleuni Status Repoil
                  S& Cs. revnuo      and  prices. oweI plan’s, fuel                               Cu nercy use r, horuw s   DL:’.iIrciii
                  use.  sl(lcks. gs:mraiioui. trade. deeiand &                                    niaix   lactuirirlu and       iiMinr   ..                Forecasts
                  ern scions...                                                                                                                               Annual Energy Outlook
                                                                                                                                                              Short.Term Energy Outlook
                  Coal
                  Rss,riyee, pr:.ict or prices. erup uuvren and            Geogmphy                                                                           rnternational Energy Outlook
                  prodL’ct Vw, rtsrbution stocks. ininorts and
                                                                                                                                                           State and   Country information
                  exports...                                                                      International
                                                                                                  Cnurufry criergv informm r ewiled cud                       Country Energy Profiles
                  Renewable & Alternative Fuels                                                   ov.urva                                                     State Energy Profiles
                  Includes hyd           Cr. sca
                  b,on,ass and eIla:uH                                                                                                                     5List of EtA Reports
                                                                                                  State & U.S. Historical Data
                                                                                                                                                                EIA Survey Forms
                                                                                                  Overview
                  Nuclear                                                           -             Mcruttul n-             c!:_.:i.t           I:-j h3r
                                     Linear re;ictiru. g.nret’on. sient               —           rnpsriso—)s                         Scdor
                                                                                                                                                            Energy Kids Page
                                                                                                                                                           Classroom projecle. gan’ei.
                                                                                                                                                           energy hasic5..
   Whats New                                                                  Basic       U*JTTISUOn
   Aug 31  NaLraI Gas S:wce C               acj.2) Jdate                         Ene    V     9 B I       FAUS         recqy  0       lno Sheels               Siesu Lp ftr Ema, Lpdaes
            P LW)
                                                                                                                                                               a4S S Feels
   Ato. 28 State    yy       Data System Jzdalo Trrojg                           Energy in Brf
           2007
                                                                                  WhatsthesiLsz:reL S                     r.—,(I     ;,s’
   Auc 27: et’oIar, Ma*et, 4w-ac’ 2a
                                                                                  Vt-c ae :e Ire             :S3yas         >r.             .     I
                                              >  Jcre        5 F4€v: -            marKet?
                                                                                            dezeet a-c eoo fo-elon ci?
    Press Room                                                                    > Mz-e        Eegy    9  3-tef artcIes.
      e, e5s Oc2&sc,’ t5Uwuy
    e..ri F sea we&..,Ias&s                        f4f
                                                             tl’t
                               Privacy/Security Acces,ib.lity Copyright & Reuse                                 •   Coiltact Us     Feedback Care€rs          .4iout EIA
                                                                       Fedstats            US&.gov Oapartment .f             Energy
httn://www.eiadoe.povf                                                                                                                                                              ‘flflQ_(iQ..Ci
  Pipe’ine System Configuration
                                                                                                            ENBAIDGE
Quarter 2,2009
                                                                                                     WSTOVH
                                                                                 SARNIA
                                                                                                                      NANTICOKE
                                                                Cu SN
                                                     [IneSiI                       Line 1O
      240 Icbpd                                      490 kbpd                      70 kpd                       100 kbpd
       18/20 -1098 miles                             30’ 645 miles                 12/20’ -91 miles
                                                           -
                                                                                                                16’ -88 miles
       NGL                                           NOL                          Condensates                   Heavy Cruths
       Refined Products                              Condensates                  Synthetics
      Synthetics                                    Synthetics                    Light Crudes
                                                     Light Crudes                 Medium Crudes
                                                                                  Heavy Cnjdes
      Line 2                                                                                                    195 kbpd
                                                     Line 6                                                    22V24’ -575 miles
      Line 2a                                                                    [Lin                          Synthetics
      440 kbpd                                      Line 6a                                                    Light Crudes
      24’- 596 miles                                670 kbpd                      I 20 kbpd                    Medium Crudes
      Une 2b                                        34_ ‘57 n-lee
                                                           -                      - 672O 47 rr3es
                                                                                           -
                                                                                                               Hea Crijdes
      440 Qp                                        Une Sb                        Condensates
      24t26 E-D2 rnies
                -                                   190 kbpcZ                     S yn i’et i cs
      Condensates
      Synthetics
                                                    30 293 ivIes
                                                          -
                                                    Light Crude.
                                                                                  Light Crudes
                                                                                  Medium Crudes
                                                                                                              ILn•niI
      Light Crudes                                  Synthetics                    Heavy Crudes                 4S kbsd
                                                    Medium Crude.                                              42 454 ios
                                                                                                                    -
                                                    Heavy Crudes                                               Synthetics
                                                                                                               Light Cnjdes
                                                                                                               Medium Crudes
      390 kbp&                                                                    Line ha                      Heavy Crudes
      34   - I 08 miles                                                           liD Kbpd
      light Crudes                                  150 kbpd                      20’116 -596 mIles
      Heavy Crudes                                  20’ 153 mi’es
                                                          -                       Synthetics
      Medium Crudes (Ex-Clearbrook)                 Condensates                   Line lSb
                                                    Synthetics                    120 kbpd                     130 kbpd
                                                    Light Crudes                  16”/lS’ -313 miles           22 75 mIles
                                                                                                                    -
      Line4                                         Medium Crudes                 Light Crudes                 Heavy Crudes
                                                    1-leavy Cmdes                 Medium Crudes
      800 kbpd
      36’/48’ 1098 miles
                -
                                                                                                              [Une 651
      Heavy Crudes
      Medium Crudes (EA.Clvathrook)
                                                   ILino9        I                                             185 kbpd
      Light Crudes (Ex-Clearbrook)                  240 kbpd                     320 kbpd                      20 3l3rnilos
                                                         -   52’ nsas            24 457 ri3es
                                                                                      -
                                                                                                               Lig!-.t Cnjdes
                                                    Condersates                  Condensates
                                                    Light Cnjdes                 Synthetics
                                                                                  Light Cnides
                                                                                 Medium Cnjdes
      NOTES:                                                                     Haa.y Cnides
    • CWaD it.&d ,          Nns& Cacaces
    -  ‘CjreiM sst rettix’s M ha 3.d: 3SC cvJ Nnsai caaa:y            eswo e,*tto,s rrove 5       ‘±pd
   • 2 rarae c—mfrt inn e,e sae pact ‘90 Itcd Nn caet, wtoj &*sae cflk 2 ktp
    • Updated. Febru,y 2009
     File Pipel[nesysten,Gonfigti,oliojjouartoilydwg                                                            Drawn by: DRD
 • •.* . :•
           ::.;
                • •• rc• icE     :.
                                    •
                             - c
                                     MOTION
                                   June 4, 2008
Enbridge Pipelines (North Dakota) LLC                                 Case No. PtJ-07-791
Pump Station Upgrades
Siting Application
       I move the Commission adopt the Order Granting Certificates of Corridor
Compatibility and Route Permits in Enbridge Pipelines (North Dakota) LLC’s application
to upgrade pump stations, Case No. PU-07-791.
PJF
                                                     35    PU-07-791          Filed: 6/412008        Pages: 27
                                                           Motion to Adopt Order and Order Grantinq
                                                           Certificates oF Corridor Compatibility and Route
                                                           Permits
                                                           Pubhc Service Commission
                 NORTH DAKOTA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
                                     June 4, 2008
 Enbridge Pipelines (North Dakota) LLC                                P0-07-791
 Pump Station Upgrades
 Siting Application
Company:      Enbridge Pipeilnes (North Dakota) LLC
FacUlty:      Upgrades to the existing Alexander Station in Mckenzie County,
              Trenton Station and Beaver Lodge Station in Williams County,
              Stanley Station and Blaisdell Station in Mountrail County, Minot
              Station in Ward County, Denbigh Station in McHenry County,
              Pleasant Lake Station in Benson County, Penn Station and Bartlett
              Station in Ramsey County, and Larirnore StaUon in Grand Forks
              County. With the exception of a small parcel of land at Beaver
              Lodge Station to be acquired by Enbridge, all construction will take
              place on land already owned by Enbridge within the station
              boundaries. The Minot, Pleasant Lake and Bartlett Stations were
              constructed prior to the passage of the Siting Act.
Purpose:      To increase pipeline capacity from 110000 barrels per day to
              161600 bpd to transport increased production of crude oil from
              producers in the regions of North Dakota and Montana that
              comprise the western and central portion of the Wilhiston Basin to
              Cleartrook, Minnesota. Commodities transported include mixed
              blend sweet crude and mixed blend sour crude.
Cost:         Estimated at $119.7 millon.
Schedule:     Fnbridge plans to begin construction in May 2008 with an in-service
             date of December 2009.
History:      Letter of ntent filed December19, 2007. Application filed February
             20. 2008. Application deemed complete on March 26, 2008. Notice
             of Filing and Notice of Opportunty for Hearing issued March 26,
             2008.
PJ F
                                   STATE OF NORTh DAKOTA
                                PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
  Enbridge Pipelines (North Dakota) LLC                                Case No. PU-07-791
  Pump Station Upyrados
  SlUng Application
                                      ORDER GRANTING
           CERTIFICATES OF CORRIDOR COMPATIBILITY AND ROUTE PERMITS
                                         June 4, 2008
          Enbridge Pipelines (North Dakota) LLC (Fnbridge) owns and operates an existing
 crude petroleum pipeline extending from near Alexander, North Dakota, to Clearbrook,
 Minnesota.
          On February 20, 2008 Enbridge Pipelines (North Dakota) LLC (Enhridge) Wed a
 n!idated letter & intent and request for waiver of procedures and time schedules, and a
 request to amend its existing conidor or route permit. Enbridge proposes to upgrade the
 existing Alexander Station in McKenzie Cointy, the Trenton Station and Beaver Lodge
 Station in Williams County, Stanley Station and Baisdell Station in Mountrail County, Minot
 Station in Ward County, Denbigh Station in McHenry County, Pleasant Lake Station in
 Benson County, Penn Station and Bartlett Station in Ramsey County, and Larimore Station
 in Grand Forks County on its existing crude o! pipeline. With The exception of a small
parcel of and at Beaver Lodge Station to be acquired by Enbridge, all construction wfll take
place on land already owned by Enbridge within the existing station boundaries.
Alexander Station
         In its October 12, 2006 Amended Order, Case No. PtJ-06-317, the Commission
issued to Lnbñdge a Second Amended Certificate of Site Compatibdity for Transmission
Facility Corridor No. 40 and Second Amended Permit for the Construction of a
Transmission Facility No. 49 granting authority to upgrade the Alexander Station. An
environmental assessment update and a cultural resource survey were provided in that
proceeding.
         In this proceeding, the Alexander Station upgrades include the addition of pumps, a
control station, and a drag reducer agent skid and equipment.
Trenton Station
        In its October 12, 2006 Amended Order, Case No. PU-06-317, the Commission
issued to Enbridge a Second Amended Certificate of Site Compabi1ty for Transmssion
Facility Conidor No. 40 and Second Amended Permit for the Construction of a
Transmssion Facility No. 49 granting authority to upgrade the Trenton Station. An
environmental assessment update and a cultural resource survey were provided in that
proceeding.
  Enbridge Inc.        - Shipper     -  Bakken Pipeline                                                                     Page I of 1
  ;INBRIDGE
  1
  you are here: Home> Shipper    2QO Refiner and Customer Update        >  Bakken Pipehno
             .!                     uuj .              s2:z.:::.  . ... .- .,v;::_
   Bakken Pipeline
  The Bakken Expansion Project
                                                                                 Questions?
                                                                                 Please contact us
                                                                                 sli ipperb [nfo@ en b ridge corn
             t
                                                                                                               .....
  North Dakota (ND), Saskatchewan (5K) and Montana have recently seen tremendous growth in the development of
  oil, gas and natural gas liquids from the Bakken Shale deposits. Capacity on Enbridges Williston Basin feeder
  pipelines is being expanded to accommodate much of the growth in production. The Bakken deposits are estimated
  to hold just under 5 billion barrels of technically recoverable oil. Further, the Three Forks play, located underneath
  the BAkken shale, is thought to be the next natural step in the development of this prolific region. Crude production
  from this area has increased by approximately 150000 barrels per day (bpd) over the last two years. Eribridge’s
  Willistan Basin Feeder pipelines have completed 107,000 bpd of expansions with an additional 61.000 bpd of
  expansions scheduled to be completed in 2010. To address the further potential for growth, Enbridge is exploring
  additional expansion opportunities beyond these levels in order to provide timely and cost effective transportation for
  up to an additional 100000 bpd.
  One such option is the Portal Reversal Expansion Project. Re-activation and reversal of the existing Porta[ Link Line
  from Berthold, ND to Steelnian, 5K will allow Bakken cnjde to access Enbridge’s Mainline at Cromer, and is the next
  logical step in the development ot pipeline capacity to service this prolific area. Once at Cramer, the Bakken crude
  can access refineries connected via the Enbridge mainline system including relineries located in: Illinois, Michigan,
  Ohio! Kansas, Oklahoma, the Cusbing hub, Kentucky, and Ontario.
  Enbridge is currently finalizing the Bakkan Expansion project and will be talking to potential shippers to gather input
  and support for the expansion.
httnI/www        enhridve cnni/hinner/rp.fi,p.r/                 llccpn-nnpline nhn
    Pipeline from Cheed:am to the Edmonton area. Enhridge plans to fflc egLlarc aDpcarions for Phase I Eacilities
 h the end of 2009 w[h an expected in-service dare ofate 2012. T: estimated cost of tNe pieIines and reared
 facilres is subect to Fna2zarinn of scope. de:ai;e.i engErieering and regularon approvth.
  Fort Hr]l Poe-rie Sys::’’
 In November 2007, Enbridge was selected by Fort Hills Energy L.P (FHFIP) as its piprline and terminaling
 services provider for the nitial phase of the Fort Hills project and all subsequent expansions. in late 2008, FHELP
 announced that its final investmenr decision for the mining portion of the project was being deferred until costs
 could be reduced, and commodity pi-ices and financial markets strengthened. It also announced that the Fort Hills
 upgrader was put on hold and that a decision to proceed with the upgrader would be made at a later date.
 Accordingly, the scope ni the Foit Hills Pipe[ine System is being reevaluated by FHELP and he planned in-service
 dare for the project has been deferred beyond rhc original planned dae of mid-201 I. Expenditures to date are
 approxnate[v Sod billion and are coiiirner.ialv recoverai1e from FHELP.
 N-     yt   n Ace’.
 En addition to thc panned constructior. of the Southern Access Extension w:ich is expected to provide access to
 the Patoka market and the recently complctcd expansion of the S       ’carhead Pipeline, Enbridec ill continue to
                                                                       1
 pursue new oppoatinines to provide broader marker access for Canadian bitumen and svi,rheric andes. Key
opportunies being pu: sued irciude: Ea:en PADD II access into the Michigan and Ohio rurets; access to
Uni:ed States Cull Coast ceEning centers thwigh a con:nation of smaller ,:crernenijl           OpOnLIflitIes and large
volume solutions: PADD I access into the East Coast market near Philadelphia; and the Northern Gateway pipeline
to the Pcific Coast.
 Northern Gateway Project
The Northern Gateway Project involves constructing a twin pipeline system running from near Edmonton, Alberta,
to a new marine terminal in Kitimat, British Columbia. One pipeline will transport crude oil for export from the
Lidinomon area to Kitiniat, and is expected to he a 36-inch diameter line with an initial capacity    of 525,000 bpd.
The other pipeline wLIl he used to import condensate and is expected to be a 20-inch diameter line with an initial
capacity of 93,000 bp1
 :hc Company has Sec red thnd:ng from vesrern Canada oil sinds producers and Pacific Rui: refiners to seek
regularoi appro’ al of the project. The Company continues to hold consultation meetings and opzr. houses wEth
communities and First Nations -aiong the pipcline route to rccc*e input. create epportlinitirs for economic
partnerships and incorporate traditional aborigillal knowledge into the planning and operations of the proposed
prOject. Ei:hridge e.pec:s to file ins rcguatcrv aplicaton with the NED in 2009 S:!bect to conr:nJea commerciai
supcrt and regulatoi-v and .:chcr approvals, the Company estimates that the carie_t Northern CMevav conild be in
service is the 201 5 tmc frame.
GAS PPELIIE
The Gas Pipelines strategy is based on the Comp-any’s forecast supp]y and demand for natura’ gas Progress made
on major projects which support this strategy is set out below.
Walker Ridge Gt ern System
On July 29, 2009, Eubridge announced it had entered into Letters of Intent (LOT) with Chevron Corp. that could
result in the expansion of its central GulL of Mexico offshore pipeline system. Under the terns of the LOT,
Enhridge proposes to consLruct, own and operate die WROS to pL-ocide natural gas gathering services to the
potential lack, St. -talo and Big Foot ultra deepwater developments. The WRUS is expccred to include
aproximatelv 50(, kUnruerres 1 Qfl nai!es of 8-inch, 0-inch and--or 12-inch dian:e:er pir’clEne a: iecxNs cf up to
7000 feet d ‘:! have a capacity of ] flu million cubic feet per day. The esnlateJ cost of the WRGS s
approximatey USS0() million, subject to finalization ofscope and dcfi::E:ivc cost estimates.
                                                                             ENBRoGE Nc. SECOND QUARTER REPORT2009
 I- •                                         I.-
                                                 —I.
      • as..
                tatt
L                                 -
                                      V
  Lost Down the Pipeline
  In these difficult economic times, is the Alberta
  government doing enough to keep value-added
  oil-sands jobs in Canada?.
                                             -a
  Alberta Federation of Labour
  MARCH 2009
 f OIL SANDS BITUMEN UPGRADING
                                                                     •    __.aC  .
  Alberta
                            Under
   Operating                Construction                                                Postponed                         Cancelled
      bpd
      0
      ,
      1
      3O   00                                                                       .           bpJ
                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                3     00 0
            Syncrud                                                                          -  Syncrude (expansion)
                                                                             -;
                                  - -  --
                                                        -
      277,OOObp                                                                                 35,OOOup
                                                                                                2
              Suncor                                                           - /              Suncor (expansion)
                           3
                           2
                           ,000bpd                 -                                            ,
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                UpJ
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                l7    00
                            CNRL-Horizøn               Fort MCMLJrMy   0                 —      Petrc Can/UTS-Fort HEII
                                                     :::-
                                                     —
                                                                                               -
                            ——            —                                    I               —-=
                                                                                                                              0
       7O,000Jpd
        Opti/Nexen
                     •            -
                                      —                                        I         S      ZOOOOOhpd
                                                                                                               -.———-—-—              Z5,OOObp
                                                                                                                                      ace River Oil Blue Sky
                                                                          _                     Total E&P
           Long lake
                           000
                           bpd
                           l5O,
                           Albian Scotlord       •           C                     —
                                                                                            —
                                                                                                                          a           bN
                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                      000   O,
                                                                                                                                      BA Heartland
                                                                                                                                                      cf—
                                (expansion)   r
                                 —
                     •
                                          .—.
     155,000bpd
     Albian Scotford
                                           -  :.          ...  .
                                                                                               l5O,OOObpi
                                                                                                Northwest Upgradcng
                                                                                                                             •       73,OOOijp
                                                                                                                                     Husky Lloydrriinster
                                                                                                                                     (expansion)
                                                                        “
     135,000bpa
       Petro-Canada
                                                                                           •   70,000hpd
                                      ---.                                            -.
                                                                                                North American-Statoil            :.:    {! c0      C
                       —        -
                                                                             I                                                                DL’fr1ifl
      77,000hpd
                     • ..-                                                 .J             .
                                                                                               100,000bpi            -                      c--    1]Crç,,
 Husky-Lloydminster                                                                            Synenco-Northern Lights                                  4
                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                   .,
   1,015,000 bpd              382,000 bpd                                                      1,225,000 bpd                       348,000 bpd
                                                                                                       Source: CAPR compiny reports
       S
                                       United States
                                       Refinery Expansions and Conversions to Handle Alberta Bitumen
              1
                       -
                                    /
                                    ru                  ..                 :
                                                                             —   —
                                                                                                                               —  I.
                                                                                       .4a_.r        —-  -
                                                   4’
                             495,000        t                                                                     0
                                                                                                                  :
                                                                                                                  115, rc
                              $Lg bilifon us                                                               •      $:.9 billion jt
                                                           -.
 Wood R ye’       eev C:rv3icn s                    ‘-7                                                           Ce:rs.t —4eay C        ..lrsj-_  tAararhs,,
                                 3crge-. Texas                                                                    Gtrct. M
       Ret; Ooc                     & Encaa/
                               c.xra. I jr D’S                                                        1
                              115,000        r4                                                                   131,000 1j-d
                                 Si billion (L’s)                                                                 $2.5 bUJon ‘Lr)l
   TLi isa kfi ncr)’ Expansion Sni.taii Oil                                                                       Toledo Rcfineiy Con orsiun I LPfHuky
                             Tulsa, Okjahoma                                                                      Toledo.Ohic,
                                                                               J        N”
                             8
                             0
                             1  ,000bpd
                              $3.2 billion (135)
Caryvi lie Refinery ExpanMon Marathon
                                                  /   -
                                                                       —
                                                                                 I         \-‘
                                                                                                 ‘1
                                                                                                       —   .      146,000 tpd
                                                                                                                  $i,9 billion ..ui
                                                                                            C’”,  ‘K              Lim Refinery Conv&ion I H?nfry
                         GaryvHe,Louisiana                                                                         ml a. Ohio
                                                                                           j
                            6oo,ooo                                                        /
                                                                                                     “
                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                           a (
                                            hpd
                                $7 billion (I;s)                                                  _r’_4,          205,O0Dbp
         Port Arthur Refinery Exp I Moth’a              3                .
                                                                               -   ..,,..-—-.—‘_
                                                                                                                  .Xbillk3fl;lluj
                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                  $
                                                                     —               .-                           vi nit’ ng      ery Canversinn I HP
                      (Shell & Saud, Aramco)                                            —
                           Pod Arthur, Texas                                                                      Whiting, Indiana
                              415,000 hpd                                                                         00
                                                                                                                  400,0
                                                                                                                  bpe
                              $2.4 billion {Is}                                                              pP S4 billion
 Pod Arthur Refinery Expansion I Valero                                                                          -Hyperion             I Hyperion
                           Port Artbur,T€xas                                                                      Union County south Dakota
      2,802,000 bpd                           Total processing capacfty
      $31.7    bdlkln                         Estimated Uwestment
                                                         Sojrrr Em scqmeriuilhre
                                                                   flyPro;ec Cc tfl#fan’ma ret cu’pomie wese3 v,n.w t.wnapres thppng,
                                                                   3
 - j)                                                                                                                                                                                            s
C) APPENDIX B.3
                                                                                                                                                                       Moderate Growth
   CAPP Western Canadian Crude Oil Supply Forecast 2009                                                                - 2025                                                   JUhe 2009
       Blended Supply to Trunk Pipelines and Markets
C
     thousand ba,ms per day                                  Act USFS   Forecast
     CONVENTIONAL                          2005   2006 2007     2008     2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014  2015    2016   2017  2018   2019   2020  2021  2022  2023   2024   2025
C
Z   Total LL
           9
           Ht and Medium                     581   577   571      589     582     575     561   548     531   515    499     482   466    450    435   421   405   390    375   361    348
     Net Conventional Hesvy to  Marker       405   386   382      350     323     303     256   274     262   251    240     229   219    209    200   191   162   173    165   157    150
    TOTAL CONVENTIONAL                       985   963   954      939 I   905     878     847   822    793    768    739     711   685    660    6S5   611   587   503    541   519    498
C
     OIL SANDS
E
     Up9raded Ljght SyntlieticV              511   571   623      564     701     788     854   889    914    955 1,002  1,047   1,076 1,134  I .191 1247  1279  1,332  1.338 ‘.340  1.339
     Bitumen Blend                           693   752   835      933     972   1.051  1106   1.160     294 1411  I .57  1,733   1,839 I .856 1.994  2.080 2109  2,125 2,260  2,354  2,403
    TOTAL OIL SMIDS AND                    1,204 1.354 1,458   1,497    1,673  1839    1,960  2.049  2,208  2,427 2,570  2,780   2,915 3,020  3.185  3.327 3,380 3,458 3,597  3,694  3,742
     UPRAOEPS
55   Tetsi Liit Supc y                     1,092 I,’48         1.153    1.283  1,383   1415   l.L37  1.45   1.47OL5OI,5291S21,584             1,628  1,65        ‘.22   1,713 1,722  1,627
     VcHeaS.nIy                            Ifl2  1:e3   .217            1.295  1 .S54  I .392 1434   1 ,55  1,722 1,807  -  .962 2056 2Ct     2.94   2271  2.23’ 2299  2425   2,512  2.553
     WESTERNCANADAOILSUPPLY               Z190   2317  Z411    Z435     2.5Th  2.717   2,808  2,87D  3,001  3,192 3,)8 3,492 & 3,680          3,820  3,939 3,975 4.021 4,138  4,213  4,240
   ko
     -
   I Includes upgradea conven tonaL
   2. lcde& a) mco4         ctdersarti ô;. msufach,red       cm iç’9ses st           uDnaed rleavy ,omes cnnj frcn7 r2’BdeE.
          APPENDIX B.4
                                                                                                                                                                   Operating & In Construction
                                                                                                                           —
        CAPP Western Canadian Crude Oil Supp)y Forecast 2009                                                                   2025                                                      jre 2009
           Bjendod SuppFj to Trunk Pipelines and Mwlcets
           thousand barrels par day                              Actuals Forecast
          CONVENflONAI                       2005     2006  2007    2008  2009      2010   2011  2012    2013  2014   2Q15     2016   2017   2Q18  2019    )2O    2021          2023
                                                                                                                                                                         2022          2024   2025
          Toka Lt and Me                      51       577   571     559    582      515     56    54     531    515    L99      482   466    L5C    4-35    421   4       390    375    361    348
          Net Corwenticnal Heavy to Market    405      386   382     350    323      Th     286   274     262   251     23       229   29     23S    2-33    19     182    173    165    157     50
          TOTAL CONVENTIONAL                  985      063   954     939    905      878    847   822     793    76S    739     711    OSS    660    635     611   587     563   541     519   498
          OIL SANOS
          Up9ec Ugt Synthelt)                 51       57:   623     564    7C       7B7    853   S9C     902   908    911      911    912    912   911     912    9 I     9I    gt I   92     912
          RitumecSond                         693      782   835     32    912      ,C5D :299   1138   1.224  1,336   !3?     i,39S  l37     .48    42L   141’   1440   1,4?   I,LSi  lAS6   1A58
          TOTAL OIL SANDS AND              1,204    1,354  1459   1,497  1,873     1,837  1953  2,028  2,127  2,244  2,282   2,306   2,319 2,3O   2,335   2,342  2,351  2,358
         UPGRADEPS                                                                                                                                                             2362   2,367  2,370
          rota! Ught SupoIv                1,092    I 148  i.94   1      1,183    1 :3E2 1 d.35  .433  I .432  .‘lfl  .410   1 ,33   1.378        1347
                                                                                                                                           1 .3           1332   131€          12S    1213   12S0
         lb!oJ heavy &ppy                  i. ass   i,’.eg 1.217  1,233   .295   1.353     .385 1.412  .4B6   1.587  1,611   t624    1.626 1.627  1,624   1621   1622          1.617
                                                                                                                                                                        1.621         1613   1.606
         WESTERN CANADAOiL SUPPLY          2.190    2.317  Z411   2.46   2,5Th  Z71€     2.200  2849  2.010   Olfl   3l      3M7     3,O4  2.990  2,970   2.054  Z93    2,921  29a3   2.686  2.868
  C
      Notes.
 2     t. Includes upgraded cc,,tentonaL
      2. Thc:kres. a mçflt tad ce,a ) rn          j&CftQO Ceu frT upytazlws asd C. u         caha v;ok:mes cThi tram LNcacts.
S
I
 ri-I
C
Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
FROM :                       FflX NO. :13062973212         Sep. 14 2009     3:32PM  P1
                                                                  7009 SF.P    L  014:0!
             p
         5                                            .
       flt
                                                            D4àJ2X ‘O
                      £ Yo        c3ak- tk              --Cco&
           csJ’      ej                   ci-      3tc  119NtcZ       &sut
        OJs0  j3 3     4nr
                 a
             coi    .
                        a - k\
               S.Q4%   ciq
                       S
                       8 cL     QcoRczt, 9o’z Jtaø&.                              c
                            a                   Ccs o
             n              t
                   C.        o                     3
                                                   (s
                                                   w JaftcJ c3-\t&
           Q
           4
           X CQjC tfl JD
                      2        QCDA°-      4cc               o
                                                        r4o
                                           -      °-     °-‘ -‘---
                                                                               \
                   o3-co
                                                     “C
 FROM :                       FAX NO.  :13062973212          Sep. 14 2009 3:32PM  P2
       cLr\  iLQrcctao tS’s                         p    OtOcw       WNr
                                                                                cam
                       o kK t—
                 •
                                          krrfLf
         —rc\ucN   3
                   c
                   j ,        ‘
                                                jN          c
                                                          .
                                                       -
                                     -
                                              D1 Un
                                              -‘ 0     c1ç3a%f-t
              fec
             rkiThect            -
               03
              a                             N
                                So ccrcj%.         L&JCSL.   C
                                                                                   ppfl
                                  Nd    at                 Li           xjflcL {rm
                                                            CRC     CS
\-9acc Oac’4. cxt
                  -
  Q
  9       Zzs    cinj  &J*t        UC                    O
  \                 OJ-c)  tRic                O
                                          \i*<fl cjrc2iO
  4°
         S
            —2
£  Nd2:2  GØØE i da     EIE2LS92T: 0N Xb.                      : NDdd
                               September 16, 2009
      FSIN OFFICES
                               Claudine Dutil-Berry
                               Secretary of the Board
                               National Energy Board
                               444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
                   Head Office Calgary Alberta T2P 0X8
Asimakaniseekan Askiy Reserve
Suite 100 – 103A Packham Ave
       Saskatoon, SK S7N 4K4
       Business (306) 665-1215
            Fax (306) 244-4413 Dear Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry:
                               Re:     TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd.
                                       Keystone XL Pipeline Project Application of 27 February 2009
            Regina Sub-Office
             490A Hoffer Drive
          Regina, SK S4N 7A1   This Letter of Comment is submitted regarding the proposed
       Business (306) 721-2822
            Fax (306) 721-2707
                               TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd. Keystone XL Project (“Keystone
                               XL”) (Hearing Order No. OJ-1-2009 / File No. OF-Fac-Oil-T241-2009-01
                               01).
                               The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations (FSIN) is providing the
                               following comments with regard to the Keystone XL hearing occurring
                               September 15 – 18, 2009 in Calgary Alberta.
                               I.      FACTS
                               A. STATEMENT OF FACTS
    Protecting and
             enhancing              1. The TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline (“Keystone”) has applied to
 Treaty Rights for                     the National Energy Board (“NEB”) for regulatory approval for the
   First Nations of                    following:
      Saskatchewan
                                       •    a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity under Section
                                            52 of the Act authorizing Keystone to construct and operate the
                                            Keystone XL Pipeline (“Section 52 Certificate”);
                                       •    an Order under Part IV of the Act for approval of the proposed
                                            toll methodology and tariffs; and
                                       •    authority to carry out the Project pursuant to section 20 of the
                                            Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, including finding that
                                            the construction and operation of the Pipeline will not or in not
                                            likely to cause adverse environmental effects.
                                    2. On July 18, 2008, Keystone provided a Preliminary Information
                                       Package to the NEB, indicating that a copy had been sent to the
                                       Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations (“FSIN”):
            Preliminary Information Package at p. 9-47
3. For the purpose of Aboriginal communities, the intention of the
   Preliminary Information Package was to:
       provide the Crown with sufficient information to commence
       consultation with Aboriginal peoples who might potentially be
       affected by the project.
           Preliminary Information Package at p. 2-5
4. On November 17, 2008, the NEB sent a letter to the FSIN indicating
   that Keystone filed a Preliminary Information Package with the NEB
   regarding an expansion of the Keystone pipeline; and advising that
   the NEB would be scheduling a hearing on this project, likely
   sometime in 2009. The letter further indicated that, through the
   hearing process, Keystone would be required to report on its
   Aboriginal consultation program and the outcomes of that program.
             National Energy Board Letter to FSIN at p. 1
5. Keystone claims the Consultation and Engagement Program is
   designed to identify the potential impact of the use of lands for
   traditional purposes by Aboriginal peoples and communities
   (“Aboriginal Engagement Program”).
6. Keystone claimed that: “the Aboriginal Engagement Program will
   determine the proximity of the project to Indian reserves as defined
   under the Indian Act, and other trust lands, Métis settlements and
   communities, and traditional use areas; identify potential concerns
   about the project; obtain local and traditional knowledge about the
   project area; identify Aboriginal communities that might potentially
   be affected by or express an interest in the project; provide both
   potentially affected and interested communities with ongoing
   project-related information; and through information exchange and
   dialogue with individual communities Keystone will work with
   communities to address identified effects on a community.”
              Preliminary Information Package at p 7-33 to 7-34.
7. On July 28, 2009, the FSIN received a letter from the Major Projects
   Management Office (MPMO), which provided that the Crown’s duty
   to consult would be discharged through the NEB process “to the
   extent possible”.
     8. The engagement zone for Aboriginal communities which may be
        impacted by the Project was determined to be a radius of 50 km on
        either side of the proposed route.
                Keystone XL Pipeline, Response to Information Requests,
                June – July 2009 at p. 168.
    9. Not all potentially affected First Nations were provided with
        Preliminary Information Packages, such as Moosomin First Nation,
        for example.
                Sweetgrass and Moosomin Written Submission at para. 12.
B. THE NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD ACT AND THE NATIONAL
ENERGY BOARD
    10. There are a number of factors the NEB takes into account when
        issuing a Section 52 Certificate:
              The Board may, subject to the approval of the Governor in
              Council, issue a certificate in respect of a pipeline if the Board
              is satisfied that the pipeline is and will be required by the
              present and future public convenience and necessity and, in
              considering an application for a certificate, the Board shall
              have regard to all considerations that appear to it to be
              relevant, and may have regard to the following:
                (a) the availability of oil, gas, or any other commodity of the
                     pipeline;
                (b) the existence of markets, actual or potential;
                (c) the economic feasibility of the pipeline;
                (d) the financial responsibility and financial structure of the
                     applicant, the methods of financing the pipeline and the
                     extent to which Canadians will have an opportunity of
                     participating in the financing, engineering and
                     construction of the pipeline; and
                (e) any public interest that in the Board’s opinion may be
                    affected by the granting of the refusing of the application.
    11. On March 4, 2002 the NEB issued a Memorandum of Guidance
        (“MOG”) on Consultation with Aboriginal People. The NEB took the
        view that:
                “the Board will require applicants to clearly identify the
                Aboriginal peoples that have an interest in the area of the
                proposed project and to provide evidence that there has
             been adequate Crown consultation where rights…may be
            infringed if the Board approves the applied for facilities.”
    Memorandum of Guidance filed March 4, 2002.
12. In the MOG, the NEB went on to say that it therefore expected the
    applicant to contact the relevant Crown departments to ensure that
    the requisite obligations had been fulfilled.
13. On August 5, 2005 the NEB filed a document entitled “Implications
    of Supreme Court of Canada Decisions on the National Energy
    Board’s Memorandum of Guidance on Consultation with Aboriginal
    People” (File 3600-A000-16). In response to Haida Nation and Taku
    River, the NEB withdrew the MOG:
            The Board has considered these decisions and has
            determined that the MOG may not accurately reflect the
            most recent developments in the law. As a result, the board
            has decided to withdraw the MOG at this time for
            reconsideration and review. The Board will continue to
            monitor legal and policy developments in respect of the duty
            to consult and will engage Aboriginal organizations and
            groups, industry representatives and government prior to
            issuing any future guidance documents on this matter.
    Implications of Supreme Court of Canada Decisions on the National
    Energy Board’s Memorandum of Guidance on Consultation with
    Aboriginal People” dated August 3, 2005 (File 3600-A000-16).
14. On September 3, 2006 the NEB filed a document entitled
    “Consideration of Aboriginal Concerns in National Energy Board
    Decisions”. On the issue of the Board’s duty to consult the NEB
    stated:
            Does the Board have a duty to consult?
            Because the Board is a quasi-judicial tribunal and operates
            much like a court, it can only consider evidence that is filed
            by the applicant and any interested parties in the hearing.
            The common law rules of natural justice mean that the Board
            cannot engage in one-on-one discussions with any
            interested parties outside of the hearing process. However,
            the Board does take steps to ensure that It has sufficient
            evidence before it makes its decision, including evidence on
            the impact the proposed project may have on Aboriginal
            peoples.
     Consideration of Aboriginal Concerns in National Energy Board
    Decisions dated September 3, 2006.
C. THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE STUDY
15. FMA Heritage Inc. was subcontracted by Jacques Whitford Stantec
    AXYS Limited to complete a traditional knowledge study for the
    project (“TK Study”). The TK Study involves two components: the
    traditional land use and traditional environmental knowledge. The
    traditional land use study allegedly focuses on sites and areas of
    cultural significance and historical and/or current use of the land.
16. The TK Study was allegedly to be used by Keystone in developing
    the pipeline route by understanding the potential effects of the
    proposed development on Aboriginal communities and informing the
    archaeological assessment program:
    Keystone XL Pipeline Project Environmental and Socio-Economic
    Assessment Section 18 at p. 18-1 (February 2009).
    Keystone XL Pipeline, Responses to Information Requests, June –
    July 2009 at p. 165.
17. The “participating and First Nation Aboriginal Communities” in the
    TK Study are the Nekaneet Coalition for Saskatchewan which
    includes Nekaneet First Nation, Wood Mountain First Nation, Metis
    Nation – Saskatchewan, Western Regions IIA and III and the
    Muskwacis Coalition for Alberta which includes Samson,
    Ermineskin, Louis Bull, and the Montana First Nations.
    Keystone XL Pipeline Section 52 Application Section 12: Aboriginal
    Engagement at p. 11 (February 2009).
18. The provincial First Nations organization, the Federation of
    Saskatchewan Indian Nations was not included in the TK Study, yet
    the provincial Metis organization in Saskatchewan, the Metis-Nation
    Saskatchewan was included.
D. THE MAJOR PROJECTS MANAGEMENT OFFICE
19. The Major Projects Management Office (MPMO) at Natural
    Resources Canada sent a letter to the FSIN on July 28, 2009, and
    advised that the Crown would rely on the NEB process, to the extent
    possible, to discharge any Crown duty to consult with Aboriginal
    groups.
          Major Projects Management Office Letter at p.1.
     20. The MPMO letter advised FSIN that a number of general steps will
         be used by the Crown via the NEB process as the primary means to
         identify, consider and address the potential adverse impacts of the
         proposed project on potential or established Aboriginal or Treaty
         rights. The general steps include:
         •   Keystone will be required to engage and consult potentially
             affected Aboriginal groups both prior to, and after, the filing of its
             Project Application with the NEB;
         •   Keystone will be required by the NEB procedures to provide
             information to the NEB and relevant federal departments on the
             nature of the concerns raised by Aboriginal groups and their
             efforts to address them through project design and mitigation
             measures.
         •   The Board will thereafter draft an EA Screening Report and will
             provide FSIN with an opportunity to comment on the Report.
         •   Aboriginal groups were provided with a copy of the Hearing
             Order which provided information about the proceedings,
             including the timing and schedule of the NEB hearing.
         •   Aboriginal groups that have project-related concerns are to
             convey their concerns to the NEB, either orally or in writing,
             through the NEB hearing process.
         •   The NEB will consider the concerns raised by Aboriginal groups.
             Federal regulated agencies will participate in the NEB process to
             understand the concerns of Aboriginal groups regarding their
             relationship between their regulatory decision and any possible
             adverse impacts on potential or established Aboriginal or treaty
             rights; and
         •   Federal authorizations for the proposed project will only be
             issued once the Crown determines that its consultation
             obligations with respect to each of these authorizations
             have been discharged. [Emphasis added]
         Major Projects Management Office Letter at p.1-2.
II.      ISSUE
The FSIN’s position is that because the duty to consult owed by the Crown
to First Nations has not been fulfilled, the NEB does not have the authority
to issue a Section 52 Certificate for the Keystone XL Pipeline.
 III.    SUBMISSION
     1. It is submitted that because the duty to consult owed by the Crown
        to First Nations has not been fulfilled, the NEB does not have the
        authority to issue a Section 52 Certificate for the Keystone XL
        Pipeline.
     2. The duty to consult arises “when the Crown has knowledge, real or
        constructive, of the potential existence of the Aboriginal right or title
        and contemplates conduct that might adversely affect it”:
             Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), 2004
             SCC 73 (S.C.C.) at para. 35 [Haida Nation].
     3. Furthermore, the Crown will always have notice of aboriginal Treaty
        rights that may be infringed, as “In the case of a treaty the Crown,
        as a party, will always have notice of its contents”:
             Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian
             Heritage), 2005 SCC 69 (S.C.C.) at para. 34 [Mikisew].
     4. Given that the Keystone XL Pipeline crosses Treaty No. 6 territory,
        and the Crown had knowledge of the location of the Keystone XL
        Pipeline, the Crown had knowledge of the existence of First Nation
        Treaty rights.
     5. It is submitted that since the Crown had knowledge that the
        Keystone XL Pipeline may adversely affect First Nation rights, the
        Crown has a duty to consult and accommodate First Nations.
     6. The scope of the duty to consult depends on the circumstances, and
        may range from a duty to discuss important decisions, to obtaining
        full consent:
             Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010 (W.C.C.)
             at para. 168 [Delgamuukw].
     7. This spectrum has also been described as ranging from the duty to
        “give notice, disclose information, and discuss any issues raised in
        response to the notice”, to having “the opportunity to make
        submissions for consideration, formal participation in the decision-
        making process, and provision of written reasons to show that
        Aboriginal concerns were considered and to reveal the impact they
        had on the decision”.
             Haida Nation, supra at paras. 43 – 45.
8. Moreover, “[t]he controlling question in all situations is what is
    required to maintain the honour of the Crown and to effect
    reconciliation between the Crown and Aboriginal peoples with
    respect to the interests at stake”:
            Haida Nation, ibid. at paras. 43 – 45.
9. Furthermore, even when the Crown’s duty to consult is at the lower
    end of the spectrum, the Crown may be required to engage First
    Nations directly, as was the case in Mikisew Cree, supra. In this
    case the court held that:
            The Crown was required to provide notice to the Mikisew
            and to engage directly with them (and not, as seems to have
            been the case here, as an afterthought to a general public
            consultation: [emphasis added]
                Mikisew, ibid. at para. 64.
10. The scope of the duty to consult is what is required to maintain the
    honour of the Crown. It is submitted that to maintain the honour of
    the Crown, the scope and content of consultation requires that the
    Crown engage directly with First Nations through informed
    discussions, and that the Crown genuinely listen to and
    substantively address First Nations concerns.
11. The NEB document, “Consideration of Aboriginal Concerns in
    National Energy Board Decisions”, provides that the Board cannot
    engage in one-on-one discussions with any interested parties
    outside of the hearing process.
            Consideration of Aboriginal Concerns in National Energy
            Board Decisions dated September 3, 2006.
12. Therefore, the NEB has limited authority and is precluded from
    directly engaging First Nations in consultation. It is submitted that
    direct engagement of First Nations is required in the case at hand in
    order to properly discharge the duty to consult and accommodate.
13. To the knowledge of the FSIN, First Nations who may be impacted
    by the Keystone XL Pipeline have not been engaged directly, such
    that the honour of the Crown has not been upheld and the Crown’s
    duty to consult has not been sufficiently discharged.
 14. On July 28, 2009, the FSIN received a letter from the Major Projects
    Management Office (MPMO), which provided that the Crown’s duty
    to consult would be discharged through the NEB process “to the
    extent possible”.
15. The FSIN submits that the NEB process is insufficient to discharge
    the Crown’s duty to consult because it precludes direct interaction
    between the Crown and First Nations, which is necessary in order to
    make consultation meaningful, effect reconciliation, and thus uphold
    the honour of the Crown.
16. Indeed, merely providing the FSIN and/or First Nations with notice
    of contemplated conduct is insufficient to discharge the duty to
    consult, as in Halfway River First Nation v. British Columbia
    (Ministry of Forests) (1000) 178, D.L.R. (4th) 666 (B.C.C.A.) at
    paras. 159 – 160, [Halfway River] the court stated that:
            The fact that adequate notice of an intended decision may
            have been given does not mean that the requirement for
            adequate consultation has also been met. The Crown’s duty
            to consult imposes on it a positive obligation to reasonably
            ensure that aboriginal peoples are provided with all
            necessary information in a timely way so that they have an
            opportunity to express their interests and concerns, and to
            ensure that their representations are seriously considered
            and, wherever possible. Demonstrably integrated into the
            proposed plan of action.
17. While environmental assessment processes may be considered
    suitable to address Crown consultation with Aboriginals in certain
    circumstances, as in Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British
    Columbia (Project Assessment Director), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550, [Taku
    River], the NEB process in the case at hand is distinguishable
    because the NEBA does not specifically set out a scheme that
    requires consultation with potentially affected Aboriginal peoples,
    and is instead, silent on the issue of consultation.
18. Similarly, although the Brokenhead Ojibway Nation et al v. Attorney
    General of Canada (National Energy Board) et al. 2009 FC 484
    (F.C.) [Brokenhead] case held that the Crown may consider the
    opportunities for Aboriginal consultation that are available within the
    existing processes for regulatory and environmental review, it also
    held that “the NEB process may not be a substitute for the Crown’s
    duty to consult where a project under review directly affects an area
     of unallocated land which is the subject of a land claim or which is
    being used by Aboriginal peoples for traditional purposes”;
    furthermore, since “the NEB process is not designed to address
    [these situations] the Crown would almost certainly have had an
    independent obligation to consult in such a context”: at paras. 29
    and 44.
19. Therefore, the Brokenhead case raises significant questions as to
    the adequacy of the NEB process to fulfill the Crown’s duty to
    consult where a project could be prejudicial to unresolved land
    claims or traditional aboriginal activities and practices.
20. It is submitted that the Brokenhead decision, to the extent that it
    condones the NEB process to discharge Crown consultation
    obligations, is in error in that it is inconsistent with previous case law
    which requires that the scope and content of the duty to consult be
    examined based on the circumstances and context, which may
    require Crown consultation in a different mode or format than the
    NEB process allows. For example, the NEB process precludes
    direct consultations between the Crown and First Nations, but the
    relevant Supreme Court of Canada jurisprudence suggests that
    such may be required in order to uphold the honour of the Crown.
21. The FSIN also raises concerns with regard to the unduly restrictive
    approach taken by the NEB in only including First Nations within a
    50 km radius to the Keystone XL Pipeline whose traditional
    territories may be affected. This narrow approach excluded First
    Nations outside of this 50 km radius, which included certain First
    Nations who may be affected by the Pipeline, such as Moosomin
    First Nation, who was not provided with all necessary information to
    inform itself of the affects of the Pipeline and provide its comments
    and concerns.
             Sweetgrass and Moosomin Written Submission at para. 12.
22. The FSIN hereby submits that the NEB process is insufficient to
    satisfy the Crown’s duty to consult, and to the extent that the NEB
    process was used to facilitate Crown consultation, such consultation
    was not meaningful. Not only were some First Nations excluded
    from the process and not provided prior full information and an
    opportunity to respond, but moreover, there was no opportunity for
    direct consultation and meetings with the Crown, which the FSIN
    submits is required in this case, in order to ensure that consultation
    is meaningful and upholds Crown honor. The purpose of
    consultation is not merely the mitigation of adverse effects, but is
     moreover, reconciliation and what is required to maintain Crown
    honor. It is submitted that it is an error to narrowly interpret Crown
    honor, in a way that excludes some First Nations and prevent First
    Nations from engaging in direct discussions concerning the impact
    of the Project on their inherent and Treaty rights.
23. Moreover, meaningful consultation with First Nations requires timely
    consultation with First Nations, and the FSIN submits that the NEB
    hearing is too late in the process for meaningful consultation for a
    number of reasons. For example, the Traditional Knowledge Study
    conducted was not representative of potentially impacted First
    Nations, and excluded the FSIN, yet the Metis Nation –
    Saskatchewan was part of that study. To exclude the representative
    First Nation organization but to include the representative Metis
    Nation organization in the province is inequitable and surely is not
    an example of Crown honour.
24. Furthermore, the validity of a Traditional ‘Knowledge’ Study is also
    questionable when the Study was conducted without the knowledge
    of, and therefore excluding the input and knowledge held by the
    provincial First Nation organization in Saskatchewan, the FSIN.
25. Finally, the duty to consult is a function of the sui generis fiduciary
    obligation between the Crown and First Nations, and since
    Aboriginal interests are just one of many factors which the NEB may
    consider – the process is insufficient to uphold the honour of the
    Crown upon which the duty to consult is founded.
26. Moreover, even according to the Crown, as evidenced by the
    MPMO letter that advised the FSIN how Crown consultation would
    be met by way of the NEB process, the MPMO stated that:
            Federal authorizations for the proposed project will only
            be issued once the Crown determines that its
            consultation obligations with respect to each of these
            authorizations have been discharged. [Emphasis added]
    Major Projects Management Office Letter dated July 28, 2009 at
    p.1-2.
27. Thus, according to the Crown’s own standards, as stated by the
    MPMO, no authorizations for the proposed project will be issued
    until “consultation obligations... have been discharged.”
    28. Therefore, in accordance with the MPMO’s own consultation
       standards, the FSIN submits that no authorization may be issued
       until consultation obligations with respect to the proposed project
       have been discharged.
   29. Furthermore, given that the Crown’s consultation obligations have
       not been fulfilled, the FSIN submits that NEB does not have the
       jurisdiction to issue a Section 52 Certificate. The FSIN submits that
       upholding Crown honor is a necessary condition precedent to the
       issuance of a s.52 Certificate by the NEB. Without fulfilling the duty
       to consult and accommodate in a manner that ensures Crown honor
       is upheld and First Nations concerns are directly addressed, the
       NEB has no jurisdiction or authority to issue the Certificate for the
       Keystone XL Pipeline.
   30. The NEB process is insufficient to constitute meaningful
       consultation becasue not all potentially affected First Nations were
       included in the NEB ‘consultation’ process: Moosomin First Nation
       never received the Preliminary Information Package and was
       excluded due to the arbitrary 50 km radius determination. Further,
       there was no opportunity allowed for the Crown to consult directly
       with First Nations, in order to remedy this and other concerns.
   31. The FSIN therefore submits that a process which allows for direct
       consultation between the Crown and First Nations is required in
       order to ensure that all potentially affected First Nations can be
       engaged directly so that their concerns can be heard and necessary
       accommodation can occur in order to effect reconciliation.
   32. The FSIN makes this submission in support of the submissions of
       other First Nations in Saskatchewan to this Keystone XL Pipeline
       hearing.
Thank you for accepting this submission.
Yours truly,
FEDERATION OF SASKATCHEWAN INDIAN NATIONS
Delbert P. Wapass
Second Vice Chief, FSIN
 Att:
          Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), 2004
          SCC 73 (S.C.C.)
          Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian
          Heritage), 2005 SCC 69 (S.C.C.)
          Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia (Project
          Assessment Director), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550
          Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010 (W.C.C.)
          Halfway River First Nation v. British Columbia (Ministry of
          Forests) (1000) 178, D.L.R. (4th) 666 (B.C.C.A.)
          Brokenhead Ojibway Nation et al v. Attorney General of Canada
          (National Energy Board) et al. 2009 FC 484 (F.C.)
Cc:
Honourable Minister of Natural Resources Canada Lisa Raitt
Honourable Minister of Environment Jim Prentice
Honourable Minister of INAC Chuck Strahl
Mai-Linh Huynh, Environmental Officer, Transport Canada
Karmen Klarenbach, Major Resource Projects, Transport Canada
John Woodward, Canadian Transportation Agency
Don Sweet, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
Jaela Shockey, Executive Director, Lands and Resources, FSIN
Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511, 2004
SCC 73
                                                                                    2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
Minister of Forests and Attorney General of British Columbia
on behalf of Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the Province
of British Columbia                                                   Appellants
v.
Council of the Haida Nation and Guujaaw, on their own behalf
and on behalf of all members of the Haida Nation                     Respondents
and between
Weyerhaeuser Company Limited                                           Appellant
v.
Council of the Haida Nation and Guujaaw, on their own behalf
and on behalf of all members of the Haida Nation                     Respondents
and
Attorney General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario,
Attorney General of Quebec, Attorney General of Nova Scotia,
Attorney General for Saskatchewan, Attorney General of Alberta,
Squamish Indian Band and Lax-kw’alaams Indian Band,
Haisla Nation, First Nations Summit, Dene Tha’ First Nation,
Tenimgyet, aka Art Matthews, Gitxsan Hereditary Chief, Business
Council of British Columbia, Aggregate Producers Association
of British Columbia, British Columbia and Yukon Chamber of Mines,
British Columbia Chamber of Commerce, Council of Forest
Industries, Mining Association of British Columbia,
British Columbia Cattlemen’s Association and
Village of Port Clements                                        Interveners
                                             -2-
Indexed as: Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests)
                                                                                             2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
Neutral citation: 2004 SCC 73.
File No.: 29419.
2004: March 24; 2004: November 18.
Present: McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps and
Fish JJ.
on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia
            Crown — Honour of Crown — Duty to consult and accommodate
Aboriginal peoples — Whether Crown has duty to consult and accommodate
Aboriginal peoples prior to making decisions that might adversely affect their as yet
unproven Aboriginal rights and title claims — Whether duty extends to third party.
            For more than 100 years, the Haida people have claimed title to all the
lands of Haida Gwaii and the waters surrounding it, but that title has not yet been
legally recognized. The Province of British Columbia issued a “Tree Farm License”
(T.F.L. 39) to a large forestry firm in 1961, permitting it to harvest trees in an area of
Haida Gwaii designated as Block 6. In 1981, 1995 and 2000, the Minister replaced
T.F.L. 39, and in 1999, the Minister approved a transfer of T.F.L. 39 to Weyerhaeuser
Co. The Haida challenged in court these replacements and the transfer, which were
made without their consent and, since at least 1994, over their objections. They asked
that the replacements and transfer be set aside. The chambers judge dismissed the
                                            -3-
petition, but found that the government had a moral, not a legal, duty to negotiate with
the Haida. The Court of Appeal reversed the decision, declaring that both the
                                                                                           2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
government and Weyerhaeuser Co. have a duty to consult with and accommodate the
Haida with respect to harvesting timber from Block 6.
            Held: The Crown’s appeal should be dismissed. Weyerhaeuser Co.’s
appeal should be allowed.
            While it is open to the Haida to seek an interlocutory injunction, they are
not confined to that remedy, which may fail to adequately take account of their
interests prior to final determination thereof. If they can prove a special obligation
giving rise to a duty to consult or accommodate, they are free to pursue other available
remedies.
            The government’s duty to consult with Aboriginal peoples and
accommodate their interests is grounded in the principle of the honour of the Crown,
which must be understood generously. While the asserted but unproven Aboriginal
rights and title are insufficiently specific for the honour of the Crown to mandate that
the Crown act as a fiduciary, the Crown, acting honourably, cannot cavalierly run
roughshod over Aboriginal interests where claims affecting these interests are being
seriously pursued in the process of treaty negotiation and proof. The duty to consult
and accommodate is part of a process of fair dealing and reconciliation that begins
with the assertion of sovereignty and continues beyond formal claims resolution. The
foundation of the duty in the Crown’s honour and the goal of reconciliation suggest
that the duty arises when the Crown has knowledge, real or constructive, of the
potential existence of the Aboriginal right or title and contemplates conduct that might
                                              -4-
adversely affect it. Consultation and accommodation before final claims resolution
preserve the Aboriginal interest and are an essential corollary to the honourable
                                                                                              2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
process of reconciliation that s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, demands.
            The scope of the duty is proportionate to a preliminary assessment of the
strength of the case supporting the existence of the right or title, and to the seriousness
of the potentially adverse effect upon the right or title claimed. The Crown is not
under a duty to reach an agreement; rather, the commitment is to a meaningful process
of consultation in good faith. The content of the duty varies with the circumstances
and each case must be approached individually and flexibly. The controlling question
in all situations is what is required to maintain the honour of the Crown and to effect
reconciliation between the Crown and the Aboriginal people with respect to the
interests at stake. The effect of good faith consultation may be to reveal a duty to
accommodate. Where accommodation is required in making decisions that may
adversely affect as yet unproven Aboriginal rights and title claims, the Crown must
balance Aboriginal concerns reasonably with the potential impact of the decision on
the asserted right or title and with other societal interests.
            Third parties cannot be held liable for failing to discharge the Crown’s
duty to consult and accommodate. The honour of the Crown cannot be delegated, and
the legal responsibility for consultation and accommodation rests with the Crown.
This does not mean, however, that third parties can never be liable to Aboriginal
peoples.
            Finally, the duty to consult and accommodate applies to the provincial
government. At the time of the Union, the Provinces took their interest in land subject
                                             -5-
to any interest other than that of the Province in the same. Since the duty to consult
and accommodate here at issue is grounded in the assertion of Crown sovereignty
                                                                                             2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
which pre-dated the Union, the Province took the lands subject to this duty.
            The Crown’s obligation to consult the Haida on the replacement of
T.F.L. 39 was engaged in this case. The Haida’s claims to title and Aboriginal right
to harvest red cedar were supported by a good prima facie case, and the Province knew
that the potential Aboriginal rights and title applied to Block 6, and could be affected
by the decision to replace T.F.L. 39. T.F.L. decisions reflect strategic planning for
utilization of the resource and may have potentially serious impacts on Aboriginal
rights and titles. If consultation is to be meaningful, it must take place at the stage of
granting or renewing T.F.L.’s. Furthermore, the strength of the case for both the
Haida’s title and their right to harvest red cedar, coupled with the serious impact of
incremental strategic decisions on those interests, suggest that the honour of the Crown
may also require significant accommodation to preserve the Haida’s interest pending
resolution of their claims.
Cases Cited
                 Applied: Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010;
referred to:    RJR — MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), [1994]
1 S.C.R. 311; R. v. Van der Peet, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507; R. v. Badger, [1996] 1
S.C.R. 771; R. v. Marshall, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 456; Wewaykum Indian Band v. Canada,
[2002] 4 S.C.R. 245, 2002 SCC 79; R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075; R. v. Nikal,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 1013; R. v. Gladstone, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723; Cardinal v. Director of
Kent Institution, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 643; Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
                                            -6-
Immigration), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817; TransCanada Pipelines Ltd. v. Beardmore
(Township) (2000), 186 D.L.R. (4th) 403; Mitchell v. M.N.R., [2001] 1 S.C.R. 911,
                                                                                      2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
2001 SCC 33; Halfway River First Nation v. British Columbia (Ministry of Forests),
[1997] 4 C.N.L.R. 45, aff’d [1999] 4 C.N.L.R. 1; Heiltsuk Tribal Council v. British
Columbia     (Minister    of      Sustainable    Resource   Management)    (2003),
19 B.C.L.R. (4th) 107; R. v. Marshall, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 533; R. v. Sioui, [1990]
1 S.C.R. 1025; R. v. Côté, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 139; R. v. Adams, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 101;
Guerin v. The Queen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335; St. Catherine’s Milling and Lumber Co.
v. The Queen (1888), 14 App. Cas. 46; Paul v. British Columbia (Forest Appeals
Commission), [2003] 2 S.C.R. 585, 2003 SCC 55; Law Society of New Brunswick v.
Ryan, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 247, 2003 SCC 20; Canada (Director of Investigation and
Research) v. Southam Inc., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 748.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Constitution Act, 1867, s. 109.
Constitution Act, 1982, s. 35.
Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 157.
Forestry Revitalization Act, S.B.C. 2003, c. 17.
Authors Cited
Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English, 9th ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
    1995, “accommodate”, “accommodation”.
Hunter, John J. L. “Advancing Aboriginal Title Claims after Delgamuukw: The Role
    of the Injunction”. Continuing Legal Education Conference on Litigating
    Aboriginal Title, June 2000.
                                         -7-
Isaac, Thomas, and Anthony Knox. “The Crown’s Duty to Consult Aboriginal
     People” (2003), 41 Alta. L. Rev. 49.
Lawrence, Sonia, and Patrick Macklem. “From Consultation to Reconciliation:
                                                                                     2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
    Aboriginal Rights and the Crown’s Duty to Consult” (2000), 79 Can. Bar
    Rev. 252.
New Zealand. Ministry of Justice. A Guide for Consultation with Mäori. Wellington:
    The Ministry, 1997.
           APPEALS from a judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal,
[2002] 6 W.W.R. 243, 164 B.C.A.C. 217, 268 W.A.C. 217, 99 B.C.L.R. (3d) 209,
44 C.E.L.R. (N.S.) 1, [2002] 2 C.N.L.R. 121, [2002] B.C.J. No. 378 (QL),
2002 BCCA 147, with supplementary reasons (2002), 216 D.L.R. (4th) 1, [2002]
10 W.W.R. 587, 172 B.C.A.C. 75, 282 W.A.C. 75, 5 B.C.L.R. (4th) 33, [2002]
4 C.N.L.R. 117, [2002] B.C.J. No. 1882 (QL), 2002 BCCA 462, reversing a decision
of the British Columbia Supreme Court (2000), 36 C.E.L.R. (N.S.) 155, [2001]
2 C.N.L.R. 83, [2000] B.C.J. No. 2427 (QL), 2000 BCSC 1280. Appeal by the Crown
dismissed. Appeal by Weyerhaeuser Co. allowed.
           Paul J. Pearlman, Q.C., and Kathryn L. Kickbush, for the appellants the
Minister of Forests and the Attorney General of British Columbia on behalf of Her
Majesty the Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia.
           John J. L. Hunter, Q.C., and K. Michael Stephens, for the appellant
Weyerhaeuser Company Limited.
           Louise      Mandell,      Q.C.,     Michael       Jackson,      Q.C.,
Terri-Lynn Williams-Davidson, Gidfahl Gudsllaay and Cheryl Y. Sharvit, for the
respondents.
                                           -8-
           Mitchell R. Taylor and Brian McLaughlin, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Canada.
                                                                                      2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
           E. Ria Tzimas and Mark Crow, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Ontario.
           Pierre-Christian Labeau, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Quebec.
           Written submissions only by Alexander MacBain Cameron, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Nova Scotia.
           Graeme G. Mitchell, Q.C., and P. Mitch McAdam, for the intervener the
Attorney General for Saskatchewan.
           Stanley H. Rutwind and Kurt Sandstrom, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Alberta.
           Gregory J. McDade, Q.C., and John R. Rich, for the interveners the
Squamish Indian Band and the Lax-kw’alaams Indian Band.
           Allan Donovan, for the intervener the Haisla Nation.
           Hugh M. G. Braker, Q.C., Anja Brown, Arthur C. Pape and Jean Teillet,
for the intervener the First Nations Summit.
                                               -9-
               Robert C. Freedman, for the intervener the Dene Tha’ First Nation.
                                                                                             2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
               Robert J. M. Janes and Dominique Nouvet, for the intervener Tenimgyet,
    aka Art Matthews, Gitxsan Hereditary Chief.
               Charles F. Willms and Kevin O’Callaghan, for the interveners the Business
    Council of British Columbia, the Aggregate Producers Association of British
    Columbia, the British Columbia and Yukon Chamber of Mines, the British Columbia
    Chamber of Commerce, the Council of Forest Industries and the Mining Association
    of British Columbia.
               Thomas F. Isaac, for the intervener the British Columbia Cattlemen’s
    Association.
               Stuart A. Rush, Q.C., for the intervener the Village of Port Clements.
               The judgment of the Court was delivered by
               THE CHIEF JUSTICE —
    I. Introduction
1              To the west of the mainland of British Columbia lie the Queen Charlotte
    Islands, the traditional homeland of the Haida people. Haida Gwaii, as the inhabitants
    call it, consists of two large islands and a number of smaller islands. For more than
    100 years, the Haida people have claimed title to all the lands of the Haida Gwaii and
                                                - 10 -
    the waters surrounding it. That title is still in the claims process and has not yet been
    legally recognized.
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
2               The islands of Haida Gwaii are heavily forested. Spruce, hemlock and
    cedar abound. The most important of these is the cedar which, since time immemorial,
    has played a central role in the economy and culture of the Haida people. It is from
    cedar that they made their ocean-going canoes, their clothing, their utensils and the
    totem poles that guarded their lodges. The cedar forest remains central to their life and
    their conception of themselves.
3               The forests of Haida Gwaii have been logged since before the First World
    War. Portions of the island have been logged off. Other portions bear second-growth
    forest. In some areas, old-growth forests can still be found.
4               The Province of British Columbia continues to issue licences to cut trees
    on Haida Gwaii to forestry companies. The modern name for these licenses are Tree
    Farm Licences, or T.F.L.’s. Such a licence is at the heart of this litigation. A large
    forestry firm, MacMillan Bloedel Limited acquired T.F.L. 39 in 1961, permitting it to
    harvest trees in an area designated as Block 6. In 1981, 1995 and 2000, the Minister
    replaced T.F.L. 39 pursuant to procedures set out in the Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996,
    c. 157. In 1999, the Minister approved a transfer of T.F.L. 39 to Weyerhaeuser
    Company Limited (“Weyerhaeuser”). The Haida people challenged these replacements
    and the transfer, which were made without their consent and, since at least 1994, over
    their objections. Nevertheless, T.F.L. 39 continued.
                                                - 11 -
5               In January of 2000, the Haida people launched a lawsuit objecting to the
    three replacement decisions and the transfer of T.F.L. 39 to Weyerhaeuser and asking
                                                                                               2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
    that they be set aside. They argued legal encumbrance, equitable encumbrance and
    breach of fiduciary duty, all grounded in their assertion of Aboriginal title.
6               This brings us to the issue before this Court. The government holds legal
    title to the land. Exercising that legal title, it has granted Weyerhaeuser the right to
    harvest the forests in Block 6 of the land. But the Haida people also claim title to the
    land — title which they are in the process of trying to prove — and object to the
    harvesting of the forests on Block 6 as proposed in T.F.L. 39. In this situation, what
    duty if any does the government owe the Haida people? More concretely, is the
    government required to consult with them about decisions to harvest the forests and
    to accommodate their concerns about what if any forest in Block 6 should be harvested
    before they have proven their title to land and their Aboriginal rights?
7               The stakes are huge. The Haida argue that absent consultation and
    accommodation, they will win their title but find themselves deprived of forests that
    are vital to their economy and their culture. Forests take generations to mature, they
    point out, and old-growth forests can never be replaced. The Haida’s claim to title to
    Haida Gwaii is strong, as found by the chambers judge. But it is also complex and will
    take many years to prove. In the meantime, the Haida argue, their heritage will be
    irretrievably despoiled.
8               The government, in turn, argues that it has the right and responsibility to
    manage the forest resource for the good of all British Columbians, and that until the
                                                 - 12 -
     Haida people formally prove their claim, they have no legal right to be consulted or
     have their needs and interests accommodated.
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
9                The chambers judge found that the government has a moral, but not a legal,
     duty to negotiate with the Haida people: [2001] 2 C.N.L.R. 83, 2000 BCSC 1280. The
     British Columbia Court of Appeal reversed this decision, holding that both the
     government and Weyerhaeuser have a duty to consult with and accommodate the
     Haida people with respect to harvesting timber from Block 6: (2002), 99 B.C.L.R. (3d)
     209, 2002 BCCA 147, with supplementary reasons (2002), 5 B.C.L.R. (4th) 33, 2002
     BCCA 462.
10               I conclude that the government has a legal duty to consult with the Haida
     people about the harvest of timber from Block 6, including decisions to transfer or
     replace Tree Farm Licences. Good faith consultation may in turn lead to an obligation
     to accommodate Haida concerns in the harvesting of timber, although what
     accommodation if any may be required cannot at this time be ascertained. Consultation
     must be meaningful. There is no duty to reach agreement. The duty to consult and, if
     appropriate, accommodate cannot be discharged by delegation to Weyerhaeuser. Nor
     does Weyerhaeuser owe any independent duty to consult with or accommodate the
     Haida people’s concerns, although the possibility remains that it could become liable
     for assumed obligations. It follows that I would dismiss the Crown’s appeal and allow
     the appeal of Weyerhaeuser.
11               This case is the first of its kind to reach this Court. Our task is the modest
     one of establishing a general framework for the duty to consult and accommodate,
     where indicated, before Aboriginal title or rights claims have been decided. As this
                                                 - 13 -
     framework is applied, courts, in the age-old tradition of the common law, will be
     called on to fill in the details of the duty to consult and accommodate.
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     II. Analysis
     A. Does the Law of Injunctions Govern This Situation?
12               It is argued that the Haida’s proper remedy is to apply for an interlocutory
     injunction against the government and Weyerhaeuser, and that therefore it is
     unnecessary to consider a duty to consult or accommodate. In RJR — MacDonald Inc.
     v. Canada (Attorney General), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 311, the requirements for obtaining an
     interlocutory injunction were reviewed. The plaintiff must establish: (1) a serious
     issue to be tried; (2) that irreparable harm will be suffered if the injunction is not
     granted; and (3) that the balance of convenience favours the injunction.
13               It is open to plaintiffs like the Haida to seek an interlocutory injunction.
     However, it does not follow that they are confined to that remedy. If plaintiffs can
     prove a special obligation giving rise to a duty to consult or accommodate, they are
     free to pursue these remedies. Here the Haida rely on the obligation flowing from the
     honour of the Crown toward Aboriginal peoples.
14               Interlocutory injunctions may offer only partial imperfect relief. First, as
     mentioned, they may not capture the full obligation on the government alleged by the
     Haida. Second, they typically represent an all-or-nothing solution. Either the project
     goes ahead or it halts. By contrast, the alleged duty to consult and accommodate by
     its very nature entails balancing of Aboriginal and other interests and thus lies closer
                                                 - 14 -
     to the aim of reconciliation at the heart of Crown-Aboriginal relations, as set out in R.
     v. Van der Peet, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507, at para. 31, and Delgamuukw v. British
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010, at para. 186. Third, the balance of convenience test
     tips the scales in favour of protecting jobs and government revenues, with the result
     that Aboriginal interests tend to “lose” outright pending a final determination of the
     issue, instead of being balanced appropriately against conflicting concerns:
     J. J. L. Hunter, “Advancing Aboriginal Title Claims after Delgamuukw: The Role of
     the Injunction” (June 2000). Fourth, interlocutory injunctions are designed as a stop-
     gap remedy pending litigation of the underlying issue. Aboriginal claims litigation can
     be very complex and require years and even decades to resolve in the courts. An
     interlocutory injunction over such a long period of time might work unnecessary
     prejudice and may diminish incentives on the part of the successful party to
     compromise. While Aboriginal claims can be and are pursued through litigation,
     negotiation is a preferable way of reconciling state and Aboriginal interests. For all
     these reasons, interlocutory injunctions may fail to adequately take account of
     Aboriginal interests prior to their final determination.
15                I conclude that the remedy of interlocutory injunction does not preclude
     the Haida’s claim. We must go further and see whether the special relationship with
     the Crown upon which the Haida rely gives rise to a duty to consult and, if appropriate,
     accommodate. In what follows, I discuss the source of the duty, when the duty arises,
     the scope and content of the duty, whether the duty extends to third parties, and
     whether it applies to the provincial government and not exclusively the federal
     government. I then apply the conclusions flowing from this discussion to the facts of
     this case.
                                                - 15 -
     B. The Source of a Duty to Consult and Accommodate
                                                                                               2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
16               The government’s duty to consult with Aboriginal peoples and
     accommodate their interests is grounded in the honour of the Crown. The honour of
     the Crown is always at stake in its dealings with Aboriginal peoples: see for example
     R. v. Badger, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 771, at para. 41; R. v. Marshall, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 456.
     It is not a mere incantation, but rather a core precept that finds its application in
     concrete practices.
17               The historical roots of the principle of the honour of the Crown suggest
     that it must be understood generously in order to reflect the underlying realities from
     which it stems. In all its dealings with Aboriginal peoples, from the assertion of
     sovereignty to the resolution of claims and the implementation of treaties, the Crown
     must act honourably. Nothing less is required if we are to achieve “the reconciliation
     of the pre-existence of aboriginal societies with the sovereignty of the Crown”:
     Delgamuukw, supra, at para. 186, quoting Van der Peet, supra, at para. 31.
18               The honour of the Crown gives rise to different duties in different
     circumstances. Where the Crown has assumed discretionary control over specific
     Aboriginal interests, the honour of the Crown gives rise to a fiduciary duty:
     Wewaykum Indian Band v. Canada, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 245, 2002 SCC 79, at para. 79.
     The content of the fiduciary duty may vary to take into account the Crown’s other,
     broader obligations. However, the duty’s fulfilment requires that the Crown act with
     reference to the Aboriginal group’s best interest in exercising discretionary control
     over the specific Aboriginal interest at stake. As explained in Wewaykum, at para. 81,
                                                 - 16 -
     the term “fiduciary duty” does not connote a universal trust relationship encompassing
     all aspects of the relationship between the Crown and Aboriginal peoples:
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
                  . . . “fiduciary duty” as a source of plenary Crown liability covering all
                 aspects of the Crown-Indian band relationship . . . overshoots the mark.
                 The fiduciary duty imposed on the Crown does not exist at large but in
                 relation to specific Indian interests.
     Here, Aboriginal rights and title have been asserted but have not been defined or
     proven. The Aboriginal interest in question is insufficiently specific for the honour
     of the Crown to mandate that the Crown act in the Aboriginal group’s best interest, as
     a fiduciary, in exercising discretionary control over the subject of the right or title.
19               The honour of the Crown also infuses the processes of treaty making and
     treaty interpretation. In making and applying treaties, the Crown must act with honour
     and integrity, avoiding even the appearance of “sharp dealing” (Badger, at para. 41).
     Thus in Marshall, supra, at para. 4, the majority of this Court supported its
     interpretation of a treaty by stating that “nothing less would uphold the honour and
     integrity of the Crown in its dealings with the Mi’kmaq people to secure their peace
     and friendship . . .”.
20               Where treaties remain to be concluded, the honour of the Crown requires
     negotiations leading to a just settlement of Aboriginal claims: R. v. Sparrow, [1990]
     1 S.C.R. 1075, at pp. 1105-6. Treaties serve to reconcile pre-existing Aboriginal
     sovereignty with assumed Crown sovereignty, and to define Aboriginal rights
     guaranteed by s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. Section 35 represents a promise of
     rights recognition, and “[i]t is always assumed that the Crown intends to fulfil its
     promises” (Badger, supra, at para. 41). This promise is realized and sovereignty
                                                 - 17 -
     claims reconciled through the process of honourable negotiation. It is a corollary of
     s. 35 that the Crown act honourably in defining the rights it guarantees and in
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     reconciling them with other rights and interests. This, in turn, implies a duty to
     consult and, if appropriate, accommodate.
21               This duty to consult is recognized and discussed in the jurisprudence. In
     Sparrow, supra, at p. 1119, this Court affirmed a duty to consult with west-coast
     Salish asserting an unresolved right to fish. Dickson C.J. and La Forest J. wrote that
     one of the factors in determining whether limits on the right were justified is “whether
     the aboriginal group in question has been consulted with respect to the conservation
     measures being implemented”.
22               The Court affirmed the duty to consult regarding resources to which
     Aboriginal peoples make claim a few years later in R. v. Nikal, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 1013,
     where Cory J. wrote: “So long as every reasonable effort is made to inform and to
     consult, such efforts would suffice to meet the justification requirement” (para. 110).
23               In the companion case of R. v. Gladstone, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723, Lamer C.J.
     referred to the need for “consultation and compensation”, and to consider “how the
     government has accommodated different aboriginal rights in a particular fishery . . .,
     how important the fishery is to the economic and material well-being of the band in
     question, and the criteria taken into account by the government in, for example,
     allocating commercial licences amongst different users” (para. 64).
24               The Court’s seminal decision in Delgamuukw, supra, at para. 168, in the
     context of a claim for title to land and resources, confirmed and expanded on the duty
                                                - 18 -
     to consult, suggesting the content of the duty varied with the circumstances: from a
     minimum “duty to discuss important decisions” where the “breach is less serious or
                                                                                               2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     relatively minor”; through the “significantly deeper than mere consultation” that is
     required in “most cases”; to “full consent of [the] aboriginal nation” on very serious
     issues. These words apply as much to unresolved claims as to intrusions on settled
     claims.
25               Put simply, Canada’s Aboriginal peoples were here when Europeans came,
     and were never conquered. Many bands reconciled their claims with the sovereignty
     of the Crown through negotiated treaties. Others, notably in British Columbia, have
     yet to do so. The potential rights embedded in these claims are protected by s. 35 of
     the Constitution Act, 1982. The honour of the Crown requires that these rights be
     determined, recognized and respected. This, in turn, requires the Crown, acting
     honourably, to participate in processes of negotiation. While this process continues,
     the honour of the Crown may require it to consult and, where indicated, accommodate
     Aboriginal interests.
     C. When the Duty to Consult and Accommodate Arises
26               Honourable negotiation implies a duty to consult with Aboriginal claimants
     and conclude an honourable agreement reflecting the claimants’ inherent rights. But
     proving rights may take time, sometimes a very long time. In the meantime, how are
     the interests under discussion to be treated? Underlying this question is the need to
     reconcile prior Aboriginal occupation of the land with the reality of Crown
     sovereignty. Is the Crown, under the aegis of its asserted sovereignty, entitled to use
     the resources at issue as it chooses, pending proof and resolution of the Aboriginal
                                                 - 19 -
     claim? Or must it adjust its conduct to reflect the as yet unresolved rights claimed by
     the Aboriginal claimants?
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
27               The answer, once again, lies in the honour of the Crown. The Crown,
     acting honourably, cannot cavalierly run roughshod over Aboriginal interests where
     claims affecting these interests are being seriously pursued in the process of treaty
     negotiation and proof. It must respect these potential, but yet unproven, interests. The
     Crown is not rendered impotent. It may continue to manage the resource in question
     pending claims resolution. But, depending on the circumstances, discussed more fully
     below, the honour of the Crown may require it to consult with and reasonably
     accommodate Aboriginal interests pending resolution of the claim. To unilaterally
     exploit a claimed resource during the process of proving and resolving the Aboriginal
     claim to that resource, may be to deprive the Aboriginal claimants of some or all of the
     benefit of the resource. That is not honourable.
28               The government argues that it is under no duty to consult and
     accommodate prior to final determination of the scope and content of the right. Prior
     to proof of the right, it is argued, there exists only a broad, common law “duty of
     fairness”, based on the general rule that an administrative decision that affects the
     “rights, privileges or interests of an individual” triggers application of the duty of
     fairness: Cardinal v. Director of Kent Institution, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 643, at p. 653; Baker
     v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817, at para. 20.
     The government asserts that, beyond general administrative law obligations, a duty to
     consult and accommodate arises only where the government has taken on the
     obligation of protecting a specific Aboriginal interest or is seeking to limit an
     established Aboriginal interest. In the result, the government submits that there is no
                                                 - 20 -
     legal duty to consult and accommodate Haida interests at this stage, although it
     concedes there may be “sound practical and policy reasons” to do so.
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
29               The government cites both authority and policy in support of its position.
     It relies on Sparrow, supra, at pp. 1110-13 and 1119, where the scope and content of
     the right were determined and infringement established, prior to consideration of
     whether infringement was justified. The government argues that its position also finds
     support in the perspective of the Ontario Court of Appeal in TransCanada Pipelines
     Ltd. v. Beardmore (Township) (2000), 186 D.L.R. (4th) 403, which held that “what
     triggers a consideration of the Crown’s duty to consult is a showing by the First Nation
     of a violation of an existing Aboriginal or treaty right recognized and affirmed by
     s. 35(1)” (para. 120).
30               As for policy, the government points to practical difficulties in the
     enforcement of a duty to consult or accommodate unproven claims. If the duty to
     consult varies with the circumstances from a “mere” duty to notify and listen at one
     end of the spectrum to a requirement of Aboriginal consent at the other end, how, the
     government asks, are the parties to agree which level is appropriate in the face of
     contested claims and rights? And if they cannot agree, how are courts or tribunals to
     determine this? The government also suggests that it is impractical and unfair to
     require consultation before final claims determination because this amounts to giving
     a remedy before issues of infringement and justification are decided.
31               The government’s arguments do not withstand scrutiny. Neither the
     authorities nor practical considerations support the view that a duty to consult and, if
                                                 - 21 -
     appropriate, accommodate arises only upon final determination of the scope and
     content of the right.
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
32               The jurisprudence of this Court supports the view that the duty to consult
     and accommodate is part of a process of fair dealing and reconciliation that begins
     with the assertion of sovereignty and continues beyond formal claims resolution.
     Reconciliation is not a final legal remedy in the usual sense. Rather, it is a process
     flowing from rights guaranteed by s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. This process
     of reconciliation flows from the Crown’s duty of honourable dealing toward
     Aboriginal peoples, which arises in turn from the Crown’s assertion of sovereignty
     over an Aboriginal people and de facto control of land and resources that were
     formerly in the control of that people. As stated in Mitchell v. M.N.R., [2001] 1 S.C.R.
     911, 2001 SCC 33, at para. 9, “[w]ith this assertion [sovereignty] arose an obligation
     to treat aboriginal peoples fairly and honourably, and to protect them from
     exploitation” (emphasis added).
33               To limit reconciliation to the post-proof sphere risks treating reconciliation
     as a distant legalistic goal, devoid of the “meaningful content” mandated by the
     “solemn commitment” made by the Crown in recognizing and affirming Aboriginal
     rights and title: Sparrow, supra, at p. 1108. It also risks unfortunate consequences.
     When the distant goal of proof is finally reached, the Aboriginal peoples may find their
     land and resources changed and denuded. This is not reconciliation.             Nor is it
     honourable.
34               The existence of a legal duty to consult prior to proof of claims is
     necessary to understand the language of cases like Sparrow, Nikal, and Gladstone,
                                                  - 22 -
     supra, where confirmation of the right and justification of an alleged infringement
     were litigated at the same time. For example, the reference in Sparrow to Crown
                                                                                                   2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     behaviour in determining if any infringements were justified, is to behaviour before
     determination of the right. This negates the contention that a proven right is the
     trigger for a legal duty to consult and if appropriate accommodate even in the context
     of justification.
35               But, when precisely does a duty to consult arise? The foundation of the
     duty in the Crown’s honour and the goal of reconciliation suggest that the duty arises
     when the Crown has knowledge, real or constructive, of the potential existence of the
     Aboriginal right or title and contemplates conduct that might adversely affect it: see
     Halfway River First Nation v. British Columbia (Ministry of Forests), [1997] 4
     C.N.L.R. 45 (B.C.S.C.), at p. 71, per Dorgan J.
36               This leaves the practical argument. It is said that before claims are
     resolved, the Crown cannot know that the rights exist, and hence can have no duty to
     consult or accommodate. This difficulty should not be denied or minimized. As I
     stated (dissenting) in Marshall, supra, at para. 112, one cannot “meaningfully discuss
     accommodation or justification of a right unless one has some idea of the core of that
     right and its modern scope”. However, it will frequently be possible to reach an idea
     of the asserted rights and of their strength sufficient to trigger an obligation to consult
     and accommodate, short of final judicial determination or settlement. To facilitate this
     determination, claimants should outline their claims with clarity, focussing on the
     scope and nature of the Aboriginal rights they assert and on the alleged infringements.
     This is what happened here, where the chambers judge made a preliminary evidence-
                                                 - 23 -
     based assessment of the strength of the Haida claims to the lands and resources of
     Haida Gwaii, particularly Block 6.
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
37               There is a distinction between knowledge sufficient to trigger a duty to
     consult and, if appropriate, accommodate, and the content or scope of the duty in a
     particular case. Knowledge of a credible but unproven claim suffices to trigger a duty
     to consult and accommodate. The content of the duty, however, varies with the
     circumstances, as discussed more fully below. A dubious or peripheral claim may
     attract a mere duty of notice, while a stronger claim may attract more stringent duties.
     The law is capable of differentiating between tenuous claims, claims possessing a
     strong prima facie case, and established claims. Parties can assess these matters, and
     if they cannot agree, tribunals and courts can assist. Difficulties associated with the
     absence of proof and definition of claims are addressed by assigning appropriate
     content to the duty, not by denying the existence of a duty.
38               I conclude that consultation and accommodation before final claims
     resolution, while challenging, is not impossible, and indeed is an essential corollary
     to the honourable process of reconciliation that s. 35 demands. It preserves the
     Aboriginal interest pending claims resolution and fosters a relationship between the
     parties that makes possible negotiations, the preferred process for achieving ultimate
     reconciliation: see S. Lawrence and P. Macklem, “From Consultation to
     Reconciliation: Aboriginal Rights and the Crown’s Duty to Consult” (2000), 79 Can.
     Bar Rev. 252, at p. 262. Precisely what is required of the government may vary with
     the strength of the claim and the circumstances. But at a minimum, it must be
     consistent with the honour of the Crown.
                                                 - 24 -
     D. The Scope and Content of the Duty to Consult and Accommodate
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
39               The content of the duty to consult and accommodate varies with the
     circumstances. Precisely what duties arise in different situations will be defined as the
     case law in this emerging area develops. In general terms, however, it may be asserted
     that the scope of the duty is proportionate to a preliminary assessment of the strength
     of the case supporting the existence of the right or title, and to the seriousness of the
     potentially adverse effect upon the right or title claimed.
40               In Delgamuukw, supra, at para. 168, the Court considered the duty to
     consult and accommodate in the context of established claims. Lamer C.J. wrote:
                 The nature and scope of the duty of consultation will vary with the
                 circumstances. In occasional cases, when the breach is less serious or
                 relatively minor, it will be no more than a duty to discuss important
                 decisions that will be taken with respect to lands held pursuant to
                 aboriginal title. Of course, even in these rare cases when the minimum
                 acceptable standard is consultation, this consultation must be in good faith,
                 and with the intention of substantially addressing the concerns of the
                 aboriginal peoples whose lands are at issue. In most cases, it will be
                 significantly deeper than mere consultation. Some cases may even require
                 the full consent of an aboriginal nation, particularly when provinces enact
                 hunting and fishing regulations in relation to aboriginal lands.
41               Transposing this passage to pre-proof claims, one may venture the
     following. While it is not useful to classify situations into watertight compartments,
     different situations requiring different responses can be identified. In all cases, the
     honour of the Crown requires that the Crown act with good faith to provide meaningful
     consultation appropriate to the circumstances. In discharging this duty, regard may
     be had to the procedural safeguards of natural justice mandated by administrative law.
                                                - 25 -
42               At all stages, good faith on both sides is required. The common thread on
                                                                                               2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     the Crown’s part must be “the intention of substantially addressing [Aboriginal]
     concerns” as they are raised (Delgamuukw, supra, at para. 168), through a meaningful
     process of consultation. Sharp dealing is not permitted. However, there is no duty to
     agree; rather, the commitment is to a meaningful process of consultation. As for
     Aboriginal claimants, they must not frustrate the Crown’s reasonable good faith
     attempts, nor should they take unreasonable positions to thwart government from
     making decisions or acting in cases where, despite meaningful consultation, agreement
     is not reached: see Halfway River First Nation v. British Columbia (Ministry of
     Forests), [1999] 4 C.N.L.R. 1 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 44; Heiltsuk Tribal Council v. British
     Columbia (Minister of Sustainable Resource Management) (2003), 19 B.C.L.R. (4th)
     107 (B.C.S.C.). Mere hard bargaining, however, will not offend an Aboriginal
     people’s right to be consulted.
43               Against this background, I turn to the kind of duties that may arise in
     different situations. In this respect, the concept of a spectrum may be helpful, not to
     suggest watertight legal compartments but rather to indicate what the honour of the
     Crown may require in particular circumstances. At one end of the spectrum lie cases
     where the claim to title is weak, the Aboriginal right limited, or the potential for
     infringement minor. In such cases, the only duty on the Crown may be to give notice,
     disclose information, and discuss any issues raised in response to the notice.
     “‘[C]onsultation’ in its least technical definition is talking together for mutual
     understanding”: T. Isaac and A. Knox, “The Crown’s Duty to Consult Aboriginal
     People” (2003), 41 Alta. L. Rev. 49, at p. 61.
                                                  - 26 -
44                 At the other end of the spectrum lie cases where a strong prima facie case
     for the claim is established, the right and potential infringement is of high significance
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     to the Aboriginal peoples, and the risk of non-compensable damage is high. In such
     cases deep consultation, aimed at finding a satisfactory interim solution, may be
     required.     While precise requirements will vary with the circumstances, the
     consultation required at this stage may entail the opportunity to make submissions for
     consideration, formal participation in the decision-making process, and provision of
     written reasons to show that Aboriginal concerns were considered and to reveal the
     impact they had on the decision. This list is neither exhaustive, nor mandatory for
     every case. The government may wish to adopt dispute resolution procedures like
     mediation or administrative regimes with impartial decision-makers in complex or
     difficult cases.
45                 Between these two extremes of the spectrum just described, will lie other
     situations.    Every case must be approached individually.          Each must also be
     approached flexibly, since the level of consultation required may change as the process
     goes on and new information comes to light. The controlling question in all situations
     is what is required to maintain the honour of the Crown and to effect reconciliation
     between the Crown and the Aboriginal peoples with respect to the interests at stake.
     Pending settlement, the Crown is bound by its honour to balance societal and
     Aboriginal interests in making decisions that may affect Aboriginal claims. The
     Crown may be required to make decisions in the face of disagreement as to the
     adequacy of its response to Aboriginal concerns. Balance and compromise will then
     be necessary.
                                                - 27 -
46               Meaningful consultation may oblige the Crown to make changes to its
     proposed action based on information obtained through consultations. The New
                                                                                               2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     Zealand Ministry of Justice’s Guide for Consultation with Mäori (1997) provides
     insight (at pp. 21 and 31):
                 Consultation is not just a process of exchanging information. It also
                 entails testing and being prepared to amend policy proposals in the light
                 of information received, and providing feedback. Consultation therefore
                 becomes a process which should ensure both parties are better informed
                 ....
                                               ...
                 . . . genuine consultation means a process that involves . . .:
                     • gathering information to test policy proposals
                     • putting forward proposals that are not yet finalised
                     • seeking Mäori opinion on those proposals
                     • informing Mäori of all relevant information upon which those
                       proposals are based
                     • not promoting but listening with an open mind to what Mäori have
                       to say
                     • being prepared to alter the original proposal
                     • providing feedback both during the consultation process and after
                       the decision-process.
47               When the consultation process suggests amendment of Crown policy, we
     arrive at the stage of accommodation. Thus the effect of good faith consultation may
     be to reveal a duty to accommodate. Where a strong prima facie case exists for the
     claim, and the consequences of the government’s proposed decision may adversely
     affect it in a significant way, addressing the Aboriginal concerns may require taking
     steps to avoid irreparable harm or to minimize the effects of infringement, pending
     final resolution of the underlying claim.       Accommodation is achieved through
     consultation, as this Court recognized in R. v. Marshall, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 533, at para.
     22: “. . . the process of accommodation of the treaty right may best be resolved by
     consultation and negotiation”.
                                                  - 28 -
48               This process does not give Aboriginal groups a veto over what can be done
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     with land pending final proof of the claim. The Aboriginal “consent” spoken of in
     Delgamuukw is appropriate only in cases of established rights, and then by no means
     in every case. Rather, what is required is a process of balancing interests, of give and
     take.
49               This flows from the meaning of “accommodate”.                    The terms
     “accommodate” and “accommodation” have been defined as to “adapt, harmonize,
     reconcile” . . . “an adjustment or adaptation to suit a special or different purpose . . .
     a convenient arrangement; a settlement or compromise”: Concise Oxford Dictionary
     of Current English (9th ed. 1995), at p. 9. The accommodation that may result from
     pre-proof consultation is just this — seeking compromise in an attempt to harmonize
     conflicting interests and move further down the path of reconciliation. A commitment
     to the process does not require a duty to agree. But it does require good faith efforts
     to understand each other’s concerns and move to address them.
50               The Court’s decisions confirm this vision of accommodation. The Court
     in Sparrow raised the concept of accommodation, stressing the need to balance
     competing societal interests with Aboriginal and treaty rights. In R. v. Sioui, [1990]
     1 S.C.R. 1025, at p. 1072, the Court stated that the Crown bears the burden of proving
     that its occupancy of lands “cannot be accommodated to reasonable exercise of the
     Hurons’ rights”. And in R. v. Côté, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 139, at para. 81, the Court spoke
     of whether restrictions on Aboriginal rights “can be accommodated with the Crown’s
     special fiduciary relationship with First Nations”. Balance and compromise are
     inherent in the notion of reconciliation. Where accommodation is required in making
                                                 - 29 -
     decisions that may adversely affect as yet unproven Aboriginal rights and title claims,
     the Crown must balance Aboriginal concerns reasonably with the potential impact of
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     the decision on the asserted right or title and with other societal interests.
51               It is open to governments to set up regulatory schemes to address the
     procedural requirements appropriate to different problems at different stages, thereby
     strengthening the reconciliation process and reducing recourse to the courts. As noted
     in R. v. Adams, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 101, at para. 54, the government “may not simply
     adopt an unstructured discretionary administrative regime which risks infringing
     aboriginal rights in a substantial number of applications in the absence of some
     explicit guidance”. It should be observed that, since October 2002, British Columbia
     has had a Provincial Policy for Consultation with First Nations to direct the terms of
     provincial ministries’ and agencies’ operational guidelines. Such a policy, while
     falling short of a regulatory scheme, may guard against unstructured discretion and
     provide a guide for decision-makers.
     E. Do Third Parties Owe a Duty to Consult and Accommodate?
52               The Court of Appeal found that Weyerhaeuser, the forestry contractor
     holding T.F.L. 39, owed the Haida people a duty to consult and accommodate. With
     respect, I cannot agree.
53               It is suggested (per Lambert J.A.) that a third party’s obligation to consult
     Aboriginal peoples may arise from the ability of the third party to rely on justification
     as a defence against infringement. However, the duty to consult and accommodate,
     as discussed above, flows from the Crown’s assumption of sovereignty over lands and
                                                 - 30 -
     resources formerly held by the Aboriginal group. This theory provides no support for
     an obligation on third parties to consult or accommodate. The Crown alone remains
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     legally responsible for the consequences of its actions and interactions with third
     parties, that affect Aboriginal interests. The Crown may delegate procedural aspects
     of consultation to industry proponents seeking a particular development; this is not
     infrequently done in environmental assessments. Similarly, the terms of T.F.L. 39
     mandated Weyerhaeuser to specify measures that it would take to identify and consult
     with “aboriginal people claiming an aboriginal interest in or to the area” (Tree Farm
     Licence No. 39, Haida Tree Farm Licence, para. 2.09(g)(ii)). However, the ultimate
     legal responsibility for consultation and accommodation rests with the Crown. The
     honour of the Crown cannot be delegated.
54               It is also suggested (per Lambert J.A.) that third parties might have a duty
     to consult and accommodate on the basis of the trust law doctrine of “knowing
     receipt”. However, as discussed above, while the Crown’s fiduciary obligations and
     its duty to consult and accommodate share roots in the principle that the Crown’s
     honour is engaged in its relationship with Aboriginal peoples, the duty to consult is
     distinct from the fiduciary duty that is owed in relation to particular cognizable
     Aboriginal interests. As noted earlier, the Court cautioned in Wewaykum against
     assuming that a general trust or fiduciary obligation governs all aspects of relations
     between the Crown and Aboriginal peoples. Furthermore, this Court in Guerin v. The
     Queen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, made it clear that the “trust-like” relationship between the
     Crown and Aboriginal peoples is not a true “trust”, noting that “[t]he law of trusts is
     a highly developed, specialized branch of the law” (p. 386). There is no reason to graft
     the doctrine of knowing receipt onto the special relationship between the Crown and
     Aboriginal peoples. It is also questionable whether businesses acting on licence from
                                                 - 31 -
     the Crown can be analogized to persons who knowingly turn trust funds to their own
     ends.
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
55               Finally, it is suggested (per Finch C.J.B.C.) that third parties should be
     held to the duty in order to provide an effective remedy. The first difficulty with this
     suggestion is that remedies do not dictate liability. Once liability is found, the
     question of remedy arises. But the remedy tail cannot wag the liability dog. We
     cannot sue a rich person, simply because the person has deep pockets or can provide
     a desired result. The second problem is that it is not clear that the government lacks
     sufficient remedies to achieve meaningful consultation and accommodation. In this
     case, Part 10 of T.F.L. 39 provided that the Ministry of Forests could vary any permit
     granted to Weyerhaeuser to be consistent with a court’s determination of Aboriginal
     rights or title. The government may also require Weyerhaeuser to amend its
     management plan if the Chief Forester considers that interference with an Aboriginal
     right has rendered the management plan inadequate (para. 2.38(d)). Finally, the
     government can control by legislation, as it did when it introduced the Forestry
     Revitalization Act, S.B.C. 2003, c. 17, which claws back 20 percent of all licensees’
     harvesting rights, in part to make land available for Aboriginal peoples.          The
     government’s legislative authority over provincial natural resources gives it a powerful
     tool with which to respond to its legal obligations. This, with respect, renders
     questionable the statement by Finch C.J.B.C. that the government “has no capacity to
     allocate any part of that timber to the Haida without Weyerhaeuser’s consent or co-
     operation” ((2002), 5 B.C.L.R. (4th) 33, at para. 119). Failure to hold Weyerhaeuser
     to a duty to consult and accommodate does not make the remedy “hollow or illusory”.
                                                 - 32 -
56               The fact that third parties are under no duty to consult or accommodate
     Aboriginal concerns does not mean that they can never be liable to Aboriginal peoples.
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     If they act negligently in circumstances where they owe Aboriginal peoples a duty of
     care, or if they breach contracts with Aboriginal peoples or deal with them dishonestly,
     they may be held legally liable. But they cannot be held liable for failing to discharge
     the Crown’s duty to consult and accommodate.
     F. The Province’s Duty
57               The Province of British Columbia argues that any duty to consult or
     accommodate rests solely with the federal government. I cannot accept this argument.
58               The Province’s argument rests on s. 109 of the Constitution Act, 1867,
     which provides that “[a]ll Lands, Mines, Minerals, and Royalties belonging to the
     several Provinces of Canada . . . at the Union . . . shall belong to the several
     Provinces.” The Province argues that this gives it exclusive right to the land at issue.
     This right, it argues, cannot be limited by the protection for Aboriginal rights found
     in s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. To do so, it argues, would “undermine the
     balance of federalism” (Crown’s factum, at para. 96).
59               The answer to this argument is that the Provinces took their interest in land
     subject to “any Interest other than that of the Province in the same” (s. 109). The duty
     to consult and accommodate here at issue is grounded in the assertion of Crown
     sovereignty which pre-dated the Union. It follows that the Province took the lands
     subject to this duty. It cannot therefore claim that s. 35 deprives it of powers it would
     otherwise have enjoyed. As stated in St. Catherine’s Milling and Lumber Co. v. The
                                                 - 33 -
     Queen (1888), 14 App. Cas. 46 (P.C.), lands in the Province are “available to [the
     Province] as a source of revenue whenever the estate of the Crown is disencumbered
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     of the Indian title” (p. 59). The Crown’s argument on this point has been canvassed
     by this Court in Delgamuukw, supra, at para. 175, where Lamer C.J. reiterated the
     conclusions in St. Catherine’s Milling, supra. There is therefore no foundation to the
     Province’s argument on this point.
     G. Administrative Review
60               Where the government’s conduct is challenged on the basis of allegations
     that it failed to discharge its duty to consult and accommodate pending claims
     resolution, the matter may go to the courts for review. To date, the Province has
     established no process for this purpose. The question of what standard of review the
     court should apply in judging the adequacy of the government’s efforts cannot be
     answered in the absence of such a process. General principles of administrative law,
     however, suggest the following.
61               On questions of law, a decision-maker must generally be correct: for
     example, Paul v. British Columbia (Forest Appeals Commission), [2003] 2 S.C.R. 585,
     2003 SCC 55. On questions of fact or mixed fact and law, on the other hand, a
     reviewing body may owe a degree of deference to the decision-maker. The existence
     or extent of the duty to consult or accommodate is a legal question in the sense that it
     defines a legal duty. However, it is typically premised on an assessment of the facts.
     It follows that a degree of deference to the findings of fact of the initial adjudicator
     may be appropriate. The need for deference and its degree will depend on the nature
     of the question the tribunal was addressing and the extent to which the facts were
                                                 - 34 -
     within the expertise of the tribunal: Law Society of New Brunswick v. Ryan, [2003] 1
     S.C.R. 247, 2003 SCC 20; Paul, supra. Absent error on legal issues, the tribunal may
                                                                                                2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     be in a better position to evaluate the issue than the reviewing court, and some degree
     of deference may be required. In such a case, the standard of review is likely to be
     reasonableness. To the extent that the issue is one of pure law, and can be isolated
     from the issues of fact, the standard is correctness. However, where the two are
     inextricably entwined, the standard will likely be reasonableness: Canada (Director
     of Investigation and Research) v. Southam Inc., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 748.
62               The process itself would likely fall to be examined on a standard of
     reasonableness. Perfect satisfaction is not required; the question is whether the
     regulatory scheme or government action “viewed as a whole, accommodates the
     collective aboriginal right in question”: Gladstone, supra, at para. 170. What is
     required is not perfection, but reasonableness. As stated in Nikal, supra, at para. 110,
     “in . . . information and consultation the concept of reasonableness must come into
     play. . . . So long as every reasonable effort is made to inform and to consult, such
     efforts would suffice.” The government is required to make reasonable efforts to
     inform and consult. This suffices to discharge the duty.
63               Should the government misconceive the seriousness of the claim or impact
     of the infringement, this question of law would likely be judged by correctness. Where
     the government is correct on these matters and acts on the appropriate standard, the
     decision will be set aside only if the government’s process is unreasonable. The focus,
     as discussed above, is not on the outcome, but on the process of consultation and
     accommodation.
                                                 - 35 -
     H. Application to the Facts
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
                 (1) Existence of the Duty
64               The question is whether the Province had knowledge, real or constructive,
     of the potential existence of Aboriginal right or title and contemplated conduct that
     might adversely affect them. On the evidence before the Court in this matter, the
     answer must unequivocally be “yes”.
65               The Haida have claimed title to all of Haida Gwaii for at least 100 years.
     The chambers judge found that they had expressed objections to the Province for a
     number of years regarding the rate of logging of old-growth forests, methods of
     logging, and the environmental effects of logging. Further, the Province was aware
     since at least 1994 that the Haida objected to replacement of T.F.L. 39 without their
     consent and without accommodation with respect to their title claims. As found by the
     chambers judge, the Province has had available evidence of the Haida’s exclusive use
     and occupation of some areas of Block 6 “[s]ince 1994, and probably much earlier”.
     The Province has had available to it evidence of the importance of red cedar to the
     Haida culture since before 1846 (the assertion of British sovereignty).
66               The Province raises concerns over the breadth of the Haida’s claims,
     observing that “[i]n a separate action the Haida claim aboriginal title to all of the
     Queen Charlotte Islands, the surrounding waters, and the air space. . . . The Haida
     claim includes the right to the exclusive use, occupation and benefit of the land, inland
     waters, seabed, archipelagic waters and air space” (Crown’s factum, at para. 35).
     However, consideration of the duty to consult and accommodate prior to proof of a
                                                 - 36 -
     right does not amount to a prior determination of the case on its merits. Indeed, it
     should be noted that, prior to the chambers judge’s decision in this case, the Province
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     had successfully moved to sever the question of the existence and infringement of
     Haida title and rights from issues involving the duty to consult and accommodate. The
     issues were clearly separate in the proceedings, at the Province’s instigation.
67               The chambers judge ascertained that the Province knew that the potential
     Aboriginal right and title applied to Block 6, and could be affected by the decision to
     replace T.F.L. 39. On this basis, the honour of the Crown mandated consultation prior
     to making a decision that might adversely affect the claimed Aboriginal title and
     rights.
                 (2) Scope of the Duty
68               As discussed above, the scope of the consultation required will be
     proportionate to a preliminary assessment of the strength of the case supporting the
     existence of the right or title, and to the seriousness of the potentially adverse effect
     upon the right or title claimed.
                 (i) Strength of the Case
69               On the basis of evidence described as “voluminous”, the chambers judge
     found, at para. 25, a number of conclusions to be “inescapable” regarding the Haida’s
     claims. He found that the Haida had inhabited Haida Gwaii continuously since at least
     1774, that they had never been conquered, never surrendered their rights by treaty, and
     that their rights had not been extinguished by federal legislation. Their culture has
                                                 - 37 -
     utilized red cedar from old-growth forests on both coastal and inland areas of what is
     now Block 6 of T.F.L. 39 since at least 1846.
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
70               The chambers judge’s thorough assessment of the evidence distinguishes
     between the various Haida claims relevant to Block 6. On the basis of a thorough
     survey of the evidence, he found, at para. 47:
                 (1) a “reasonable probability” that the Haida may establish title to “at least
                 some parts” of the coastal and inland areas of Haida Gwaii, including
                 coastal areas of Block 6. There appears to be a “reasonable possibility”
                 that these areas will include inland areas of Block 6;
                 (2) a “substantial probability” that the Haida will be able to establish an
                 aboriginal right to harvest old-growth red cedar trees from both coastal
                 and inland areas of Block 6.
     The chambers judge acknowledged that a final resolution would require a great deal
     of further evidence, but said he thought it “fair to say that the Haida claim goes far
     beyond the mere ‘assertion’ of Aboriginal title” (para. 50).
71               The chambers judge’s findings grounded the Court of Appeal’s conclusion
     that the Haida claims to title and Aboriginal rights were “supported by a good prima
     facie case” (para. 49). The strength of the case goes to the extent of the duty that the
     Province was required to fulfill.      In this case the evidence clearly supports a
     conclusion that, pending a final resolution, there was a prima facie case in support of
                                                - 38 -
     Aboriginal title, and a strong prima facie case for the Aboriginal right to harvest red
     cedar.
                                                                                               2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
                 (ii) Seriousness of the Potential Impact
72               The evidence before the chambers judge indicated that red cedar has long
     been integral to Haida culture. The chambers judge considered that there was a
     “reasonable probability” that the Haida would be able to establish infringement of an
     Aboriginal right to harvest red cedar “by proof that old-growth cedar has been and will
     continue to be logged on Block 6, and that it is of limited supply” (para. 48). The
     prospect of continued logging of a resource in limited supply points to the potential
     impact on an Aboriginal right of the decision to replace T.F.L. 39.
73               Tree Farm Licences are exclusive, long-term licences. T.F.L. 39 grants
     exclusive rights to Weyerhaeuser to harvest timber within an area constituting almost
     one quarter of the total land of Haida Gwaii. The chambers judge observed that “it [is]
     apparent that large areas of Block 6 have been logged off” (para. 59). This points to
     the potential impact on Aboriginal rights of the decision to replace T.F.L. 39.
74               To the Province’s credit, the terms of T.F.L. 39 impose requirements on
     Weyerhaeuser with respect to Aboriginal peoples. However, more was required.
     Where the government has knowledge of an asserted Aboriginal right or title, it must
     consult the Aboriginal peoples on how exploitation of the land should proceed.
75               The next question is when does the duty to consult arise? Does it arise at
     the stage of granting a Tree Farm Licence, or only at the stage of granting cutting
                                                  - 39 -
     permits? The T.F.L. replacement does not itself authorize timber harvesting, which
     occurs only pursuant to cutting permits. T.F.L. replacements occur periodically, and
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     a particular T.F.L. replacement decision may not result in the substance of the asserted
     right being destroyed. The Province argues that, although it did not consult the Haida
     prior to replacing the T.F.L., it “has consulted, and continues to consult with the Haida
     prior to authorizing any cutting permits or other operational plans” (Crown’s factum,
     at para. 64).
76               I conclude that the Province has a duty to consult and perhaps
     accommodate on T.F.L. decisions. The T.F.L. decision reflects the strategic planning
     for utilization of the resource. Decisions made during strategic planning may have
     potentially serious impacts on Aboriginal right and title. The holder of T.F.L. 39 must
     submit a management plan to the Chief Forester every five years, to include
     inventories of the licence area’s resources, a timber supply analysis, and a “20-Year
     Plan” setting out a hypothetical sequence of cutblocks. The inventories and the timber
     supply analysis form the basis of the determination of the allowable annual cut
     (“A.A.C.”) for the licence. The licensee thus develops the technical information based
     upon which the A.A.C. is calculated. Consultation at the operational level thus has
     little effect on the quantity of the annual allowable cut, which in turn determines
     cutting permit terms. If consultation is to be meaningful, it must take place at the stage
     of granting or renewing Tree Farm Licences.
77               The last issue is whether the Crown’s duty went beyond consultation on
     T.F.L. decisions, to accommodation. We cannot know, on the facts here, whether
     consultation would have led to a need for accommodation. However, the strength of
     the case for both the Haida title and the Haida right to harvest red cedar, coupled with
                                                 - 40 -
     the serious impact of incremental strategic decisions on those interests, suggest that
     the honour of the Crown may well require significant accommodation to preserve the
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     Haida interest pending resolution of their claims.
                 (3) Did the Crown Fulfill its Duty?
78               The Province did not consult with the Haida on the replacement of T.F.L.
     39. The chambers judge found, at para. 42:
                 [O]n the evidence presented, it is apparent that the Minister refused to
                 consult with the Haida about replacing T.F.L. 39 in 1995 and 2000, on the
                 grounds that he was not required by law to consult, and that such
                 consultation could not affect his statutory duty to replace T.F.L. 39.
     In both this Court and the courts below, the Province points to various measures and
     policies taken to address Aboriginal interests. At this Court, the Province argued that
     “[t]he Haida were and are consulted with respect to forest development plans and
     cutting permits. . . . Through past consultations with the Haida, the Province has taken
     various steps to mitigate the effects of harvesting . . .” (Crown’s factum, at para. 75).
     However, these measures and policies do not amount to and cannot substitute for
     consultation with respect to the decision to replace T.F.L. 39 and the setting of the
     licence’s terms and conditions.
79               It follows, therefore, that the Province failed to meet its duty to engage in
     something significantly deeper than mere consultation. It failed to engage in any
     meaningful consultation at all.
     III. Conclusion
                                                - 41 -
80              The Crown’s appeal is dismissed and Weyerhaeuser’s appeal is allowed.
                                                                                              2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
     The British Columbia Court of Appeal’s order is varied so that the Crown’s obligation
     to consult does not extend to Weyerhaeuser. The Crown has agreed to pay the costs
     of the respondents regarding the application for leave to appeal and the appeal.
     Weyerhaeuser shall be relieved of any obligation to pay the costs of the Haida in the
     courts below. It is not necessary to answer the constitutional question stated in this
     appeal.
                                         - 42 -
            Appeal by the Crown dismissed. Appeal by Weyerhaeuser Co. allowed.
                                                                                      2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
            Solicitors for the appellant the Minister of Forests: Fuller Pearlman &
McNeil, Victoria.
            Solicitor for the appellant the Attorney General of British Columbia on
behalf of Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia:
Attorney General of British Columbia, Victoria.
            Solicitors for the appellant Weyerhaeuser Company Limited: Hunter
Voith, Vancouver.
            Solicitors for the respondents: EAGLE, Surrey.
            Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada: Department
of Justice, Vancouver.
            Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario: Attorney
General of Ontario, Toronto.
            Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec: Department
of Justice, Sainte-Foy.
            Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Nova Scotia:
Department of Justice, Halifax.
                                             - 43 -
             Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General for Saskatchewan:
Deputy Attorney General for Saskatchewan, Regina.
                                                                                            2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
             Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Alberta: Department
of Justice, Edmonton.
             Solicitors for the interveners the Squamish Indian Band and the
Lax-kw’alaams Indian Band: Ratcliff & Company, North Vancouver.
             Solicitors for the intervener the Haisla Nation: Donovan & Company,
Vancouver.
             Solicitors for the intervener the First Nations Summit:          Braker &
Company, West Vancouver.
             Solicitors for the intervener the Dene Tha’ First Nation: Cook Roberts,
Victoria.
             Solicitors   for   the   intervener     Tenimgyet,   aka   Art   Matthews,
Gitxsan Hereditary Chief: Cook Roberts, Victoria.
             Solicitors for the interveners the Business Council of British Columbia, the
Aggregate Producers Association of British Columbia, the British Columbia and
Yukon Chamber of Mines, the British Columbia Chamber of Commerce, the Council
of Forest Industries and the Mining Association of British Columbia:             Fasken
Martineau DuMoulin, Vancouver.
                                         - 44 -
          Solicitors for the intervener the British Columbia Cattlemen’s Association:
McCarthy Tétrault, Vancouver.
                                                                                        2004 SCC 73 (CanLII)
          Solicitors for the intervener the Village of Port Clements: Rush Crane
Guenther & Adams, Vancouver.
                           SUPREME COURT OF CANADA
CITATION: Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of          DATE: 20051124
Canadian Heritage), [2005] 3 S.C.R. 388, 2005 SCC 69                DOCKET: 30246
BETWEEN:
                                                                                           2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                                  Mikisew Cree First Nation
                                           Appellant
                                              and
                        Sheila Copps, Minister of Canadian Heritage,
                                 and Thebacha Road Society
                                         Respondents
                                            - and -
                  Attorney General for Saskatchewan, Attorney General
                  of Alberta, Big Island Lake Cree Nation, Lesser Slave
                   Lake Indian Regional Council, Treaty 8 First Nations
                     of Alberta, Treaty 8 Tribal Association, Blueberry
                     River First Nations and Assembly of First Nations
                                          Interveners
CORAM: McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and
Charron JJ.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT:            Binnie J. (McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, LeBel,
(paras. 1 to 70)                 Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ. concurring)
                           ______________________________
 Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian Heritage), [2005] 3 S.C.R.
388, 2005 SCC 69
                                                                                       2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
Mikisew Cree First Nation                                                 Appellant
v.
Sheila Copps, Minister of Canadian Heritage,
and Thebacha Road Society                                              Respondents
and
Attorney General for Saskatchewan, Attorney General
of Alberta, Big Island Lake Cree Nation, Lesser Slave
Lake Indian Regional Council, Treaty 8 First Nations
of Alberta, Treaty 8 Tribal Association, Blueberry
River First Nations and Assembly of First Nations                       Interveners
Indexed as:    Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian
Heritage)
Neutral citation: 2005 SCC 69.
File No.: 30246.
2005: March 14; 2005: November 24.
Present: McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Abella and Charron JJ.
on appeal from the federal court of appeal
                                            -3-
            Indians — Treaty rights — Crown’s duty to consult — Crown exercising
its treaty right and “taking up” surrendered lands to build winter road to meet
                                                                                          2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
regional transportation needs — Proposed road reducing territory over which
Mikisew Cree First Nation would be entitled to exercise its treaty rights to hunt, fish
and trap — Whether Crown had duty to consult Mikisew — If so, whether Crown
discharged its duty — Treaty No. 8.
            Crown — Honour of Crown — Duty to consult and accommodate
Aboriginal peoples
            Appeal — Role of intervener — New argument.
            Under Treaty 8, made in 1899, the First Nations who lived in the area
surrendered to the Crown 840,000 square kilometres of what is now northern Alberta,
northeastern British Columbia, northwestern Saskatchewan and the southern portion
of the Northwest Territories, an area whose size dwarfs France, exceeds Manitoba,
Saskatchewan and Alberta and approaches the size of British Columbia. In exchange
for this surrender, the First Nations were promised reserves and some other benefits
including, most importantly to them, the rights to hunt, trap and fish throughout the
land surrendered to the Crown except “such tracts as may be required or taken up from
time to time for settlement, mining, lumbering, trading or other purposes”.
            The Mikisew Reserve is located within Treaty 8 in what is now Wood
Buffalo National Park. In 2000, the federal government approved a winter road, which
was to run through the Mikisew’s reserve, without consulting them. After the Mikisew
protested, the road alignment was modified (but without consultation) to track around
                                              -4-
the boundary of the reserve. The total area of the road corridor is approximately
23 square kilometres. The Mikisew’s objection to the road goes beyond the direct
                                                                                               2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
impact of closure to hunting and trapping of the area covered by the winter road and
included the injurious affection it would have on their traditional lifestyle which was
central to their culture. The Federal Court, Trial Division set aside the Minister’s
approval based on breach of the Crown’s fiduciary duty to consult with the Mikisew
adequately and granted an interlocutory injuction against constructing the winter road.
The court held that the standard public notices and open houses which were given were
not sufficient and that the Mikisew were entitled to a distinct consultation process.
The Federal Court of Appeal set aside the decision and found, on the basis of an
argument put forward by an intervener, that the winter road was properly seen as a
“taking up” of surrendered land pursuant to the treaty rather than an infringement of
it. This judgment was delivered before the release of this Court’s decisions in Haida
Nation and Taku River Tlingit First Nation.
            Held: The appeal should be allowed. The duty of consultation, which
flows from the honour of the Crown, was breached.
            The government’s approach, rather than advancing the process of
reconciliation between the Crown and the Treaty 8 First Nations, undermined it. [4]
            When the Crown exercises its Treaty 8 right to “take up” land, its duty to
act honourably dictates the content of the process. The question in each case is to
determine the degree to which conduct contemplated by the Crown would adversely
affect the rights of the aboriginal peoples to hunt, fish and trap so as to trigger the duty
to consult. Accordingly, where the court is dealing with a proposed “taking up”, it is
                                             -5-
not correct to move directly to a Sparrow justification analysis even if the proposed
measure, if implemented, would infringe a First Nation treaty right. The Court must
                                                                                            2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
first consider the process and whether it is compatible with the honour of the Crown.
[33-34] [59]
            The Crown, while it has a treaty right to “take up” surrendered lands, is
nevertheless under the obligation to inform itself on the impact its project will have
on the exercise by the Mikisew of their treaty hunting, fishing and trapping rights and
to communicate its findings to the Mikisew. The Crown must then attempt to deal
with the Mikisew in good faith and with the intention of substantially addressing their
concerns. The duty to consult is triggered at a low threshold, but adverse impact is a
matter of degree, as is the extent of the content of the Crown’s duty. Under Treaty 8,
the First Nation treaty rights to hunt, fish and trap are therefore limited not only by
geographical limits and specific forms of government regulation, but also by the
Crown’s right to take up lands under the treaty, subject to its duty to consult and, if
appropriate, to accommodate the concerns of the First Nation affected. [55-56]
            Here, the duty to consult is triggered. The impacts of the proposed road
were clear, established, and demonstrably adverse to the continued exercise of the
Mikisew hunting and trapping rights over the lands in question. Contrary to the
Crown’s argument, the duty to consult was not discharged in 1899 by the pre-treaty
negotiations. [54-55]
            However, given that the Crown is proposing to build a fairly minor winter
road on surrendered lands where the Mikisew treaty rights are expressly subject to the
“taking up” limitation, the content of the Crown’s duty of consultation in this case lies
                                             -6-
at the lower end of the spectrum. The Crown is required to provide notice to the
Mikisew and to engage directly with them. This engagement should include the
                                                                                            2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
provision of information about the project, addressing what the Crown knew to be the
Mikisew’s interests and what the Crown anticipated might be the potential adverse
impact on those interests. The Crown must also solicit and listen carefully to the
Mikisew’s concerns, and attempt to minimize adverse impacts on its treaty rights. [64]
            The Crown did not discharge its obligations when it unilaterally declared
the road re-alignment would be shifted from the reserve itself to a track along its
boundary. It failed to demonstrate an intention of substantially addressing aboriginal
concerns through a meaningful process of consultation. [64-67]
            The Attorney General of Alberta did not overstep the proper role of an
intervener when he raised before the Federal Court of Appeal a fresh argument on the
central issue of whether the Minister’s approval of the winter road infringed Treaty 8.
It is always open to an intervener to put forward any legal argument in support of what
it submits is the correct legal conclusion on an issue properly before the court provided
that in doing so its legal argument does not require additional facts not proven in
evidence at trial, or raise an argument that is otherwise unfair to one of the
parties. [40]
Cases Cited
            Considered: R. v. Badger, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 771; Haida Nation v. British
Columbia (Minister of Forests), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511, 2004 SCC 73; Taku River Tlingit
First Nation v. British Columbia (Project Assessment Director), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550,
                                          -7-
2004 SCC 74; distinguished: R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075; referred to: R.
v. Sioui, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1025; R. v. Marshall, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 456; R. v. Marshall,
                                                                                       2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
[2005] 2. S.C.R. 220, 2005 SCC 43; Halfway River First Nation v. British Columbia
(Ministry of Forests) (1999), 178 D.L.R. (4th) 666, 1999 BCCA 470; R. v.
Morgentaler, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 462; Lamb v. Kincaid (1907), 38 S.C.R. 516; Athey v.
Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458; Performance Industries Ltd. v. Sylvan Lake Golf &
Tennis Club Ltd., [2002] 1 S.C.R. 678, 2002 SCC 19; Province of Ontario v. Dominion
of Canada (1895), 25 S.C.R. 434; Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3
S.C.R. 1010; Wewaykum Indian Band v. Canada, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 245, 2002 SCC 79;
McInerney v. MacDonald, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 138; R. v. Smith, [1935] 2 W.W.R. 433.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Constitution Act, 1982, s. 35.
Natural Resources Transfer Agreement, 1930 (Alberta) (Schedule of Constitution Act,
     1930, R.S.C. 1985, App. II, No. 26), para. 10.
Wood Buffalo National Park Game Regulations, SOR/78-830, s. 36(5).
Treaties and Proclamations
Royal Proclamation (1763), R.S.C. 1985, App. II, No. 1.
Treaty No. 8 (1899).
Authors Cited
Mair, Charles. Through the Mackenzie Basin: A Narrative of the Athabasca and
     Peace River Treaty Expedition of 1899. Toronto: William Briggs, 1908.
                                          -8-
Report of Commissioners for Treaty No. 8, in Treaty No. 8 made June 21, 1899 and
    Adhesions, Reports, etc., reprinted from 1899 edition. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer,
    1966.
                                                                                      2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
           APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (Rothstein,
Sexton and Sharlow JJ.A.), [2004] 3 F.C.R. 436, (2004), 236 D.L.R. (4th) 648,
317 N.R. 258, [2004] 2 C.N.L.R. 74, [2004] F.C.J. No. 277 (QL), 2004 FCA 66,
reversing a judgment of Hansen J. (2001), 214 F.T.R. 48, [2002] 1 C.N.L.R. 169,
[2001] F.C.J. No. 1877 (QL), 2001 FCT 1426. Appeal allowed.
           Jeffrey R. W. Rath and Allisun Taylor Rana, for the appellant.
           Cheryl J. Tobias and Mark R. Kindrachuk, Q.C., for the respondent
Sheila Copps, Minister of Canadian Heritage.
           No one appeared for the respondent the Thebacha Road Society.
           P. Mitch McAdam, for the intervener the Attorney General for
Saskatchewan.
           Robert J. Normey and Angela J. Brown, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Alberta.
           James D. Jodouin and Gary L. Bainbridge, for the intervener the Big
Island Lake Cree Nation.
                                                 -9-
                C. Allan Donovan and Bram Rogachevsky, for the intervener the Lesser
    Slave Lake Indian Regional Council.
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                Robert C. Freedman and Dominique Nouvet, for the intervener the Treaty 8
    First Nations of Alberta.
                E. Jack Woodward and Jay Nelson, for the intervener the Treaty 8 Tribal
    Association.
                Thomas R. Berger, Q.C., and Gary A. Nelson, for the intervener the
    Blueberry River First Nations.
                Jack R. London, Q.C., and Bryan P. Schwartz, for the intervener the
    Assembly of First Nations.
                The judgment of the Court was delivered by
1               BINNIE J. — The fundamental objective of the modern law of aboriginal
    and treaty rights is the reconciliation of aboriginal peoples and non-aboriginal peoples
    and their respective claims, interests and ambitions. The management of these
    relationships takes place in the shadow of a long history of grievances and
    misunderstanding. The multitude of smaller grievances created by the indifference of
    some government officials to aboriginal people’s concerns, and the lack of respect
    inherent in that indifference has been as destructive of the process of reconciliation as
    some of the larger and more explosive controversies. And so it is in this case.
                                                - 10 -
2               Treaty 8 is one of the most important of the post-Confederation treaties.
    Made in 1899, the First Nations who lived in the area surrendered to the Crown
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
    840,000 square kilometres of what is now northern Alberta, northeastern British
    Columbia, northwestern Saskatchewan and the southern portion of the Northwest
    Territories. Some idea of the size of this surrender is given by the fact that it dwarfs
    France (543,998 square kilometres), exceeds the size of Manitoba (650,087 square
    kilometres), Saskatchewan (651,900 square kilometres) and Alberta (661,185 square
    kilometres) and approaches the size of British Columbia (948,596 square kilometres).
    In exchange for this surrender, the First Nations were promised reserves and some
    other benefits including, most importantly to them, the following rights of hunting,
    trapping, and fishing:
                     And Her Majesty the Queen HEREBY AGREES with the said Indians that
                they shall have right to pursue their usual vocations of hunting, trapping
                and fishing throughout the tract surrendered as before described, subject
                to such regulations as may from time to time be made by the Government
                of the country, acting under the authority of Her Majesty, and saving and
                excepting such tracts as may be required or taken up from time to time for
                settlement, mining, lumbering, trading or other purposes. [Emphasis
                added.]
                (Report of Commissioners for Treaty No. 8 (1899), at p. 12)
3               In fact, for various reasons (including lack of interest on the part of First
    Nations), sufficient land was not set aside for reserves for the Mikisew Cree First
    Nation (the “Mikisew”) until the 1986 Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement, 87 years
    after Treaty 8 was made. Less than 15 years later, the federal government approved
    a 118-kilometre winter road that, as originally conceived, ran through the new
    Mikisew First Nation Reserve at Peace Point. The government did not think it
    necessary to engage in consultation directly with the Mikisew before making this
    decision. After the Mikisew protested, the winter road alignment was changed to track
                                                - 11 -
    the boundary of the Peace Point reserve instead of running through it, again without
    consultation with the Mikisew. The modified road alignment traversed the traplines
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
    of approximately 14 Mikisew families who reside in the area near the proposed road,
    and others who may trap in that area although they do not live there, and the hunting
    grounds of as many as 100 Mikisew people whose hunt (mainly of moose), the
    Mikisew say, would be adversely affected. The fact the proposed winter road directly
    affects only about 14 Mikisew trappers and perhaps 100 hunters may not seem very
    dramatic (unless you happen to be one of the trappers or hunters in question) but, in
    the context of a remote northern community of relatively few families, it is significant.
    Beyond that, however, the principle of consultation in advance of interference with
    existing treaty rights is a matter of broad general importance to the relations between
    aboriginal and non-aboriginal peoples. It goes to the heart of the relationship and
    concerns not only the Mikisew but other First Nations and non-aboriginal governments
    as well.
4               In this case, the relationship was not properly managed.          Adequate
    consultation in advance of the Minister’s approval did not take place.              The
    government’s approach did not advance the process of reconciliation but undermined
    it. The duty of consultation which flows from the honour of the Crown, and its
    obligation to respect the existing treaty rights of aboriginal peoples (now entrenched
    in s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982), was breached. The Mikisew appeal should be
    allowed, the Minister’s approval quashed, and the matter returned to the Minister for
    further consultation and consideration.
    I. Facts
                                                - 12 -
5               About 5 percent of the territory surrendered under Treaty 8 was set aside
    in 1922 as Wood Buffalo National Park. The Park was created principally to protect
                                                                                               2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
    the last remaining herds of wood bison (or buffalo) in northern Canada and covers
    44,807 square kilometres of land straddling the boundary between northern Alberta
    and southerly parts of the Northwest Territories. It is designated a UNESCO World
    Heritage Site. The Park itself is larger than Switzerland.
6               At present, it contains the largest free-roaming, self-regulating bison herd
    in the world, the last remaining natural nesting area for the endangered whooping
    crane, and vast undisturbed natural boreal forests. More to the point, it has been
    inhabited by First Nation peoples for more than over 8,000 years, some of whom still
    earn a subsistence living by hunting, fishing and commercial trapping within the Park
    boundaries. The Park includes the traditional lands of the Mikisew. As a result of the
    Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement, the Peace Point Reserve was formally excluded
    from the Park in 1988 but of course is surrounded by it.
7               The members of the Mikisew Cree First Nation are descendants of the
    Crees of Fort Chipewyan who signed Treaty 8 on June 21, 1899. It is common ground
    that its members are entitled to the benefits of Treaty 8.
    A. The Winter Road Project
8               The proponent of the winter road is the respondent Thebacha Road Society,
    whose members include the Town of Fort Smith (located in the Northwest Territories
    on the northeastern boundary of Wood Buffalo National Park, where the Park
    headquarters is located), the Fort Smith Métis Council, the Salt River First Nation, and
                                                 - 13 -
     Little Red River Cree First Nation. The advantage of the winter road for these people
     is that it would provide direct winter access among a number of isolated northern
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     communities and to the Alberta highway system to the south. The trial judge accepted
     that the government’s objective was to meet “regional transportation needs”: (2001),
     214 F.T.R. 48, 2001 FCT 1426, at para. 115.
     B. The Consultation Process
9                According to the trial judge, most of the communications relied on by the
     Minister to demonstrate appropriate consultation were instances of the Mikisew’s
     being provided with standard information about the proposed road in the same form
     and substance as the communications being distributed to the general public of
     interested stakeholders. Thus Parks Canada acting for the Minister, provided the
     Mikisew with the Terms of Reference for the environmental assessment on January 19,
     2000. The Mikisew were advised that open house sessions would take place over the
     summer of 2000. The Minister says that the first formal response from the Mikisew
     did not come until October 10, 2000, some two months after the deadline she had
     imposed for “public” comment. Chief Poitras stated that the Mikisew did not formally
     participate in the open houses, because “. . . an open house is not a forum for us to be
     consulted adequately”.
10               Apparently, Parks Canada left the proponent Thebacha Road Society out
     of the information loop as well. At the end of January 2001, it advised Chief Poitras
     that it had just been informed that the Mikisew did not support the road. Up to that
     point, Thebacha had been led to believe that the Mikisew had no objection to the
     road’s going through the reserve. Chief Poitras wrote a further letter to the Minister
                                                - 14 -
     on January 29, 2001 and received a standard-form response letter from the Minister’s
     office stating that the correspondence “will be given every consideration”.
                                                                                              2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
11              Eventually, after several more miscommunications, Parks Canada wrote
     Chief Poitras on April 30, 2001, stating in part: “I apologize to you and your people
     for the way in which the consultation process unfolded concerning the proposed winter
     road and any resulting negative public perception of the [Mikisew Cree First Nation]”.
     At that point, in fact, the decision to approve the road with a modified alignment had
     already been taken.
12              On May 25, 2001, the Minister announced on the Parks Canada website
     that the Thebacha Road Society was authorized to build a winter road 10 metres wide
     with posted speed limits ranging from 10 to 40 kilometres per hour. The approval was
     said to be in accordance with “Parks Canada plans and policy” and “other federal laws
     and regulations”. No reference was made to any obligations to the Mikisew.
13              The Minister now says the Mikisew ought not to be heard to complain
     about the process of consultation because they declined to participate in the public
     process that took place. Consultation is a two-way street, she says. It was up to the
     Mikisew to take advantage of what was on offer. They failed to do so. In the
     Minister’s view, she did her duty.
14              The proposed winter road is wide enough to allow two vehicles to pass.
     Pursuant to s. 36(5) of the Wood Buffalo National Park Game Regulations, SOR/78-
     830, creation of the road would trigger a 200-metre wide corridor within which the use
                                                  - 15 -
     of firearms would be prohibited.         The total area of this corridor would be
     approximately 23 square kilometres.
                                                                                                  2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
15               The Mikisew objection goes beyond the direct impact of closure of the area
     covered by the winter road to hunting and trapping. The surrounding area would be,
     the trial judge found, injuriously affected. Maintaining a traditional lifestyle, which
     the Mikisew say is central to their culture, depends on keeping the land around the
     Peace Point reserve in its natural condition and this, they contend, is essential to allow
     them to pass their culture and skills on to the next generation of Mikisew. The
     detrimental impact of the road on hunting and trapping, they argue, may simply prove
     to be one more incentive for their young people to abandon a traditional lifestyle and
     turn to other modes of living in the south.
16               The Mikisew applied to the Federal Court to set aside the Minister’s
     approval based on their view of the Crown’s fiduciary duty, claiming that the Minister
     owes “a fiduciary and constitutional duty to adequately consult with Mikisew Cree
     First Nation with regard to the construction of the road” (trial judge, at para. 26).
17               An interlocutory injunction against construction of the winter road was
     issued by the Federal Court, Trial Division on August 27, 2001.
     II. Relevant Enactments
18   Constitution Act, 1982
                     35. (1) The existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal
                 peoples of Canada are hereby recognized and affirmed.
                                                 - 16 -
     III. Judicial History
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     A. Federal Court, Trial Division ((2001), 214 F.T.R. 48, 2001 FCT 1426)
19               Hansen J. held that the lands included in Wood Buffalo National Park were
     not “taken up” by the Crown within the meaning of Treaty 8 because the use of the
     lands as a national park did not constitute a “visible use” incompatible with the
     existing rights to hunt and trap (R. v. Badger, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 771; R. v. Sioui, [1990]
     1 S.C.R. 1025). The proposed winter road and its 200-metre “[no] firearm” corridor
     would adversely impact the Mikisew’s treaty rights.             These rights received
     constitutional protection in 1982, and any infringements must be justified in
     accordance with the test in R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075. In Hansen J.’s view,
     the Minister’s decision to approve the road infringed the Mikisew’s Treaty 8 rights and
     could not be justified under the Sparrow test.
20               In particular, the trial judge held that the standard public notices and open
     houses which were given were not sufficient. The Mikisew were entitled to a distinct
     consultation process. She stated at paras. 170-71:
                     The applicant complains that the mitigation measures attached to the
                 Minister’s decision were not developed in consultation with Mikisew and
                 were not designed to minimize impacts on Mikisew’s rights. I agree.
                 Even the realignment, apparently adopted in response to Mikisew’s
                 objections, was not developed in consultation with Mikisew. The
                 evidence does not establish that any consideration was given to whether
                 the new route would minimize impacts on Mikisew’s treaty rights. The
                 evidence of Chief George Poitras highlighted an air of secrecy surrounding
                 the realignment, a process that should have included a transparent
                 consideration of Mikisew’s concerns.
                                                  - 17 -
                       Parks Canada admitted it did not consult with Mikisew about the route
                  for the realignment, nor did it consider the impacts of the realignment on
                  Mikisew trappers’ rights.
                                                                                                  2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
21                Accordingly, the trial judge allowed the application for judicial review and
     quashed the Minister’s approval.
     B. Federal Court of Appeal ([2004] 3 F.C.R. 436, 2004 FCA 66)
22                Rothstein J.A., with whom Sexton J.A. agreed, allowed the appeal and
     restored the Minister’s approval. He did so on the basis of an argument brought
     forward by the Attorney General of Alberta as an intervener on the appeal. The
     argument was that Treaty 8 expressly contemplated the “taking up” of surrendered
     lands for various purposes, including roads. The winter road was more properly seen
     as a “taking up” pursuant to the Treaty rather than an infringement of it. As Rothstein
     J.A. held:
                       Where a limitation expressly provided for by a treaty applies, there is
                  no infringement of the treaty and thus no infringement of section 35. This
                  is to be contrasted with the case where the limitations provided by the
                  treaty do not apply but the government nevertheless seeks to limit the
                  treaty right. In such a case, the Sparrow test must be satisfied in order for
                  the infringement to be constitutionally permissible. [para. 21]
     Rothstein J.A. also held that there was no obligation on the Minister to consult with
     the Mikisew about the road, although to do so would be “good practice” (para. 24).
     (This opinion was delivered before the release of this Court’s decisions in Haida
     Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511, 2004 SCC 73,
     and Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia (Project Assessment Director),
     [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550, 2004 SCC 74.)
                                                 - 18 -
23               Sharlow J.A., in dissenting reasons, agreed with the trial judge that the
     winter road approval was itself a prima facie infringement of the Treaty 8 rights and
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     that the infringement had not been justified under the Sparrow test. The Crown’s
     obligation as a fiduciary must be considered. The failure of the Minister’s staff at
     Parks Canada to engage in meaningful consultation was fatal to the Crown’s attempt
     at justification. She wrote:
                      In this case, there is no evidence of any good faith effort on the part
                 of the Minister to understand or address the concerns of Mikisew Cree
                 First Nation about the possible effect of the road on the exercise of their
                 Treaty 8 hunting and trapping rights. It is significant, in my view, that
                 Mikisew Cree First Nation was not even told about the realignment of the
                 road corridor to avoid the Peace Point Reserve until after it had been
                 determined that the realignment was possible and reasonable, in terms of
                 environmental impact, and after the road was approved. That invites the
                 inference that the responsible Crown officials believed that as long as the
                 winter road did not cross the Peace Point Reserve, any further objections
                 of the Mikisew Cree First Nation could be disregarded. Far from
                 meaningful consultation, that indicates a complete disregard for the
                 concerns of Mikisew Cree First Nation about the breach of their Treaty 8
                 rights. [para. 152]
     Sharlow J.A. would have dismissed the appeal.
     IV. Analysis
24               The post-Confederation numbered treaties were designed to open up the
     Canadian west and northwest to settlement and development. Treaty 8 itself recites
     that “the said Indians have been notified and informed by Her Majesty’s said
     Commission that it is Her desire to open for settlement, immigration, trade, travel,
     mining, lumbering and such other purposes as to Her Majesty may seem meet”. This
     stated purpose is reflected in a corresponding limitation on the Treaty 8 hunting,
     fishing and trapping rights to exclude such “tracts as may be required or taken up from
                                                 - 19 -
     time to time for settlement, mining, lumbering, trading or other purposes”. The “other
     purposes” would be at least as broad as the purposes listed in the recital, mentioned
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     above, including “travel”.
25               There was thus from the outset an uneasy tension between the First
     Nations’ essential demand that they continue to be as free to live off the land after the
     treaty as before and the Crown’s expectation of increasing numbers of non-aboriginal
     people moving into the surrendered territory. It was seen from the beginning as an
     ongoing relationship that would be difficult to manage, as the Commissioners
     acknowledged at an early Treaty 8 negotiation at Lesser Slave Lake in June 1899:
                 The white man is bound to come in and open up the country, and we come
                 before him to explain the relations that must exist between you, and thus
                 prevent any trouble.
                 (C. Mair, Through the Mackenzie Basin: A Narrative of the Athabasca and
                 Peace River Treaty Expedition of 1899, at p. 61)
     As Cory J. explained in Badger, at para. 57, “[t]he Indians understood that land would
     be taken up for homesteads, farming, prospecting and mining and that they would not
     be able to hunt in these areas or to shoot at the settlers’ farm animals or buildings”.
26               The hunting, fishing and trapping rights were not solely for the benefit of
     First Nations people. It was in the Crown’s interest to keep the aboriginal people
     living off the land, as the Commissioners themselves acknowledged in their Report on
     Treaty 8 dated September 22, 1899:
                     We pointed out that the Government could not undertake to maintain
                 Indians in idleness; that the same means of earning a livelihood would
                                                  - 20 -
                 continue after the treaty as existed before it, and that the Indians would be
                 expected to make use of them. [p. 5]
                                                                                                    2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
27               Thus none of the parties in 1899 expected that Treaty 8 constituted a
     finished land use blueprint. Treaty 8 signalled the advancing dawn of a period of
     transition. The key, as the Commissioners pointed out, was to “explain the relations”
     that would govern future interaction “and thus prevent any trouble” (Mair, at p. 61).
     A. Interpretation of the Treaty
28               The interpretation of the treaty “must be realistic and reflect the
     intention[s] of both parties, not just that of the [First Nation]” (Sioui, at p. 1069). As
     a majority of the Court stated in R. v. Marshall, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 456, at para. 14:
                 The Indian parties did not, for all practical purposes, have the opportunity
                 to create their own written record of the negotiations. Certain assumptions
                 are therefore made about the Crown’s approach to treaty making
                 (honourable) which the Court acts upon in its approach to treaty
                 interpretation (flexible) as to the existence of a treaty . . . the completeness
                 of any written record . . . and the interpretation of treaty terms once found
                 to exist. The bottom line is the Court’s obligation is to “choose from
                 among the various possible interpretations of the common intention [at the
                 time the treaty was made] the one which best reconciles” the [First Nation]
                 interests and those of the Crown. [Emphasis in original; citations omitted.]
     See also R. v. Marshall, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 220, 2005 SCC 43, per McLachlin C.J. at
     paras. 22-24, and per LeBel J. at para. 115.
29               The Minister is therefore correct to insist that the clause governing
     hunting, fishing and trapping cannot be isolated from the treaty as a whole, but must
                                                 - 21 -
     be read in the context of its underlying purpose, as intended by both the Crown and the
     First Nations peoples. Within that framework, as Cory J. pointed out in Badger,
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                 the words in the treaty must not be interpreted in their strict technical
                 sense nor subjected to rigid modern rules of construction. Rather, they
                 must be interpreted in the sense that they would naturally have been
                 understood by the Indians at the time of the signing. [para. 52]
30               In the case of Treaty 8, it was contemplated by all parties that “from time
     to time” portions of the surrendered land would be “taken up” and transferred from the
     inventory of lands over which the First Nations had treaty rights to hunt, fish and trap,
     and placed in the inventory of lands where they did not. Treaty 8 lands lie to the north
     of Canada and are largely unsuitable for agriculture. The Commissioners who
     negotiated Treaty 8 could therefore express confidence to the First Nations that, as
     previously mentioned, “the same means of earning a livelihood would continue after
     the treaty as existed before it” (p. 5).
31               I agree with Rothstein J.A. that not every subsequent “taking up” by the
     Crown constituted an infringement of Treaty 8 that must be justified according to the
     test set out in Sparrow. In Sparrow, it will be remembered, the federal government’s
     fisheries regulations infringed the aboriginal fishing right, and had to be strictly
     justified. This is not the same situation as we have here, where the aboriginal rights
     have been surrendered and extinguished, and the Treaty 8 rights are expressly limited
     to lands not “required or taken up from time to time for settlement, mining, lumbering,
     trading or other purposes” (emphasis added). The language of the treaty could not be
     clearer in foreshadowing change. Nevertheless the Crown was and is expected to
     manage the change honourably.
                                                 - 22 -
32               It follows that I do not accept the Sparrow-oriented approach adopted in
     this case by the trial judge, who relied in this respect on Halfway River First Nation
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     v. British Columbia (Ministry of Forests) (1999), 178 D.L.R. (4th) 666, 1999 BCCA
     470. In that case, a majority of the British Columbia Court of Appeal held that the
     government’s right to take up land was “by its very nature limited” (para. 138) and
     “that any interference with the right to hunt is a prima facie infringement of the
     Indians’ treaty right as protected by s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982” (para. 144
     (emphasis in original)) which must be justified under the Sparrow test. The Mikisew
     strongly support the Halfway River First Nation test but, with respect, to the extent the
     Mikisew interpret Halfway River as fixing in 1899 the geographic boundaries of the
     Treaty 8 hunting right, and holding that any post-1899 encroachment on these
     geographic limits requires a Sparrow-type justification, I cannot agree. The Mikisew
     argument presupposes that Treaty 8 promised continuity of nineteenth century patterns
     of land use. It did not, as is made clear both by the historical context in which Treaty
     8 was concluded and the period of transition it foreshadowed.
     B. The Process of Treaty Implementation
33               Both the historical context and the inevitable tensions underlying
     implementation of Treaty 8 demand a process by which lands may be transferred from
     the one category (where the First Nations retain rights to hunt, fish and trap) to the
     other category (where they do not). The content of the process is dictated by the duty
     of the Crown to act honourably. Although Haida Nation was not a treaty case,
     McLachlin C.J. pointed out, at paras. 19 and 35:
                     The honour of the Crown also infuses the processes of treaty making
                 and treaty interpretation. In making and applying treaties, the Crown must
                                                  - 23 -
                 act with honour and integrity, avoiding even the appearance of “sharp
                 dealing” (Badger, at para. 41). Thus in Marshall, supra, at para. 4, the
                 majority of this Court supported its interpretation of a treaty by stating that
                 “nothing less would uphold the honour and integrity of the Crown in its
                                                                                                   2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                 dealings with the Mi’kmaq people to secure their peace and friendship”.
                                                ...
                      But, when precisely does a duty to consult arise? The foundation of
                 the duty in the Crown’s honour and the goal of reconciliation suggest that
                 the duty arises when the Crown has knowledge, real or constructive, of the
                 potential existence of the Aboriginal right or title and contemplates
                 conduct that might adversely affect it.
34               In the case of a treaty the Crown, as a party, will always have notice of its
     contents. The question in each case will therefore be to determine the degree to which
     conduct contemplated by the Crown would adversely affect those rights so as to trigger
     the duty to consult. Haida Nation and Taku River set a low threshold. The flexibility
     lies not in the trigger (“might adversely affect it”) but in the variable content of the
     duty once triggered. At the low end, “the only duty on the Crown may be to give
     notice, disclose information, and discuss any issues raised in response to the notice”
     (Haida Nation, at para. 43). The Mikisew say that even the low end content was not
     satisfied in this case.
     C. The Mikisew Legal Submission
35               The appellant, the Mikisew, essentially reminded the Court of what was
     said in Haida Nation and Taku River. This case, the Mikisew say, is stronger. In those
     cases, unlike here, the aboriginal interest to the lands was asserted but not yet proven.
     In this case, the aboriginal interests are protected by Treaty 8. They are established
     legal facts. As in Haida Nation, the trial judge found the aboriginal interest was
     threatened by the proposed development. If a duty to consult was found to exist in
                                               - 24 -
     Haida Nation and Taku River, then, a fortiori, the Mikisew argue, it must arise here
     and the majority judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal was quite wrong to
                                                                                             2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     characterise consultation between governments and aboriginal peoples as nothing more
     than a “good practice” (para. 24).
     D. The Minister’s Response
36              The respondent Minister seeks to distinguish Haida Nation and Taku River.
     Her counsel advances three broad propositions in support of the Minister’s approval
     of the proposed winter road.
                1. In “taking up” the 23 square kilometres for the winter road, the Crown
                     was doing no more than Treaty 8 entitled it to do. The Crown as well
                     as First Nations have rights under Treaty 8. The exercise by the
                     Crown of its Treaty right to “take up” land is not an infringement of
                     the Treaty but the performance of it.
                2. The Crown went through extensive consultations with First Nations
                     in 1899 at the time Treaty 8 was negotiated. Whatever duty of
                     accommodation was owed to First Nations was discharged at that
                     time.   The terms of the Treaty do not contemplate further
                     consultations whenever a “taking up” occurs.
                3. In the event further consultation was required, the process followed
                     by the Minister through Parks Canada in this case was sufficient.
                                                   - 25 -
37                  For the reasons that follow, I believe that each of these propositions must
     be rejected.
                                                                                                  2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                    (1) In “taking up” Land for the Winter Road the Crown Was Doing No
                        More Than It Was Entitled To Do Under the Treaty
38                  The majority judgment in the Federal Court of Appeal held that “[w]ith the
     exceptions of cases where the Crown has taken up land in bad faith or has taken up so
     much land that no meaningful right to hunt remains, taking up land for a purpose
     express or necessarily implied in the treaty itself cannot be considered an infringement
     of the treaty right to hunt” (para. 19).
39                  The “Crown rights” argument was initially put forward in the Federal
     Court of Appeal by the Attorney General of Alberta as an intervener. The respondent
     Minister advised the Federal Court of Appeal that, while she did not dispute the
     argument, “[she] was simply not relying on it” (para. 3). As a preliminary objection,
     the Mikisew say that an intervener is not permitted “to widen or add to the points in
     issue”: R. v. Morgentaler, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 462, at p. 463. Therefore it was not open
     to the Federal Court of Appeal (or this Court) to decide the case on this basis.
                    (a) Preliminary Objection: Did the Attorney General of Alberta Overstep
                        the Proper Role of an Intervener?
40                  This branch of the Mikisew argument is, with respect, misconceived. In
     their application for judicial review, the Mikisew argued that the Minister’s approval
     of the winter road infringed Treaty 8. The infringement issue has been central to the
     proceedings. It is always open to an intervener to put forward any legal argument in
     support of what it submits is the correct legal conclusion on an issue properly before
                                                  - 26 -
     the Court, provided that in doing so its legal argument does not require additional
     facts, not proven in evidence at trial or raise an argument that is otherwise unfair to
                                                                                                   2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     one of the parties. An intervener is in no worse a position than a party who belatedly
     discovers some legal argument that it ought to have raised earlier in the proceedings
     but did not, as in Lamb v. Kincaid (1907), 38 S.C.R. 516, where Duff J. stated, at
     p. 539:
                 A court of appeal, I think, should not give effect to such a point taken for
                 the first time in appeal, unless it be clear that, had the question been raised
                 at the proper time, no further light could have been thrown upon it.
     See also Athey v. Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458, at paras. 51-52.
41               Even granting that the Mikisew can fairly say the Attorney General of
     Alberta frames the non-infringement argument differently than was done by the federal
     Minister at trial, the Mikisew have still not identified any prejudice. Had the argument
     been similarly formulated at trial, how could “further light” have been thrown on it by
     additional evidence? The historical record was fully explored at trial. At this point
     the issue is one of the rules of treaty interpretation, not evidence. It thus comes within
     the rule stated in Performance Industries Ltd. v. Sylvan Lake Golf & Tennis Club Ltd.,
     [2002] 1 S.C.R. 678, 2002 SCC 19, that “[t]he Court is free to consider a new issue of
     law on the appeal where it is able to do so without procedural prejudice to the
     opposing party and where the refusal to do so would risk an injustice” (para. 33). Here
     the Attorney General of Alberta took the factual record as he found it. The issue of
     treaty infringement has always been central to the case. Alberta’s legal argument is
     not one that should have taken the Mikisew by surprise. In these circumstances it
     would be intolerable if the courts were precluded from giving effect to a correct legal
                                                - 27 -
     analysis just because it came later rather than sooner and from an intervener rather
     than a party. To close our eyes to the argument would be to “risk an injustice”.
                                                                                               2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                 (b) The Content of Treaty 8
42               The “hunting, trapping and fishing clause” of Treaty 8 was extensively
     reviewed by this Court in Badger. In that case Cory J. pointed out that “even by the
     terms of Treaty No. 8, the Indians’ right to hunt for food was circumscribed by both
     geographical limitations and by specific forms of government regulation” (para. 37).
     The members of the First Nations, he continued, “would have understood that land had
     been ‘required or taken up’ when it was being put to a [visible] use which was
     incompatible with the exercise of the right to hunt” (para. 53).
                 [T]he oral promises made by the Crown’s representatives and the Indians’
                 own oral history indicate that it was understood that land would be taken
                 up and occupied in a way which precluded hunting when it was put to a
                 visible use that was incompatible with hunting. Turning to the case law,
                 it is clear that the courts have also accepted this interpretation and have
                 concluded that whether or not land has been taken up or occupied is a
                 question of fact that must be resolved on a case-by-case basis. [para. 58]
43               While Badger noted the “geographic limitation” to hunting, fishing and
     trapping rights, it did not (as it did not need to) discuss the process by which “from
     time to time” land would be “taken up” and thereby excluded from the exercise of
     those rights. The actual holding in Badger was that the Alberta licensing regime
     sought to be imposed on all aboriginal hunters within the Alberta portion of Treaty 8
     lands infringed Treaty 8, even though the treaty right was expressly made subject to
     “regulations as may from time to time be made by the government”. The Alberta
     licensing scheme denied to “holders of treaty rights as modified by the [Natural
                                               - 28 -
     Resources Transfer Agreement, 1930] the very means of exercising those rights” (para.
     94). It was thus an attempted exercise of regulatory power that went beyond what was
                                                                                             2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     reasonably within the contemplation of the parties to the treaty in 1899. (I note
     parenthetically that the Natural Resources Transfer Agreement is not at issue in this
     case as the Mikisew reserve is vested in Her Majesty in Right of Canada.
     Paragraph 10 of the Agreement provides that after-created reserves “shall thereafter
     be administered by Canada in the same way in all respects as if they had never passed
     to the Province under the provisions hereof”.)
44              The Federal Court of Appeal purported to follow Badger in holding that
     the hunting, fishing and trapping rights would be infringed only “where the Crown has
     taken up land in bad faith or has taken up so much land that no meaningful right to
     hunt remains” (para. 18). With respect, I cannot agree with this implied rejection of
     the Mikisew procedural rights. At this stage the winter road is no more than a
     contemplated change of use. The proposed use would, if carried into execution, reduce
     the territory over which the Mikisew would be entitled to exercise their Treaty 8
     rights. Apart from everything else, there would be no hunting at all within the 200-
     metre road corridor. More broadly, as found by the trial judge, the road would
     injuriously affect the exercise of these rights in the surrounding bush. As the Parks
     Canada witness, Josie Weninger, acknowledged in cross-examination:
                Q: But roads, in effect, change the pattern of moose and other wildlife
                   within the Park and that’s been what Parks Canada observed in the
                   past with regards to other roads, correct?
                A: It is documented that roads do impact. I would be foolish if I said
                   they didn’t.
                                                 - 29 -
     The Draft Environmental Assessment Report acknowledged the road could potentially
     result in a diminution in quantity of the Mikisew harvest of wildlife, as fewer
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     furbearers (including fisher, muskrat, marten, wolverine and lynx) will be caught in
     their traps. Second, in qualitative terms, the more lucrative or rare species of
     furbearers may decline in population. Other potential impacts include fragmentation
     of wildlife habitat, disruption of migration patterns, loss of vegetation, increased
     poaching because of easier motor vehicle access to the area and increased wildlife
     mortality due to motor vehicle collisions. While Haida Nation was decided after the
     release of the Federal Court of Appeal reasons in this case, it is apparent that the
     proposed road will adversely affect the existing Mikisew hunting and trapping rights,
     and therefore that the “trigger” to the duty to consult identified in Haida Nation is
     satisfied.
45                The Minister seeks to extend the dictum of Rothstein J.A. by asserting, at
     para. 96 of her factum, that the test ought to be “whether, after the taking up, it still
     remains reasonably practicable, within the Province as a whole, for the Indians to hunt,
     fish and trap for food [to] the extent that they choose to do so” (emphasis added). This
     cannot be correct. It suggests that a prohibition on hunting at Peace Point would be
     acceptable so long as decent hunting was still available in the Treaty 8 area north of
     Jasper, about 800 kilometres distant across the province, equivalent to a commute
     between Toronto and Quebec City (809 kilometres) or Edmonton and Regina (785
     kilometres). One might as plausibly invite the truffle diggers of southern France to try
     their luck in the Austrian Alps, about the same distance as the journey across Alberta
     deemed by the Minister to be an acceptable fulfilment of the promises of Treaty 8.
                                                   - 30 -
46               The Attorney General of Alberta tries a slightly different argument, at para.
     49 of his factum, adding a de minimus element to the treaty-wide approach:
                                                                                                    2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                     In this case the amount of land to be taken up to construct the winter
                 road is 23 square kilometres out of 44,807 square kilometres of Wood
                 Buffalo National Park and out of 840,000 square kilometres encompassed
                 by Treaty No. 8. As Rothstein J.A. found, this is not a case where a
                 meaningful right to hunt no longer remains.
47               The arguments of the federal and Alberta Crowns simply ignore the
     significance and practicalities of a First Nation’s traditional territory. Alberta’s 23
     square kilometre argument flies in the face of the injurious affection of surrounding
     lands as found by the trial judge. More significantly for aboriginal people, as for non-
     aboriginal people, location is important. Twenty-three square kilometres alone is
     serious if it includes the claimants’ hunting ground or trapline. While the Mikisew
     may have rights under Treaty 8 to hunt, fish and trap throughout the Treaty 8 area, it
     makes no sense from a practical point of view to tell the Mikisew hunters and trappers
     that, while their own hunting territory and traplines would now be compromised, they
     are entitled to invade the traditional territories of other First Nations distant from their
     home turf (a suggestion that would have been all the more impractical in 1899). The
     Chipewyan negotiators in 1899 were intensely practical people, as the Treaty 8
     Commissioners noted in their report (at p. 5):
                 The Chipewyans confined themselves to asking questions and making
                 brief arguments. They appeared to be more adept at cross-examination
                 than at speech-making, and the Chief at Fort Chipewyan displayed
                 considerable keenness of intellect and much practical sense in pressing the
                 claims of his band.
                                                 - 31 -
     Badger recorded that a large element of the Treaty 8 negotiations were the assurances
     of continuity in traditional patterns of economic activity.        Continuity respects
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     traditional patterns of activity and occupation. The Crown promised that the Indians’
     rights to hunt, fish and trap would continue “after the treaty as existed before it” (p.
     5). This promise is not honoured by dispatching the Mikisew to territories far from
     their traditional hunting grounds and traplines.
48               What Rothstein J.A. actually said at para. 18 is as follows:
                      With the exceptions of cases where the Crown has taken up land in
                 bad faith or has taken up so much land that no meaningful right to hunt
                 remains, taking up land for a purpose express or necessarily implied in the
                 treaty itself cannot be considered an infringement of the treaty right to
                 hunt. [Emphasis added.]
     The “meaningful right to hunt” is not ascertained on a treaty-wide basis (all 840,000
     square kilometres of it) but in relation to the territories over which a First Nation
     traditionally hunted, fished and trapped, and continues to do so today. If the time
     comes that in the case of a particular Treaty 8 First Nation “no meaningful right to
     hunt” remains over its traditional territories, the significance of the oral promise that
     “the same means of earning a livelihood would continue after the treaty as existed
     before it” would clearly be in question, and a potential action for treaty infringement,
     including the demand for a Sparrow justification, would be a legitimate First Nation
     response.
                 (c) Unilateral Crown Action
                                                 - 32 -
49               There is in the Minister’s argument a strong advocacy of unilateral Crown
     action (a sort of “this is surrendered land and we can do with it what we like”
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     approach) which not only ignores the mutual promises of the treaty, both written and
     oral, but also is the antithesis of reconciliation and mutual respect. It is all the more
     extraordinary given the Minister’s acknowledgment at para. 41 of her factum that “[i]n
     many if not all cases the government will not be able to appreciate the effect a
     proposed taking up will have on the Indians’ exercise of hunting, fishing and trapping
     rights without consultation”.
50               The Attorney General of Alberta denies that a duty of consultation can be
     an implied term of Treaty 8. He argues:
                     Given that a consultation obligation would mean that the Crown
                 would be required to engage in meaningful consultations with any and all
                 affected Indians, being nomadic individuals scattered across a vast
                 expanse of land, every time it wished to utilize an individual plot of land
                 or change the use of the plot, such a requirement would not be within the
                 range of possibilities of the common intention of the parties.
     The parties did in fact contemplate a difficult period of transition and sought to soften
     its impact as much as possible, and any administrative inconvenience incidental to
     managing the process was rejected as a defence in Haida Nation and Taku River.
     There is no need to repeat here what was said in those cases about the overarching
     objective of reconciliation rather than confrontation.
                 (d) Honour of the Crown
                                                 - 33 -
51               The duty to consult is grounded in the honour of the Crown, and it is not
     necessary for present purposes to invoke fiduciary duties. The honour of the Crown
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     is itself a fundamental concept governing treaty interpretation and application that was
     referred to by Gwynne J. of this Court as a treaty obligation as far back as 1895, four
     years before Treaty 8 was concluded: Province of Ontario v. Dominion of Canada
     (1895), 25 S.C.R. 434, at pp. 511-12 per Gwynne J. (dissenting). While he was in the
     minority in his view that the treaty obligation to pay Indian annuities imposed a trust
     on provincial lands, nothing was said by the majority in that case to doubt that the
     honour of the Crown was pledged to the fulfilment of its obligations to the Indians.
     This had been the Crown’s policy as far back as the Royal Proclamation of 1763, and
     is manifest in the promises recorded in the report of the Commissioners. The honour
     of the Crown exists as a source of obligation independently of treaties as well, of
     course. In Sparrow, Delgamuukw v. British Columbia [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010, Haida
     Nation and Taku River, the “honour of the Crown” was invoked as a central principle
     in resolving aboriginal claims to consultation despite the absence of any treaty.
52               It is not as though the Treaty 8 First Nations did not pay dearly for their
     entitlement to honourable conduct on the part of the Crown; surrender of the aboriginal
     interest in an area larger than France is a hefty purchase price.
                 (2) Did the Extensive Consultations with First Nations Undertaken in
                     1899 at the Time Treaty 8 Was Negotiated Discharge the Crown’s
                     Duty of Consultation and Accommodation?
53               The Crown’s second broad answer to the Mikisew claim is that whatever
     had to be done was done in 1899. The Minister contends:
                                                  - 34 -
                      While the government should consider the impact on the treaty right,
                 there is no duty to accommodate in this context. The treaty itself
                 constitutes the accommodation of the aboriginal interest; taking up lands,
                 as defined above, leaves intact the essential ability of the Indians to
                                                                                                  2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                 continue to hunt, fish and trap. As long as that promise is honoured, the
                 treaty is not breached and no separate duty to accommodate arises.
                 [Emphasis added.]
54               This is not correct. Consultation that excludes from the outset any form
     of accommodation would be meaningless. The contemplated process is not simply one
     of giving the Mikisew an opportunity to blow off steam before the Minister proceeds
     to do what she intended to do all along. Treaty making is an important stage in the
     long process of reconciliation, but it is only a stage. What occurred at Fort Chipewyan
     in 1899 was not the complete discharge of the duty arising from the honour of the
     Crown, but a rededication of it.
55               The Crown has a treaty right to “take up” surrendered lands for regional
     transportation purposes, but the Crown is nevertheless under an obligation to inform
     itself of the impact its project will have on the exercise by the Mikisew of their hunting
     and trapping rights, and to communicate its findings to the Mikisew. The Crown must
     then attempt to deal with the Mikisew “in good faith, and with the intention of
     substantially addressing” Mikisew concerns (Delgamuukw, at para. 168). This does
     not mean that whenever a government proposes to do anything in the Treaty 8
     surrendered lands it must consult with all signatory First Nations, no matter how
     remote or unsubstantial the impact. The duty to consult is, as stated in Haida Nation,
     triggered at a low threshold, but adverse impact is a matter of degree, as is the extent
     of the Crown’s duty. Here the impacts were clear, established and demonstrably
     adverse to the continued exercise of the Mikisew hunting and trapping rights over the
     lands in question.
                                                  - 35 -
56               In summary, the 1899 negotiations were the first step in a long journey that
                                                                                                  2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     is unlikely to end any time soon. Viewed in light of the facts of this case, we should
     qualify Badger’s identification of two inherent limitations on Indian hunting, fishing
     and trapping rights under Treaty 8 (geographical limits and specific forms of
     government regulation) by a third, namely the Crown’s right to take up lands under the
     treaty, which itself is subject to its duty to consult and, if appropriate, accommodate
     First Nations’ interests before reducing the area over which their members may
     continue to pursue their hunting, trapping and fishing rights. Such a third qualification
     (not at issue in Badger) is fully justified by the history of the negotiations leading to
     Treaty 8, as well as by the honour of the Crown as previously discussed.
57               As stated at the outset, the honour of the Crown infuses every treaty and
     the performance of every treaty obligation. Treaty 8 therefore gives rise to Mikisew
     procedural rights (e.g. consultation) as well as substantive rights (e.g. hunting, fishing
     and trapping rights). Were the Crown to have barrelled ahead with implementation of
     the winter road without adequate consultation, it would have been in violation of its
     procedural obligations, quite apart from whether or not the Mikisew could have
     established that the winter road breached the Crown’s substantive treaty obligations
     as well.
58               Sparrow holds not only that rights protected by s. 35 of the Constitution
     Act, 1982 are not absolute, but also that their breach may be justified by the Crown in
     certain defined circumstances. The Mikisew rights under Treaty 8 are protected by
     s. 35. The Crown does not seek to justify in Sparrow-terms shortcomings in its
     consultation in this case. The question that remains, therefore, is whether what the
                                                 - 36 -
     Crown did here complied with its obligation to consult honourably with the Mikisew
     First Nation.
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                 (3) Was the Process Followed by the Minister Through Parks Canada in
                     this Case Sufficient?
59               Where, as here, the Court is dealing with a proposed “taking up” it is not
     correct (even if it is concluded that the proposed measure if implemented would
     infringe the treaty hunting and trapping rights) to move directly to a Sparrow analysis.
     The Court must first consider the process by which the “taking up” is planned to go
     ahead, and whether that process is compatible with the honour of the Crown. If not,
     the First Nation may be entitled to succeed in setting aside the Minister’s order on the
     process ground whether or not the facts of the case would otherwise support a finding
     of infringement of the hunting, fishing and trapping rights.
60               I should state at the outset that the winter road proposed by the Minister
     was a permissible purpose for “taking up” lands under Treaty 8. It is obvious that the
     listed purposes of “settlement, mining, lumbering” and “trading” all require suitable
     transportation. The treaty does not spell out permissible “other purposes” but the term
     should not be read restrictively: R. v. Smith, [1935] 2 W.W.R. 433, (Sask. C.A.), at
     pp. 440-41. In any event, as noted earlier, the opening recital of Treaty 8 refers to
     “travel”.
61               The question is whether the Minister and her staff pursued the permitted
     purpose of regional transportation needs in accordance with the Crown’s duty to
     consult. The answer turns on the particulars of that duty shaped by the circumstances
                                                 - 37 -
     here. In Delgamuukw, the Court considered the duty to consult and accommodate in
     the context of an infringement of aboriginal title (at para. 168):
                                                                                                  2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
                 In occasional cases, when the breach is less serious or relatively minor, it
                 will be no more than a duty to discuss important decisions that will be
                 taken with respect to lands held pursuant to aboriginal title. Of course,
                 even in these rare cases when the minimum acceptable standard is
                 consultation, this consultation must be in good faith, and with the intention
                 of substantially addressing the concerns of the aboriginal peoples whose
                 lands are at issue. In most cases, it will be significantly deeper than mere
                 consultation. Some cases may even require the full consent of an
                 aboriginal nation, particularly when provinces enact hunting and fishing
                 regulations in relation to aboriginal lands. [Emphasis added.]
62               In Haida Nation, the Court pursued the kinds of duties that may arise in
     pre-proof claim situations, and McLachlin C.J. used the concept of a spectrum to frame
     her analysis (at paras. 43-45):
                 At one end of the spectrum lie cases where the claim to title is weak, the
                 Aboriginal right limited, or the potential for infringement minor. In such
                 cases, the only duty on the Crown may be to give notice, disclose
                 information, and discuss any issues raised in response to the notice. . . .
                     At the other end of the spectrum lie cases where a strong prima facie
                 case for the claim is established, the right and potential infringement is of
                 high significance to the Aboriginal peoples, and the risk of non-
                 compensable damage is high. In such cases deep consultation, aimed at
                 finding a satisfactory interim solution, may be required. While precise
                 requirements will vary with the circumstances, the consultation required
                 at this stage may entail the opportunity to make submissions for
                 consideration, formal participation in the decision-making process, and
                 provision of written reasons to show that Aboriginal concerns were
                 considered and to reveal the impact they had on the decision. This list is
                 neither exhaustive, nor mandatory for every case. . . .
                     Between these two extremes of the spectrum just described, will lie
                 other situations. Every case must be approached individually. Each must
                 also be approached flexibly, since the level of consultation required may
                 change as the process goes on and new information comes to light. The
                 controlling question in all situations is what is required to maintain the
                 honour of the Crown and to effect reconciliation between the Crown and
                 the Aboriginal peoples with respect to the interests at stake. . . . [Emphasis
                 added.]
                                                 - 38 -
63               The determination of the content of the duty to consult will, as Haida
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     suggests, be governed by the context. One variable will be the specificity of the
     promises made. Where, for example, a treaty calls for certain supplies, or Crown
     payment of treaty monies, or a modern land claims settlement imposes specific
     obligations on aboriginal peoples with respect to identified resources, the role of
     consultation may be quite limited. If the respective obligations are clear the parties
     should get on with performance. Another contextual factor will be the seriousness of
     the impact on the aboriginal people of the Crown’s proposed course of action. The
     more serious the impact the more important will be the role of consultation. Another
     factor in a non-treaty case, as Haida points out, will be the strength of the aboriginal
     claim. The history of dealings between the Crown and a particular First Nation may
     also be significant. Here, the most important contextual factor is that Treaty 8
     provides a framework within which to manage the continuing changes in land use
     already foreseen in 1899 and expected, even now, to continue well into the future. In
     that context, consultation is key to achievement of the overall objective of the modern
     law of treaty and aboriginal rights, namely reconciliation.
64               The duty here has both informational and response components. In this
     case, given that the Crown is proposing to build a fairly minor winter road on
     surrendered lands where the Mikisew hunting, fishing and trapping rights are
     expressly subject to the “taking up” limitation, I believe the Crown’s duty lies at the
     lower end of the spectrum. The Crown was required to provide notice to the Mikisew
     and to engage directly with them (and not, as seems to have been the case here, as an
     afterthought to a general public consultation with Park users). This engagement ought
     to have included the provision of information about the project addressing what the
                                                 - 39 -
     Crown knew to be Mikisew interests and what the Crown anticipated might be the
     potential adverse impact on those interests. The Crown was required to solicit and to
                                                                                                 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
     listen carefully to the Mikisew concerns, and to attempt to minimize adverse impacts
     on the Mikisew hunting, fishing and trapping rights. The Crown did not discharge this
     obligation when it unilaterally declared the road realignment would be shifted from the
     reserve itself to a track along its boundary. I agree on this point with what Finch J.A.
     (now C.J.B.C.) said in Halfway River First Nation at paras. 159-60.
                 The fact that adequate notice of an intended decision may have been given
                 does not mean that the requirement for adequate consultation has also been
                 met.
                      The Crown’s duty to consult imposes on it a positive obligation to
                 reasonably ensure that aboriginal peoples are provided with all necessary
                 information in a timely way so that they have an opportunity to express
                 their interests and concerns, and to ensure that their representations are
                 seriously considered and, wherever possible, demonstrably integrated into
                 the proposed plan of action. [Emphasis added.]
65               It is true, as the Minister argues, that there is some reciprocal onus on the
     Mikisew to carry their end of the consultation, to make their concerns known, to
     respond to the government’s attempt to meet their concerns and suggestions, and to try
     to reach some mutually satisfactory solution. In this case, however, consultation never
     reached that stage. It never got off the ground.
66               Had the consultation process gone ahead, it would not have given the
     Mikisew a veto over the alignment of the road. As emphasized in Haida Nation,
     consultation will not always lead to accommodation, and accommodation may or may
     not result in an agreement. There could, however, be changes in the road alignment
     or construction that would go a long way towards satisfying the Mikisew objections.
                                                 - 40 -
     We do not know, and the Minister cannot know in the absence of consultation, what
     such changes might be.
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
67               The trial judge’s findings of fact make it clear that the Crown failed to
     demonstrate an “‘intention of substantially addressing [Aboriginal] concerns’ . . .
     through a meaningful process of consultation” (Haida Nation, at para. 42). On the
     contrary, the trial judge held that
                 [i]n the present case, at the very least, this [duty to consult] would have
                 entailed a response to Mikisew’s October 10, 2000 letter, and a meeting
                 with them to ensure that their concerns were addressed early in the
                 planning stages of the project. At the meetings that were finally held
                 between Parks Canada and Mikisew, a decision had essentially been made,
                 therefore, the meeting could not have been conducted with the genuine
                 intention of allowing Mikisew’s concerns to be integrated with the
                 proposal. [para. 154]
     The trial judge also wrote:
                 . . . it is not consistent with the honour of the Crown, in its capacity as
                 fiduciary, for it to fail to consult with a First Nation prior to making a
                 decision that infringes on constitutionally protected treaty rights.
                 [para. 157]
68               I agree, as did Sharlow J.A., dissenting in the Federal Court of Appeal.
     She declared that the mitigation measures were adopted through a process that was
     “fundamentally flawed” (para. 153).
69               In the result I would allow the appeal, quash the Minister’s approval order,
     and remit the winter road project to the Minister to be dealt with in accordance with
     these reasons.
                                                 - 41 -
     V. Conclusion
                                                                                                2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
70               Costs are sought by the Mikisew on a solicitor and client basis but there
     are no exceptional circumstances to justify such an award. The appeal is therefore
     allowed and the decision of the Court of Appeal is set aside, all with costs against the
     respondent Minister in this Court and in the Federal Court of Appeal on a party and
     party basis. The costs in the Trial Division remain as ordered by the trial judge.
                 Appeal allowed with costs.
                 Solicitors for the appellant: Rath & Co., Priddis, Alberta.
                 Solicitor for the respondent Sheila Copps, Minister of Canadian
     Heritage: Attorney General of Canada, Edmonton.
                 Solicitors for the respondent the Thebacha Road Society: Ackroyd Piasta
     Roth & Day, Edmonton.
                 Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General for Saskatchewan:
     Attorney General for Saskatchewan, Regina.
                 Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Alberta: Attorney
     General of Alberta, Edmonton.
                                          - 42 -
            Solicitors for the intervener the Big Island Lake Cree Nation: Woloshyn
& Co., Saskatoon.
                                                                                        2005 SCC 69 (CanLII)
            Solicitors for the intervener the Lesser Slave Lake Indian Regional
Council: Donovan & Co., Vancouver.
            Solicitors for the intervener the Treaty 8 First Nations of Alberta: Cook
Roberts, Victoria.
            Solicitors for the intervener the Treaty 8 Tribal Association: Woodward
& Co., Victoria.
            Solicitors for the intervener the Blueberry River First Nations: Thomas
R. Berger, Vancouver.
            Solicitors for the intervener the Assembly of First Nations: Pitblado,
Winnipeg.
Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia (Project Assessment Director),
[2004] 3 S.C.R. 550, 2004 SCC 74
Norm Ringstad, in his capacity as the Project Assessment Director
of the Tulsequah Chief Mine Project, Sheila Wynn, in her
                                                                                     2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
capacity as the Executive Director, Environmental Assessment
Office, the Minister of Environment, Lands and Parks, and
the Minister of Energy and Mines and Minister Responsible
for Northern Development                                               Appellants
v.
Taku River Tlingit First Nation and Melvin Jack, on behalf of
himself and all other members of the Taku River Tlingit First
Nation, Redfern Resources Ltd., and Redcorp Ventures Ltd.
formerly known as Redfern Resources Ltd.                             Respondents
and
Attorney General of Canada, Attorney General of Quebec,
Attorney General of Alberta, Business Council of British Columbia,
British Columbia and Yukon Chamber of Mines, British Columbia
Chamber of Commerce, British Columbia Wildlife Federation,
Council of Forest Industries, Mining Association of British Columbia,
Aggregate Producers Association of British Columbia,
Doig River First Nation, First Nations Summit, and Union of
British Columbia Indian Chiefs                                     Interveners
Indexed as: Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia (Project
Assessment Director)
Neutral citation: 2004 SCC 74.
File No.: 29146.
2004: March 24; 2004: November 18.
                                            -2-
Present: McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps and
Fish JJ.
on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia
                                                                                         2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
           Crown — Honour of Crown — Duty to consult and accommodate
Aboriginal peoples — Whether Crown has duty to consult and accommodate
Aboriginal peoples prior to making decisions that might adversely affect their as yet
unproven Aboriginal rights and title claims — If so, whether consultation and
accommodation engaged in by Province prior to issuing project approval certificate
was adequate to satisfy honour of Crown.
           Since 1994, a mining company has sought permission from the British
Columbia government to re-open an old mine. The Taku River Tlingit First Nation
(“TRTFN”), which participated in the environmental assessment process engaged in
by the Province under the Environmental Assessment Act, objected to the company’s
plan to build a road through a portion of the TRTFN’s traditional territory. The
Province granted the project approval certificate in 1998. The TRTFN brought a
petition to quash the decision on grounds based on administrative law and on its
Aboriginal rights and title. The chambers judge concluded that the decision makers
had not been sufficiently careful during the final months of the assessment process to
ensure that they had effectively addressed the substance of the TRTFN’s concerns. She
set aside the decision and directed a reconsideration. The majority of the Court of
Appeal upheld the decision, finding that the Province had failed to meet its duty to
consult with and accommodate the TRTFN.
           Held: The appeal should be allowed.
                                              -3-
            The Crown’s duty to consult and accommodate Aboriginal peoples, even
prior to proof of asserted Aboriginal rights and title, is grounded in the principle of the
honour of the Crown, which derives from the Crown’s assertion of sovereignty in the
                                                                                              2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
face of prior Aboriginal occupation. The Crown’s honour cannot be interpreted
narrowly or technically, but must be given full effect in order to promote the process
of reconciliation mandated by s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. The duty to
consult varies with the circumstances. It arises when a Crown actor has knowledge,
real or constructive, of the potential existence of the Aboriginal right or title and
contemplates conduct that might adversely affect it. This in turn may lead to a duty
to accommodate Aboriginal concerns. Responsiveness is a key requirement of both
consultation and accommodation. The scope of the duty to consult is proportionate to
a preliminary assessment of the strength of the case supporting the existence of the
right or title, and to the seriousness of the potentially adverse effect upon the right or
title claimed.
            The Crown’s obligation to consult the TRTFN was engaged in this case.
The Province was aware of the TRTFN’s title and rights claims and knew that the
decision to reopen the mine had the potential to adversely affect the substance of the
TRTFN’s claims. The TRTFN’s claim is relatively strong, supported by a prima facie
case, as attested to by its inclusion in the Province’s treaty negotiation process. While
the proposed road is to occupy only a small portion of the territory over which the
TRTFN asserts title, the potential for negative derivative impacts on the TRTFN’s
claims is high. On the spectrum of consultation required by the honour of the Crown,
the TRTFN was entitled to more than minimum consultation under the circumstances,
and to a level of responsiveness to its concerns that can be characterized as
accommodation. It is impossible, however, to provide a prospective checklist of the
level of consultation required.
                                           -4-
            In this case, the process engaged in by the Province under the
Environmental Assessment Act fulfilled the requirements of its duty to consult and
accommodate. The TRTFN was part of the Project Committee, participating fully in
                                                                                         2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
the environmental review process. Its views were put before the decision makers, and
the final project approval contained measures designed to address both its immediate
and its long-term concerns. The Province was not under a duty to reach agreement
with the TRTFN, and its failure to do so did not breach the obligations of good faith
that it owed the TRTFN. Finally, it is expected that, throughout the permitting,
approval and licensing process, as well as in the development of a land use strategy,
the Crown will continue to fulfill its honourable duty to consult and, if appropriate,
accommodate the TRTFN.
Cases Cited
            Applied: Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), [2004]
3 S.C.R. 511, 2004 SCC 73; referred to: R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075; R. v.
Nikal, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 1013; R. v. Gladstone, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723; Delgamuukw v.
British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Constitution Act, 1982, s. 35(1).
Environmental Assessment Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 119 [rep. 2002, c. 43, s. 58], ss. 2,
     7, 9, 10, 14 to 18, 19(1), 21, 22, 23, 29, 30(1).
Judicial Review Procedure Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 241.
Mine Development Assessment Act, S.B.C. 1990, c. 55.
                                          -5-
           APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (2002),
211 D.L.R. (4th) 89, [2002] 4 W.W.R. 19, 163 B.C.A.C. 164, 267 W.A.C. 164,
98 B.C.L.R. (3d) 16, 42 C.E.L.R. (N.S.) 169, [2002] 2 C.N.L.R. 312, 91 C.R.R.
                                                                                      2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
(2d) 260, [2002] B.C.J. No. 155 (QL), 2002 BCCA 59, affirming a decision of the
British Columbia Supreme Court (2000), 77 B.C.L.R. (3d) 310, 34 C.E.L.R.
(N.S.) 209, [2000] B.C.J. No. 1301 (QL), 2000 BCSC 1001. Appeal allowed.
           Paul J. Pearlman, Q.C., and Kathryn L. Kickbush, for the appellants.
           Arthur C. Pape, Jean Teillet and Richard B. Salter, for the respondents
Taku River Tlingit First Nation and Melvin Jack, on behalf of himself and all other
members of the Taku River Tlingit First Nation.
           Randy J. Kaardal and Lisa Hynes, for the respondents Redfern Resources
Ltd. and Redcorp Ventures Ltd. formerly known as Redfern Resources Ltd.
           Mitchell Taylor and Brian McLaughlin, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Canada.
           Pierre-Christian Labeau, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Quebec.
           Kurt J. W. Sandstrom and Stan Rutwind, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Alberta.
           Charles F. Willms and Kevin G. O’Callaghan, for the interveners Business
Council of British Columbia, British Columbia and Yukon Chamber of Mines, British
                                                -6-
    Columbia Chamber of Commerce, British Columbia Wildlife Federation, Council of
    Forest Industries, Mining Association of British Columbia and Aggregate Producers
    Association of British Columbia.
                                                                                               2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
                Jeffrey R. W. Rath and Allisun Rana, for the intervener Doig River First
    Nation.
                Hugh M. G. Braker, Q.C., and Anja Brown, for the intervener First Nations
    Summit.
                Robert J. M. Janes and Dominique Nouvet, for the intervener Union of
    British Columbia Indian Chiefs.
                The judgment of the Court was delivered by
                THE CHIEF JUSTICE —
    I.    Introduction
1               This case raises the issue of the limits of the Crown’s duty to consult with
    and accommodate Aboriginal peoples when making decisions that may adversely
    affect as yet unproven Aboriginal rights and title claims. The Taku River Tlingit First
    Nation (“TRTFN”) participated in a three-and-a-half-year environmental assessment
    process related to the efforts of Redfern Resources Ltd. (“Redfern”) to reopen an old
    mine. Ultimately, the TRTFN found itself disappointed in the process and in the
    result.
                                               -7-
2              I conclude that the Province was required to consult meaningfully with the
    TRTFN in the decision-making process surrounding Redfern’s project approval
    application. The TRTFN’s role in the environmental assessment was, however,
                                                                                             2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
    sufficient to uphold the Province’s honour and meet the requirements of its duty.
    Where consultation is meaningful, there is no ultimate duty to reach agreement.
    Rather, accommodation requires that Aboriginal concerns be balanced reasonably with
    the potential impact of the particular decision on those concerns and with competing
    societal concerns. Compromise is inherent to the reconciliation process. In this case,
    the Province accommodated TRTFN concerns by adapting the environmental
    assessment process and the requirements made of Redfern in order to gain project
    approval. I find, therefore, that the Province met the requirements of its duty toward
    the TRTFN.
    II.   Facts and Decisions Below
3              The Tulsequah Chief Mine, operated in the 1950s by Cominco Ltd., lies
    in a remote and pristine area of northwestern British Columbia, at the confluence of
    the Taku and Tulsequah Rivers. Since 1994, Redfern has sought permission from the
    British Columbia government to reopen the mine, first under the Mine Development
    Assessment Act, S.B.C. 1990, c. 55, and then, following its enactment in 1995, under
    the Environmental Assessment Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 119. During the environmental
    assessment process, access to the mine emerged as a point of contention. The members
    of the TRTFN, who participated in the assessment as Project Committee members,
    objected to Redfern’s plan to build a 160-km road from the mine to the town of Atlin
    through a portion of their traditional territory. However, after a lengthy process,
    project approval was granted on March 19, 1998 by the Minister of Environment,
    Lands and Parks and the Minister of Energy and Mines (“Ministers”).
                                                 -8-
4               The Redfern proposal was assessed in accordance with British Columbia’s
    Environmental Assessment Act. The environmental assessment process is distinct from
                                                                                                2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
    both the land use planning process and the treaty negotiation process, although these
    latter processes may necessarily have an impact on the assessment of individual
    proposals. The following provisions are relevant to this matter.
5               Section 2 sets out the purposes of the Act, which are:
                (a) to promote sustainability by protecting the environment and fostering
                    a sound economy and social well-being,
                (b) to provide for the thorough, timely and integrated assessment of the
                    environmental, economic, social, cultural, heritage and health effects
                    of reviewable projects,
                (c) to prevent or mitigate adverse effects of reviewable projects,
                (d) to provide an open, accountable and neutrally administered process
                    for the assessment
                    (i) of reviewable projects, and
                                              ...
                (e) to provide for participation, in an assessment under this Act, by the
                    public, proponents, first nations, municipalities and regional districts,
                    the government and its agencies, the government of Canada and its
                    agencies and British Columbia’s neighbouring jurisdictions.
6               “The proponent of a reviewable project may apply for a project approval
    certificate” under s. 7 of the Act, providing a “preliminary overview of the reviewable
    project, including” potential effects and proposed mitigation measures. If the project
    is accepted for review, “the executive director must establish a project committee” for
    the project (s. 9(1)). The executive director must invite a number of groups to
    nominate members to the committee, including “any first nation whose traditional
                                                   -9-
    territory includes the site of the project or is in the vicinity of the project” (s. 9(2)(d)).
    Under s. 9(6), the committee “may determine its own procedure, and provide for the
    conduct of its meetings”.
                                                                                                     2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
7                Redfern’s proposal was accepted for review under the former Mine
    Development Assessment Act, and a project committee was established in November
    1994. Invited to participate were the TRTFN, the British Columbia, federal, Yukon,
    United States, and Alaskan governments, as well as the Atlin Advisory Planning
    Commission. When the Environmental Assessment Act was instituted, the Project
    Committee was formally constituted under s. 9. Working groups and technical sub-
    committees were formed, including a group to deal with Aboriginal concerns and a
    group to deal with issues around transportation options. The TRTFN participated in
    both of these groups. A number of studies were commissioned and provided to the
    Project Committee during the assessment process.
8                The project committee becomes the primary engine driving the assessment
    process. It must act in accordance with the purposes of a project committee, set out in
    s. 10 as:
                 (a) to provide to the executive director, the minister and the responsible
                     minister expertise, advice, analysis and recommendations, and
                 (b) to analyze and advise the executive director, the minister and the
                     responsible minister as to,
                     (i)   the comments received in response to an invitation for comments
                           under this Act,
                     (ii) the advice and recommendations of the public advisory
                          committee, if any, established for that reviewable project,
                     (iii) the potential effects, and
                     (iv) the prevention or mitigation of adverse effects.
                                                  - 10 -
9                The proponent of the project is required to engage in public consultation
     and distribution of information about the proposal (ss. 14-18). After the period for
                                                                                                   2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     receipt of comments has expired, the executive director must either “refer the
     application to the [Ministers] . . . for a decision . . . or order that a project report be
     prepared . . . and that the project undergo further review” (s. 19(1)). If a project report
     is to be prepared, the executive director must prepare draft project report specifications
     indicating what information, analysis, plans or other records are relevant to an
     effective assessment, on the recommendation of the project committee (s. 21(a)).
     Sections 22 and 23 set out a non-exhaustive list of what matters may be included in a
     project report. These specifications are provided to the proponent (s. 21(b)).
10               In this case, Redfern was required to produce a project report, and draft
     project report specifications were provided to it. Additional time was granted to allow
     the executive director and Project Committee to prepare specifications.
11               When the proponent submits a project report, the project committee makes
     a recommendation to the executive director, whether to accept the report for review
     or to withhold acceptance if the report does not meet the specifications. Redfern
     submitted a multiple volume project report in November 1996. A time limit extension
     was granted to allow extra time to complete the review of the report. In January 1997,
     the Project Committee concluded that the report was deficient in certain areas, and
     Redfern was required to address the deficiencies.
12               Through the environmental assessment process, the TRTFN’s concerns
     with the road proposal became apparent. Its concerns crystallized around the potential
     effect on wildlife and traditional land use, as well as the lack of adequate baseline
                                                 - 11 -
     information by which to measure subsequent effects. It was the TRTFN’s position that
     the road ought not to be approved in the absence of a land use planning strategy and
     away from the treaty negotiation table. The environmental assessment process was
                                                                                                2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     unable to address these broader concerns directly, but the project assessment director
     facilitated the TRTFN’s access to other provincial agencies and decision makers. For
     example, the Province approved funding for wildlife monitoring programs as desired
     by the TRTFN (the Grizzly Bear Long-term Cumulative Effects Assessment and
     Ungulate Monitoring Program). The TRTFN also expressed interest in TRTFN
     jurisdiction to approve permits for the project, revenue sharing, and TRTFN control
     of the use of the access road by third parties. It was informed that these issues were
     outside the ambit of the certification process and could only be the subject of later
     negotiation with the government.
13               While Redfern undertook to address other deficiencies, the Environmental
     Assessment Office’s project assessment director engaged a consultant acceptable to
     the TRTFN, Mr. Lindsay Staples, to perform traditional land use studies and address
     issues raised by the TRTFN. Redfern submitted its upgraded report in July 1997, but
     was requested to await receipt of the Staples Report. The Staples Report, prepared by
     August 1997, was provided for inclusion in the Project Report. The Project Report was
     distributed for review in September 1997, with public comments received for a 60-day
     period thereafter. However, the TRTFN, upon reviewing the Staples Report, voiced
     additional concerns. In response, the Environmental Assessment Office engaged
     Staples to prepare an addendum to his report, which was completed in December 1997
     and also included in the Project Report from that time forward.
14               Under the Act, the executive director, upon accepting a project report, may
     refer the application for a project approval certificate to the Ministers for a decision
                                                   - 12 -
     (s. 29). “In making a referral . . . the executive director must take into account the
     application, the project report and any comments received about them” (s. 29(1)). “A
     referral . . . may be accompanied by recommendations of the project committee” (s.
                                                                                                     2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     29(4)). There is no requirement under the Act that a project committee prepare a
     written recommendations report.
15               In this case, the staff of the Environmental Assessment Office prepared a
     written Project Committee Recommendations Report, the major part of which was
     provided to committee members for review in early January 1998. The final 18 pages
     were provided as part of a complete draft on March 3, 1998. The majority of the
     committee members agreed to refer the application to the Ministers and to recommend
     approval for the project subject to certain recommendations and conditions. The
     TRTFN did not agree with the Recommendations Report, and instead prepared a
     minority report stating their concerns with the process and the proposal.
16               After a referral under s. 29 is made, “the ministers must consider the
     application and any recommendations of the project committee” (s. 30(1)(a)), in order
     to either “issue a project approval certificate”, “refuse to issue the . . . certificate”, or
     “refer the application to the Environmental Assessment Board for [a] public hearing”
     (s. 30(1)(b)). Written reasons are required (s. 30(1)(c)).
17               The executive director referred Redfern’s application to the Ministers on
     March 12, 1998. The referral included the Project Committee Recommendations
     Report, the Project Approval Certificate in the form that it was ultimately signed, and
     the TRTFN Report (A.R., vol. V, p. 858). In addition, the Recommendations Report
     explicitly identified TRTFN concerns and points of disagreement throughout, as well
     as suggested mitigation measures. The Ministers issued the Project Approval
                                                - 13 -
     Certificate on March 19, 1998, approving the proposal subject to detailed terms and
     conditions.
                                                                                               2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
18                 Issuance of project approval certification does not constitute a
     comprehensive “go-ahead” for all aspects of a project. An extensive “permitting”
     process precedes each aspect of construction, which may involve more detailed
     substantive and information requirements being placed on the developer. Part 6 of the
     Project Committee’s Recommendations Report summarized the requirements for
     licences, permits and approvals that would follow project approval in this case. In
     addition, the Recommendations Report made prospective recommendations about what
     ought to happen at the permit stage, as a condition of certification. The Report stated
     that Redfern would develop more detailed baseline information and analysis at the
     permit stage, with continued TRTFN participation, and that adjustments might be
     required to the road route in response. The majority also recommended creation of a
     resource management zone along the access corridor, to be in place until completion
     of a future land use plan; the use of regulations to control access to the road; and
     creation of a Joint Management Committee for the road with the TRTFN.                It
     recommended that Redfern’s future Special Use Permit application for the road be
     referred to the proposed Joint Management Committee.
19                 The TRTFN brought a petition in February 1999 under the Judicial Review
     Procedure Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 241, to quash the Ministers’ decision to issue the
     Project Approval Certificate on administrative law grounds and on grounds based on
     its Aboriginal rights and title. Determination of its rights and title was severed from
     the judicial review proceedings and referred to the trial list, on the Province’s
     application. The chambers judge on the judicial review proceedings, Kirkpatrick J.,
     concluded that the Ministers should have been mindful of the possibility that their
                                                 - 14 -
     decision might infringe Aboriginal rights, and that they had not been sufficiently
     careful during the final months of the assessment process to ensure that they had
     effectively addressed the substance of the TRTFN’s concerns ((2000), 77 B.C.L.R.
                                                                                              2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     (3d) 310, 2000 BCSC 1001). She also found in the TRTFN’s favour on administrative
     law grounds. She set aside the decision to issue the Project Approval Certificate and
     directed a reconsideration, for which she later issued directions.
20               The majority of the British Columbia Court of Appeal dismissed the
     Province’s appeal, finding (per Rowles J.A.) that the Province had failed to meet its
     duty to consult with and accommodate the TRTFN ((2002), 98 B.C.L.R. (3d) 16, 2002
     BCCA 59).       Southin J.A., dissenting, would have found that the consultation
     undertaken was adequate on the facts. Both the majority and the dissent appear to
     conclude that the decision complied with administrative law principles. The Province
     has appealed to this Court, arguing that no duty to consult exists outside common law
     administrative principles, prior to proof of an Aboriginal claim. If such a duty does
     exist, the Province argues, it was met on the facts of this case.
     III. Analysis
21               In Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), [2004] 3 S.C.R.
     511, 2004 SCC 73, heard concurrently with this case, this Court has confirmed the
     existence of the Crown’s duty to consult and, where indicated, to accommodate
     Aboriginal peoples prior to proof of rights or title claims. The Crown’s obligation to
     consult the TRTFN was engaged in this case. The Province was aware of the
     TRTFN’s claims through its involvement in the treaty negotiation process, and knew
     that the decision to reopen the Tulsequah Chief Mine had the potential to adversely
     affect the substance of the TRTFN’s claims.
                                                  - 15 -
22               On the principles discussed in Haida, these facts mean that the honour of
     the Crown placed the Province under a duty to consult with the TRTFN in making the
                                                                                                   2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     decision to reopen the Tulsequah Chief Mine. In this case, the process engaged in by
     the Province under the Environmental Assessment Act fulfilled the requirements of its
     duty. The TRTFN was part of the Project Committee, participating fully in the
     environmental review process. It was disappointed when, after three and a half years,
     the review was concluded at the direction of the Environmental Assessment Office.
     However, its views were put before the Ministers, and the final project approval
     contained measures designed to address both its immediate and long-term concerns.
     The Province was under a duty to consult. It did so, and proceeded to make
     accommodations. The Province was not under a duty to reach agreement with the
     TRTFN, and its failure to do so did not breach the obligations of good faith that it
     owed the TRTFN.
     A.   Did the Province Have a Duty to Consult and if Indicated Accommodate the
          TRTFN?
23               The Province argues that, before the determination of rights through
     litigation or conclusion of a treaty, it owes only a common law “duty of fair dealing”
     to Aboriginal peoples whose claims may be affected by government decisions. It
     argues that a duty to consult could arise after rights have been determined, through
     what it terms a “justificatory fiduciary duty”. Alternatively, it submits, a fiduciary duty
     may arise where the Crown has undertaken to act only in the best interests of an
     Aboriginal people. The Province submits that it owes the TRTFN no duty outside of
     these specific situations.
                                                 - 16 -
24               The Province’s submissions present an impoverished vision of the honour
     of the Crown and all that it implies. As discussed in the companion case of Haida,
     supra, the principle of the honour of the Crown grounds the Crown’s duty to consult
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     and if indicated accommodate Aboriginal peoples, even prior to proof of asserted
     Aboriginal rights and title. The duty of honour derives from the Crown’s assertion of
     sovereignty in the face of prior Aboriginal occupation. It has been enshrined in s. 35(1)
     of the Constitution Act, 1982, which recognizes and affirms existing Aboriginal rights
     and titles. Section 35(1) has, as one of its purposes, negotiation of just settlement of
     Aboriginal claims. In all its dealings with Aboriginal peoples, the Crown must act
     honourably, in accordance with its historical and future relationship with the
     Aboriginal peoples in question. The Crown’s honour cannot be interpreted narrowly
     or technically, but must be given full effect in order to promote the process of
     reconciliation mandated by s. 35(1).
25               As discussed in Haida, what the honour of the Crown requires varies with
     the circumstances. It may require the Crown to consult with and accommodate
     Aboriginal peoples prior to taking decisions: R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, at
     p. 1119; R. v. Nikal, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 1013; R. v. Gladstone, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723;
     Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010, at para. 168. The obligation
     to consult does not arise only upon proof of an Aboriginal claim, in order to justify
     infringement. That understanding of consultation would deny the significance of the
     historical roots of the honour of the Crown, and deprive it of its role in the
     reconciliation process. Although determining the required extent of consultation and
     accommodation before a final settlement is challenging, it is essential to the process
     mandated by s. 35(1). The duty to consult arises when a Crown actor has knowledge,
     real or constructive, of the potential existence of Aboriginal rights or title and
     contemplates conduct that might adversely affect them. This in turn may lead to a duty
                                                 - 17 -
     to change government plans or policy to accommodate Aboriginal concerns.
     Responsiveness is a key requirement of both consultation and accommodation.
                                                                                                 2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
26               The federal government announced a comprehensive land claims policy
     in 1981, under which Aboriginal land claims were to be negotiated. The TRTFN
     submitted its land claim to the Minister of Indian Affairs in 1983. The claim was
     accepted for negotiation in 1984, based on the TRTFN’s traditional use and occupancy
     of the land. No negotiation ever took place under the federal policy; however, the
     TRTFN later began negotiation of its land claim under the treaty process established
     by the B.C. Treaty Commission in 1993. As of 1999, the TRTFN had signed a Protocol
     Agreement and a Framework Agreement, and was working towards an Agreement in
     Principle. The Province clearly had knowledge of the TRTFN’s title and rights claims.
27               When Redfern applied for project approval, in its efforts to reopen the
     Tulsequah Chief Mine, it was apparent that the decision could adversely affect the
     TRTFN’s asserted rights and title. The TRTFN claim Aboriginal title over a large
     portion of northwestern British Columbia, including the territory covered by the access
     road considered during the approval process. It also claims Aboriginal hunting,
     fishing, gathering, and other traditional land use activity rights which stood to be
     affected by a road through an area in which these rights are exercised. The
     contemplated decision thus had the potential to impact adversely the rights and title
     asserted by the TRTFN.
28               The Province was aware of the claims, and contemplated a decision with
     the potential to affect the TRTFN’s asserted rights and title negatively. It follows that
     the honour of the Crown required it to consult and if indicated accommodate the
                                                  - 18 -
     TRTFN in making the decision whether to grant project approval to Redfern, and on
     what terms.
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     B.   What Was the Scope and Extent of the Province’s Duty to Consult and
          Accommodate the TRTFN?
29                 The scope of the duty to consult is “proportionate to a preliminary
     assessment of the strength of the case supporting the existence of the right or title, and
     to the seriousness of the potentially adverse effect upon the right or title claimed”
     (Haida, supra, at para. 39). It will vary with the circumstances, but always requires
     meaningful, good faith consultation and willingness on the part of the Crown to make
     changes based on information that emerges during the process.
30                 There is sufficient evidence to conclude that the TRTFN have prima facie
     Aboriginal rights and title over at least some of the area that they claim. Their land
     claim underwent an extensive validation process in order to be accepted into the
     federal land claims policy in 1984. The Department of Indian Affairs hired a
     researcher to report on the claim, and her report was reviewed at several stages before
     the Minister validated the claim based on the TRTFN’s traditional use and occupancy
     of the land and resources in question. In order to participate in treaty negotiations
     under the B.C. Treaty Commission, the TRTFN were required to file a statement of
     intent setting out their asserted territory and the basis for their claim. An Aboriginal
     group need not be accepted into the treaty process for the Crown’s duty to consult to
     apply to them. Nonetheless, the TRTFN’s claim was accepted for negotiation on the
     basis of a preliminary decision as to its validity. In contrast to the Haida case, the
     courts below did not engage in a detailed preliminary assessment of the various aspects
     of the TRTFN’s claims, which are broad in scope. However, acceptance of its title
                                                 - 19 -
     claim for negotiation establishes a prima facie case in support of its Aboriginal rights
     and title.
                                                                                                2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
31                 The potentially adverse effect of the Ministers’ decision on the TRTFN’s
     claims appears to be relatively serious. The chambers judge found that all of the
     experts who prepared reports for the review recognized the TRTFN’s reliance on its
     system of land use to support its domestic economy and its social and cultural life
     (para. 70). The proposed access road was only 160 km long, a geographically small
     intrusion on the 32,000-km2 area claimed by the TRTFN. However, experts reported
     that the proposed road would pass through an area critical to the TRTFN’s domestic
     economy: see, for example, Dewhirst Report (R.R., vol. I, at pp. 175, 187, 190 and
     200) and Staples Addendum Report (A.R., vol. IV, at pp. 595-600, 604-5 and 629).
     The TRTFN was also concerned that the road could act as a magnet for future
     development. The proposed road could therefore have an impact on the TRTFN’s
     continued ability to exercise its Aboriginal rights and alter the landscape to which it
     laid claim.
32                 In summary, the TRTFN’s claim is relatively strong, supported by a prima
     facie case, as attested to by its acceptance into the treaty negotiation process. The
     proposed road is to occupy only a small portion of the territory over which the TRTFN
     asserts title; however, the potential for negative derivative impacts on the TRTFN’s
     claims is high. On the spectrum of consultation required by the honour of the Crown,
     the TRTFN was entitled to more than the minimum receipt of notice, disclosure of
     information, and ensuing discussion. While it is impossible to provide a prospective
     checklist of the level of consultation required, it is apparent that the TRTFN was
     entitled to something significantly deeper than minimum consultation under the
                                                - 20 -
     circumstances, and to a level of responsiveness to its concerns that can be
     characterized as accommodation.
                                                                                              2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     C.   Did the Crown Fulfill its Duty to Consult and Accommodate the TRTFN?
33               The process of granting project approval to Redfern took three and a half
     years, and was conducted largely under the Environmental Assessment Act. As
     discussed above, the Act sets out a process of information gathering and consultation.
     The Act requires that Aboriginal peoples whose traditional territory includes the site
     of a reviewable project be invited to participate on a project committee.
34               The question is whether this duty was fulfilled in this case. A useful
     framework of events up to August 1st, 2000 is provided by Southin J.A. at para. 28
     of her dissent in this case at the Court of Appeal. Members of the TRTFN were
     invited to participate in the Project Committee to coordinate review of the project
     proposal in November 1994 and were given the original two-volume submission for
     review and comment: Southin J.A., at para. 39. They participated fully as Project
     Committee members, with the exception of a period of time from February to August
     of 1995, when they opted out of the process, wishing instead to address the issue
     through treaty talks and development of a land use policy.
35               The Final Project Report Specifications (“Specifications”) detail a number
     of meetings between the TRTFN, review agency staff and company representatives
     in TRTFN communities prior to February 1996: Southin J.A., at para. 41. Redfern
     and TRTFN met directly several times between June 1993 and February 1995 to
     discuss Redfern’s exploration activities and TRTFN’s concerns and information
     requirements.   Redfern also contracted an independent consultant to conduct
                                                 - 21 -
     archaeological and ethnographic studies with input from the TRTFN to identify
     possible effects of the proposed project on the TRTFN’s traditional way of life:
     Southin J.A., at para. 41. The Specifications document TRTFN’s written and oral
                                                                                               2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     requirements for information from Redfern concerning effects on wildlife, fisheries,
     terrain sensitivity, and the impact of the proposed access road, of barging and of mine
     development activities: Southin J.A., at para. 41.
36               The TRTFN declined to participate in the Road Access Subcommittee
     until January 26, 1998. The Environmental Assessment Office appreciated the
     dilemma faced by the TRTFN, which wished to have its concerns addressed on a
     broader scale than that which is provided for under the Act. The TRTFN was
     informed that not all of its concerns could be dealt with at the certification stage or
     through the environmental assessment process, and assistance was provided to it in
     liaising with relevant decision makers and politicians.
37               With financial assistance the TRTFN participated in many Project
     Committee meetings. Its concerns with the level of information provided by Redfern
     about impacts on Aboriginal land use led the Environmental Assessment Office to
     commission a study on traditional land use by an expert approved by the TRTFN,
     under the auspices of an Aboriginal study steering group. When the first Staples
     Report failed to allay the TRTFN’s concerns, the Environmental Assessment Office
     commissioned an addendum. The TRTFN notes that the Staples Addendum Report
     was not specifically referred to in the Recommendations Report eventually submitted
     to the Ministers. However, it did form part of Redfern’s Project Report.
38               While acknowledging its participation in the consultation process, the
     TRTFN argues that the rapid conclusion to the assessment deprived it of meaningful
                                                - 22 -
     consultation. After more than three years, numerous studies and meetings, and
     extensions of statutory time periods, the assessment process was brought to a close
     in early 1998. The Environmental Assessment Office stated on February 26 that
                                                                                               2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     consultation must end by March 4, citing its work load. The Project Committee was
     directed to review and sign off on the Recommendations Report on March 3, the same
     day that it received the last 18 pages of the report.           Appendix C to the
     Recommendations       Report   notes    that   the   TRTFN     disagreed    with   the
     Recommendations Report because of certain “information deficiencies”: Southin J.A.,
     at para. 46. Thus, the TRTFN prepared a minority report that was submitted with the
     majority report to the Ministers on March 12. Shortly thereafter, the project approval
     certification was issued.
39               It is clear that the process of project approval ended more hastily than it
     began. But was the consultation provided by the Province nonetheless adequate? On
     the findings of the courts below, I conclude that it was.
40               The chambers judge was satisfied that any duty to consult was satisfied
     until December 1997, because the members of the TRTFN were full participants in
     the assessment process (para. 132). I would agree. The Province was not required
     to develop special consultation measures to address TRTFN’s concerns, outside of the
     process provided for by the Environmental Assessment Act, which specifically set out
     a scheme that required consultation with affected Aboriginal peoples.
41               The Act permitted the Committee to set its own procedure, which in this
     case involved the formation of working groups and subcommittees, the
     commissioning of studies, and the preparation of a written recommendations report.
     The TRTFN was at the heart of decisions to set up a steering group to deal with
                                                - 23 -
     Aboriginal issues and a subcommittee on the road access proposal. The information
     and analysis required of Redfern were clearly shaped by TRTFN’s concerns. By the
     time that the assessment was concluded, more than one extension of statutory time
                                                                                            2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     limits had been granted, and in the opinion of the project assessment director, “the
     positions of all of the Project Committee members, including the TRTFN had
     crystallized” (Affidavit of Norman Ringstad, at para. 82 (quoted at para. 57 of the
     Court of Appeal’s judgment)). The concerns of the TRTFN were well understood as
     reflected in the Recommendations Report and Project Report, and had been
     meaningfully discussed. The Province had thoroughly fulfilled its duty to consult.
42               As discussed in Haida, the process of consultation may lead to a duty to
     accommodate Aboriginal concerns by adapting decisions or policies in response. The
     purpose of s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 is to facilitate the ultimate
     reconciliation of prior Aboriginal occupation with de facto Crown sovereignty.
     Pending settlement, the Crown is bound by its honour to balance societal and
     Aboriginal interests in making decisions that may affect Aboriginal claims. The
     Crown may be required to make decisions in the face of disagreement as to the
     adequacy of its response to Aboriginal concerns. Balance and compromise will then
     be necessary.
43               The TRTFN in this case disputes the adequacy of the accommodation
     ultimately provided by the terms of the Project Approval Certificate. It argues that
     the Certificate should not have been issued until its concerns were addressed to its
     satisfaction, particularly with regard to the establishment of baseline information.
44               With respect, I disagree. Within the terms of the process provided for
     project approval certification under the Act, TRTFN concerns were adequately
                                                  - 24 -
     accommodated. In addition to the discussion in the minority report, the majority
     report thoroughly identified the TRTFN’s concerns and recommended mitigation
     strategies, which were adopted into the terms and conditions of certification. These
                                                                                                  2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     mitigation strategies included further directions to Redfern to develop baseline
     information, and recommendations regarding future management and closure of the
     road.
45               Project approval certification is simply one stage in the process by which
     a development moves forward. In Haida, the Province argued that although no
     consultation occurred at all at the disputed, “strategic” stage, opportunities existed for
     Haida input at a future “operational” level. That can be distinguished from the
     situation in this case, in which the TRTFN was consulted throughout the certification
     process and its concerns accommodated.
46               The Project Committee concluded that some outstanding TRTFN concerns
     could be more effectively considered at the permit stage or at the broader stage of
     treaty negotiations or land use strategy planning. The majority report and terms and
     conditions of the Certificate make it clear that the subsequent permitting process will
     require further information and analysis of Redfern, and that consultation and
     negotiation with the TRTFN may continue to yield accommodation in response. For
     example, more detailed baseline information will be required of Redfern at the permit
     stage, which may lead to adjustments in the road’s course. Further socio-economic
     studies will be undertaken. It was recommended that a joint management authority
     be established. It was also recommended that the TRTFN’s concerns be further
     addressed through negotiation with the Province and through the use of the Province’s
     regulatory powers. The Project Committee, and by extension the Ministers, therefore
     clearly addressed the issue of what accommodation of the TRTFN’s concerns was
                                                 - 25 -
     warranted at this stage of the project, and what other venues would also be
     appropriate for the TRTFN’s continued input. It is expected that, throughout the
     permitting, approval and licensing process, as well as in the development of a land
                                                                                               2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
     use strategy, the Crown will continue to fulfill its honourable duty to consult and, if
     indicated, accommodate the TRTFN.
     IV. Conclusion
47                In summary, I conclude that the consultation and accommodation engaged
     in by the Province prior to issuing the Project Approval Certificate for the Tulsequah
     Chief Mine were adequate to satisfy the honour of the Crown. The appeal is allowed.
     Leave to appeal was granted on terms that the appellants pay the party and party costs
     of the respondents TRTFN and Melvin Jack for the application for leave to appeal and
     for the appeal in any event of the cause. There will be no order as to costs with
     respect to the respondents Redfern Resources Ltd. and Redcorp Ventures Ltd.
                  Appeal allowed.
                  Solicitors for the appellants: Fuller Pearlman & McNeil, Victoria.
                  Solicitors for the respondents Taku River Tlingit First Nation and Melvin
     Jack, on behalf of himself and all other members of the Taku River Tlingit First
     Nation: Pape & Salter, Vancouver.
                  Solicitors for the respondents Redfern Resources Ltd. and Redcorp
     Ventures Ltd. formerly known as Redfern Resources Ltd.: Blake Cassels & Graydon,
     Vancouver.
                                          - 26 -
            Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada: Department
of Justice, Vancouver.
                                                                                      2004 SCC 74 (CanLII)
            Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec: Department
of Justice, Sainte-Foy.
            Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Alberta: Alberta
Justice, Edmonton.
            Solicitors for the interveners Business Council of British Columbia,
British Columbia and Yukon Chamber of Mines, British Columbia Chamber of
Commerce, British Columbia Wildlife Federation, Council of Forest Industries,
Mining Association of British Columbia and Aggregate Producers Association of
British Columbia: Fasken Martineau DuMoulin, Vancouver.
            Solicitors for the intervener Doig River First Nation: Rath & Company,
Priddis, Alberta.
            Solicitors for the intervener First Nations Summit: Braker & Company,
Port Alberni, British Columbia.
            Solicitors for the intervener Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs:
Cook Roberts, Victoria.
Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010
Delgamuukw, also known as Earl Muldoe, suing on his own behalf
and on behalf of all the members of the Houses of Delgamuukw and
Haaxw (and others suing on their own behalf and on behalf
                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
of thirty-eight Gitksan Houses and twelve
Wet’suwet’en Houses as shown in Schedule 1)                     Appellants/
                                                 Respondents on the cross-appeal
v.
Her Majesty The Queen in Right of
the Province of British Columbia                                Respondent/
                                                    Appellant on the cross-appeal
and
The Attorney General of Canada                                  Respondent
and
The First Nations Summit,
the Musqueam Nation et al. (as shown in Schedule 2),
the Westbank First Nation,
the B.C. Cattlemen’s Association et al. (as shown in Schedule 3),
Skeena Cellulose Inc.,
Alcan Aluminum Ltd.                                             Interveners
Indexed as: Delgamuukw v. British Columbia
File No.: 23799.
1997: June 16, 17; 1997: December 11.
                                               -2-
Present: Lamer C.J. and La Forest, L’Heureux-Dubé, Sopinka,* Cory, McLachlin and
Major JJ.
                                                                                               1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia
              Constitutional law -- Aboriginal rights -- Aboriginal land title -- Claim made
for large tract -- Content of aboriginal title -- How aboriginal title protected by s. 35(1)
of Constitution Act, 1982 -- What required to prove aboriginal title -- Whether claim to
self-government made out -- Whether province could extinguish aboriginal rights after
1871, either under own jurisdiction or through the operation of s. 88 of the Indian Act
(incorporating provincial laws of general application by reference) -- Constitution Act,
1982, s. 35(1) -- Indian Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-5, s. 88.
              Constitutional law -- Aboriginal rights -- Aboriginal land title -- Evidence
-- Oral history and native law and tradition -- Weight to be given evidence -- Ability of
Court to interfere with trial judge’s factual findings.
              Courts -- Procedure -- Land claims -- Aboriginal title and self-government
-- Claim altered but no formal amendments to pleadings made -- Whether pleadings
precluded the Court from entertaining claims.
              The appellants, all Gitksan or Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs, both
individually and on behalf of their “Houses”, claimed separate portions of 58,000 square
kilometres in British Columbia. For the purpose of the claim, this area was divided into
133 individual territories, claimed by the 71 Houses. This represents all of the
Wet’suwet’en people, and all but 12 of the Gitksan Houses. Their claim was originally
    *
        Sopinka J. took no part in this judgment.
                                               -3-
for “ownership” of the territory and “jurisdiction” over it. (At this Court, this was
transformed into, primarily, a claim for aboriginal title over the land in question.) British
Columbia counterclaimed for a declaration that the appellants have no right or interest
                                                                                                 1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
in and to the territory or alternatively, that the appellants’ cause of action ought to be for
compensation from the Government of Canada.
             At trial, the appellants’ claim was based on their historical use and
“ownership” of one or more of the territories. In addition, the Gitksan Houses have an
“adaawk” which is a collection of sacred oral tradition about their ancestors, histories
and territories. The Wet’suwet’en each have a “kungax” which is a spiritual song or
dance or performance which ties them to their land. Both of these were entered as
evidence on behalf of the appellants. The most significant evidence of spiritual
connection between the Houses and their territory was a feast hall where the Gitksan and
Wet’suwet’en people tell and retell their stories and identify their territories to remind
themselves of the sacred connection that they have with their lands. The feast has a
ceremonial purpose but is also used for making important decisions.
             The trial judge did not accept the appellants’ evidence of oral history of
attachment to the land. He dismissed the action against Canada, dismissed the plaintiffs’
claims for ownership and jurisdiction and for aboriginal rights in the territory, granted
a declaration that the plaintiffs were entitled to use unoccupied or vacant land subject to
the general law of the province, dismissed the claim for damages and dismissed the
province’s counterclaim. No order for costs was made. On appeal, the original claim
was altered in two different ways. First, the claims for ownership and jurisdiction were
replaced with claims for aboriginal title and self-government, respectively. Second, the
individual claims by each House were amalgamated into two communal claims, one
                                               -4-
advanced on behalf of each nation. There were no formal amendments to the pleadings
to this effect. The appeal was dismissed by a majority of the Court of Appeal.
                                                                                                1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
              The principal issues on the appeal, some of which raised a number of
sub-issues, were as follows: (1) whether the pleadings precluded the Court from
entertaining claims for aboriginal title and self-government; (2) what was the ability of
this Court to interfere with the factual findings made by the trial judge; (3) what is the
content of aboriginal title, how is it protected by s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982,
and what is required for its proof; (4) whether the appellants made out a claim to
self-government; and, (5) whether the province had the power to extinguish aboriginal
rights after 1871, either under its own jurisdiction or through the operation of s. 88 of the
Indian Act.
              Held: The appeal should be allowed in part and the cross-appeal should be
dismissed.
Whether the Claims Were Properly Before the Court
              Per Lamer C.J. and Cory, McLachlin, and Major JJ.: The claims were
properly before the Court. Although the pleadings were not formally amended, the trial
judge did allow a de facto amendment to permit a claim for aboriginal rights other than
ownership and jurisdiction. The respondents did not appeal this de facto amendment and
the trial judge’s decision on this point must accordingly stand.
              No amendment was made with respect to the amalgamation of the individual
claims brought by the individual Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en Houses into two collective
claims, one by each nation, for aboriginal title and self-government. The collective
                                             -5-
claims were simply not in issue at trial and to frame the case on appeal in a different
manner would retroactively deny the respondents the opportunity to know the appellants’
case.
                                                                                            1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
             A new trial is necessary. First, the defect in the pleadings prevented the
Court from considering the merits of this appeal. The parties at a new trial would decide
whether any amendment was necessary to make the pleadings conform with the other
evidence. Then, too, appellate courts, absent a palpable and overriding error, should not
substitute their own findings of fact even when the trial judge misapprehended the law
which was applied to those facts. Appellate intervention is warranted, however, when
the trial court fails to appreciate the evidentiary difficulties inherent in adjudicating
aboriginal claims when applying the rules of evidence and interpreting the evidence
before it.
             Per La Forest and L’Heureux-Dubé JJ.:          The amalgamation of the
appellants’ individual claims technically prevents a consideration of the merits.
However, there is a more substantive problem with the pleadings. The appellants sought
a declaration of “aboriginal title” but attempted, in essence, to prove that they had
complete control over the territory. It follows that what the appellants sought by way of
declaration and what they set out to prove by way of the evidence were two different
matters. A new trial should be ordered.
             McLachlin J. was in substantial agreement.
                                              -6-
The Ability of the Court to Interfere with the Trial Judge’s Factual Findings
             Per Lamer C.J. and Cory, McLachlin and Major JJ.: The factual findings
                                                                                              1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
made at trial could not stand because the trial judge’s treatment of the various kinds of
oral histories did not satisfy the principles laid down in R. v. Van der Peet. The oral
histories were used in an attempt to establish occupation and use of the disputed territory
which is an essential requirement for aboriginal title. The trial judge refused to admit
or gave no independent weight to these oral histories and then concluded that the
appellants had not demonstrated the requisite degree of occupation for “ownership”.
Had the oral histories been correctly assessed, the conclusions on these issues of fact
might have been very different.
The Content of Aboriginal Title, How It Is Protected by s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act,
1982, and the Requirements Necessary to Prove It
             Per Lamer C.J. and Cory, McLachlin and Major JJ.: Aboriginal title
encompasses the right to exclusive use and occupation of the land held pursuant to that
title for a variety of purposes, which need not be aspects of those aboriginal practices,
customs and traditions which are integral to distinctive aboriginal cultures. The
protected uses must not be irreconcilable with the nature of the group’s attachment to
that land.
             Aboriginal title is sui generis, and so distinguished from other proprietary
interests, and characterized by several dimensions. It is inalienable and cannot be
transferred, sold or surrendered to anyone other than the Crown. Another dimension of
aboriginal title is its sources: its recognition by the Royal Proclamation, 1763 and the
relationship between the common law which recognizes occupation as proof of
                                              -7-
possession and systems of aboriginal law pre-existing assertion of British sovereignty.
Finally, aboriginal title is held communally.
                                                                                               1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
            The exclusive right to use the land is not restricted to the right to engage in
activities which are aspects of aboriginal practices, customs and traditions integral to
the claimant group’s distinctive aboriginal culture. Canadian jurisprudence on aboriginal
title frames the “right to occupy and possess” in broad terms and, significantly, is not
qualified by the restriction that use be tied to practice, custom or tradition. The nature
of the Indian interest in reserve land which has been found to be the same as the interest
in tribal lands is very broad and incorporates present-day needs. Finally, aboriginal title
encompasses mineral rights and lands held pursuant to aboriginal title should be capable
of exploitation. Such a use is certainly not a traditional one.
            The content of aboriginal title contains an inherent limit in that lands so held
cannot be used in a manner that is irreconcilable with the nature of the claimants’
attachment to those lands. This inherent limit arises because the relationship of an
aboriginal community with its land should not be prevented from continuing into the
future. Occupancy is determined by reference to the activities that have taken place on
the land and the uses to which the land has been put by the particular group. If lands are
so occupied, there will exist a special bond between the group and the land in question
such that the land will be part of the definition of the group’s distinctive culture. Land
held by virtue of aboriginal title may not be alienated because the land has an inherent
and unique value in itself, which is enjoyed by the community with aboriginal title to it.
The community cannot put the land to uses which would destroy that value. Finally, the
importance of the continuity of the relationship between an aboriginal community and
its land, and the non-economic or inherent value of that land, should not be taken to
detract from the possibility of surrender to the Crown in exchange for valuable
                                               -8-
consideration. On the contrary, the idea of surrender reinforces the conclusion that
aboriginal title is limited. If aboriginal peoples wish to use their lands in a way that
aboriginal title does not permit, then they must surrender those lands and convert them
                                                                                                1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
into non-title lands to do so.
             Aboriginal title at common law was recognized well before 1982 and is
accordingly protected in its full form by s. 35(1). The constitutionalization of common
law aboriginal rights, however, does not mean that those rights exhaust the content of s.
35(1). The existence of an aboriginal right at common law is sufficient, but not
necessary, for the recognition and affirmation of that right by s. 35(1).
             Constitutionally recognized aboriginal rights fall along a spectrum with
respect to their degree of connection with the land. At the one end are those aboriginal
rights which are practices, customs and traditions integral to the distinctive aboriginal
culture of the group claiming the right but where the use and occupation of the land
where the activity is taking place is not sufficient to support a claim of title to the land.
In the middle are activities which, out of necessity, take place on land and indeed, might
be intimately related to a particular piece of land. Although an aboriginal group may not
be able to demonstrate title to the land, it may nevertheless have a site-specific right to
engage in a particular activity. At the other end of the spectrum is aboriginal title itself
which confers more than the right to engage in site-specific activities which are aspects
of the practices, customs and traditions of distinctive aboriginal cultures. Site-specific
rights can be made out even if title cannot. Because aboriginal rights can vary with
respect to their degree of connection with the land, some aboriginal groups may be
unable to make out a claim to title, but will nevertheless possess aboriginal rights that
are recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1), including site-specific rights to engage in
particular activities.
                                                -9-
             Aboriginal title is a right to the land itself. That land may be used, subject
to the inherent limitations of aboriginal title, for a variety of activities, none of which
                                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
need be individually protected as aboriginal rights under s. 35(1). Those activities are
parasitic on the underlying title. Section 35(1), since its purpose is to reconcile the prior
presence of aboriginal peoples with the assertion of Crown sovereignty, must recognize
and affirm both aspects of that prior presence -- first, the occupation of land, and second,
the prior social organization and distinctive cultures of aboriginal peoples on that land.
             The test for the identification of aboriginal rights to engage in particular
activities and the test for the identification of aboriginal title, although broadly similar,
are distinct in two ways. First, under the test for aboriginal title, the requirement that the
land be integral to the distinctive culture of the claimants is subsumed by the requirement
of occupancy. Second, whereas the time for the identification of aboriginal rights is the
time of first contact, the time for the identification of aboriginal title is the time at which
the Crown asserted sovereignty over the land.
             In order to establish a claim to aboriginal title, the aboriginal group asserting
the claim must establish that it occupied the lands in question at the time at which the
Crown asserted sovereignty over the land subject to the title. In the context of aboriginal
title, sovereignty is the appropriate time period to consider for several reasons. First,
from a theoretical standpoint, aboriginal title arises out of prior occupation of the land
by aboriginal peoples and out of the relationship between the common law and
pre-existing systems of aboriginal law. Aboriginal title is a burden on the Crown’s
underlying title. The Crown, however, did not gain this title until it asserted sovereignty
and it makes no sense to speak of a burden on the underlying title before that title
existed. Aboriginal title crystallized at the time sovereignty was asserted. Second,
                                             - 10 -
aboriginal title does not raise the problem of distinguishing between distinctive, integral
aboriginal practices, customs and traditions and those influenced or introduced by
European contact. Under common law, the act of occupation or possession is sufficient
                                                                                              1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
to ground aboriginal title and it is not necessary to prove that the land was a distinctive
or integral part of the aboriginal society before the arrival of Europeans. Finally, the
date of sovereignty is more certain than the date of first contact.
            Both the common law and the aboriginal perspective on land should be taken
into account in establishing the proof of occupancy. At common law, the fact of physical
occupation is proof of possession at law, which in turn will ground title to the land.
Physical occupation may be established in a variety of ways, ranging from the
construction of dwellings through cultivation and enclosure of fields to regular use of
definite tracts of land for hunting, fishing or otherwise exploiting its resources. In
considering whether occupation sufficient to ground title is established, the group’s size,
manner of life, material resources, and technological abilities, and the character of the
lands claimed must be taken into account. Given the occupancy requirement, it was not
necessary to include as part of the test for aboriginal title whether a group demonstrated
a connection with the piece of land as being of central significance to its distinctive
culture. Ultimately, the question of physical occupation is one of fact to be determined
at trial.
            If present occupation is relied on as proof of occupation pre-sovereignty,
there must be a continuity between present and pre-sovereignty occupation. Since
conclusive evidence of pre-sovereignty occupation may be difficult, an aboriginal
community may provide evidence of present occupation as proof of pre-sovereignty
occupation in support of a claim to aboriginal title. An unbroken chain of continuity need
not be established between present and prior occupation. The fact that the nature of
                                              - 11 -
occupation has changed would not ordinarily preclude a claim for aboriginal title, as long
as a substantial connection between the people and the land is maintained. The only
limitation on this principle might be that the land not be used in ways which are
                                                                                                1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
inconsistent with continued use by future generations of aboriginals.
            At sovereignty, occupation must have been exclusive. This requirement
flows from the definition of aboriginal title itself, which is defined in terms of the right
to exclusive use and occupation of land. The test must take into account the context of
the aboriginal society at the time of sovereignty. The requirement of exclusive
occupancy and the possibility of joint title can be reconciled by recognizing that joint
title can arise from shared exclusivity. As well, shared, non-exclusive aboriginal rights
short of aboriginal title but tied to the land and permitting a number of uses can be
established if exclusivity cannot be proved. The common law should develop to
recognize aboriginal rights as they were recognized by either de facto practice or by
aboriginal systems of governance.
            Per La Forest and L’Heureux-Dubé JJ.: “Aboriginal title” is based on the
continued occupation and use of the land as part of the aboriginal peoples’ traditional
way of life. This sui generis interest is not equated with fee simple ownership; nor can
it be described with reference to traditional property law concepts. It is personal in that
it is generally inalienable except to the Crown and, in dealing with this interest, the
Crown is subject to a fiduciary obligation to treat the aboriginal peoples fairly. There
is reluctance to define more precisely the right of aboriginal peoples to live on their lands
as their forefathers had lived.
            The approach to defining the aboriginal right of occupancy is highly
contextual. A distinction must be made between (1) the recognition of a general right
                                                - 12 -
to occupy and possess ancestral lands and (2) the recognition of a discrete right to
engage in an aboriginal activity in a particular area. The latter has been defined as the
traditional use, by a tribe of Indians, that has continued from pre-contact times of a
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
particular area for a particular purpose. By contrast, a general claim to occupy and
possess vast tracts of territory is the right to use the land for a variety of activities related
to the aboriginal society’s habits and mode of life. As well, in defining the nature of
“aboriginal title”, reference need not be made to statutory provisions and regulations
dealing with reserve lands.
             In defining the nature of “aboriginal title”, reference need not be made to
statutory provisions and regulations dealing specifically with reserve lands. Though the
interest of an Indian band in a reserve has been found to be derived from, and to be of
the same nature as, the interest of an aboriginal society in its traditional tribal lands, it
does not follow that specific statutory provisions governing reserve lands should
automatically apply to traditional tribal lands.
             The “key” factors for recognizing aboriginal rights under s. 35(1) are met in
the present case. First, the nature of an aboriginal claim must be identified precisely
with regard to particular practices, customs and traditions. When dealing with a claim
of “aboriginal title”, the court will focus on the occupation and use of the land as part of
the aboriginal society’s traditional way of life.
             Second, an aboriginal society must specify the area that has been
continuously used and occupied by identifying general boundaries. Exclusivity means
that an aboriginal group must show that a claimed territory is indeed its ancestral
territory and not the territory of an unconnected aboriginal society. It is possible that two
                                             - 13 -
or more aboriginal groups may have occupied the same territory and therefore a finding
of joint occupancy would not be precluded.
                                                                                              1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
            Third, the aboriginal right of possession is based on the continued occupation
and use of traditional tribal lands since the assertion of Crown sovereignty. However,
the date of sovereignty may not be the only relevant time to consider. Continuity may
still exist where the present occupation of one area is connected to the pre-sovereignty
occupation of another area. Also, aboriginal peoples claiming a right of possession may
provide evidence of present occupation as proof of prior occupation. Further, it is not
necessary to establish an unbroken chain of continuity.
            Fourth, if aboriginal peoples continue to occupy and use the land as part of
their traditional way of life, the land is of central significance to them. Aboriginal
occupancy refers not only to the presence of aboriginal peoples in villages or
permanently settled areas but also to the use of adjacent lands and even remote territories
used to pursue a traditional mode of life. Occupancy is part of aboriginal culture in a
broad sense and is, therefore, absorbed in the notion of distinctiveness. The Royal
Proclamation, 1763 supports this approach to occupancy.
            McLachlin J. was in substantial agreement.
Infringements of Aboriginal Title: The Test of Justification
            Per Lamer C.J. and Cory, McLachlin and Major JJ.: Constitutionally
recognized aboriginal rights are not absolute and may be infringed by the federal and
provincial governments if the infringement (1) furthers a compelling and substantial
legislative objective and (2) is consistent with the special fiduciary relationship between
                                               - 14 -
the Crown and the aboriginal peoples. The development of agriculture, forestry, mining
and hydroelectric power, the general economic development of the interior of British
Columbia, protection of the environment or endangered species, and the building of
                                                                                                 1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
infrastructure and the settlement of foreign populations to support those aims, are
objectives consistent with this purpose. Three aspects of aboriginal title are relevant to
the second part of the test. First, the right to exclusive use and occupation of land is
relevant to the degree of scrutiny of the infringing measure or action. Second, the right
to choose to what uses land can be put, subject to the ultimate limit that those uses
cannot destroy the ability of the land to sustain future generations of aboriginal peoples,
suggests that the fiduciary relationship between the Crown and aboriginal peoples may
be satisfied by the involvement of aboriginal peoples in decisions taken with respect to
their lands. There is always a duty of consultation and, in most cases, the duty will be
significantly deeper than mere consultation. And third, lands held pursuant to aboriginal
title have an inescapable economic component which suggests that compensation is
relevant to the question of justification as well. Fair compensation will ordinarily be
required when aboriginal title is infringed.
              Per La Forest and L’Heureux-Dubé JJ.: Rights that are recognized and
affirmed are not absolute. Government regulation can therefore infringe upon aboriginal
rights if it meets the test of justification under s. 35(1). The approach is highly
contextual.
              The general economic development of the interior of British Columbia,
through agriculture, mining, forestry and hydroelectric power, as well as the related
building of infrastructure and settlement of foreign populations, are valid legislative
objectives that, in principle, satisfy the first part of the justification analysis. Under the
second part, these legislative objectives are subject to accommodation of the aboriginal
                                             - 15 -
peoples’ interests. This accommodation must always be in accordance with the honour
and good faith of the Crown. One aspect of accommodation of “aboriginal title” entails
notifying and consulting aboriginal peoples with respect to the development of the
                                                                                             1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
affected territory. Another aspect is fair compensation.
            McLachlin J. was in substantial agreement.
Self-Government
            Per The Court: The errors of fact made by the trial judge, and the resultant
need for a new trial, made it impossible for this Court to determine whether the claim to
self-government had been made out.
Extinguishment
            Per Lamer C.J. and Cory, McLachlin and Major JJ.: Section 91(24) of the
Constitution Act, 1867 (the federal power to legislate in respect of Indians) carries with
it the jurisdiction to legislate in relation to aboriginal title, and by implication, the
jurisdiction to extinguish it. The ownership by the provincial Crown (under s. 109) of
lands held pursuant to aboriginal title is separate from jurisdiction over those lands.
Notwithstanding s. 91(24), provincial laws of general application apply proprio vigore
to Indians and Indian lands.
            A provincial law of general application cannot extinguish aboriginal rights.
First, a law of general application cannot, by definition, meet the standard “of clear and
plain intention” needed to extinguish aboriginal rights without being ultra vires the
province. Second, s. 91(24) protects a core of federal jurisdiction even from provincial
                                             - 16 -
laws of general application through the operation of the doctrine of interjurisdictional
immunity. That core has been described as matters touching on “Indianness” or the
“core of Indianness”.
                                                                                             1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
            Provincial laws which would otherwise not apply to Indians proprio vigore
are allowed to do so by s. 88 of the Indian Act which incorporates by reference
provincial laws of general application. This provision, however, does not “invigorate”
provincial laws which are invalid because they are in relation to Indians and Indian
lands.
            Per La Forest and L’Heureux-Dubé JJ.: The province had no authority to
extinguish aboriginal rights either under the Constitution Act, 1867 or by virtue of s. 88
of the Indian Act.
            McLachlin J. was in substantial agreement.
Cases Cited
By Lamer C.J.
            Considered: R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075; R. v. Van der Peet,
[1996] 2 S.C.R. 507; R. v. N.T.C. Smokehouse Ltd., [1996] 2 S.C.R. 672; R. v. Gladstone,
[1996] 2 S.C.R. 723; R. v. Adams, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 101; R. v. Côté, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 139;
St. Catherine’s Milling and Lumber Co. v. The Queen (1888), 14 A.C. 46, aff’g sub nom.
St. Catharines Milling and Lumber Co. v. The Queen (1887), 13 S.C.R. 577; Calder v.
Attorney-General of British Columbia, [1973] S.C.R. 313; Baker Lake v. Minister of
Indian Affairs and Northern Development, [1980] 1 F.C. 518; Guerin v. The Queen,
                                            - 17 -
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 335; referred to: R. v. Pamajewon, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 821; R. v. Sioui,
[1990] 1 S.C.R. 1025; Mabo v. Queensland (1992), 107 A.L.R. 1; Four B Manufacturing
Ltd. v. United Garment Workers of America, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 1031; Natural Parents v.
                                                                                           1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
Superintendent of Child Welfare, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 751; Dick v. The Queen, [1985] 2
S.C.R. 309; Stein v. The Ship “Kathy K”, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802; N.V. Bocimar S.A. v.
Century Insurance Co. of Canada, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 1247; Schwartz v. Canada, [1996]
1 S.C.R. 254; Chartier v. Attorney General of Quebec, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 474; Kruger v.
The Queen, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 104; R. v. Taylor (1981), 62 C.C.C. (2d) 227; Simon v. The
Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 387; Uukw v. R., [1987] 6 W.W.R. 155; Canadian Pacific Ltd.
v. Paul, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 654; Roberts v. Canada, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 322; Blueberry River
Indian Band v. Canada (Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development),
[1995] 4 S.C.R. 344; Mitchell v. Peguis Indian Band, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 85; St. Mary’s
Indian Band v. Cranbrook (City), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 657; United States v. Santa Fe Pacific
Railroad Co., 314 U.S. 339 (1941); R. v. Sutherland, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 451; R. v. Francis,
[1988] 1 S.C.R. 1025; Derrickson v. Derrickson, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 285.
By La Forest J.
            Considered: Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia, [1973] S.C.R.
313; Guerin v. The Queen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335; Canadian Pacific Ltd. v. Paul, [1988]
2 S.C.R. 654; R. v. Van der Peet, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507; R. v. Côté, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 139;
R. v. Gladstone, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723; R. v. N.T.C. Smokehouse Ltd., [1996] 2 S.C.R. 672;
R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075; referred to: R. v. Wesley, [1932] 4 D.L.R. 774;
Sikyea v. The Queen, [1964] S.C.R. 642, aff’g R. v. Sikyea (1964), 43 D.L.R. (2d) 150.
                                             - 18 -
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Constitution Act, 1867, ss. 91(24), 109.
                                                                                        1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
Constitution Act, 1982, s. 35(1).
Indian Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-5, ss. 18, 88.
Indian Oil and Gas Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-7, s. 6(2).
Royal Proclamation, 1763, R.S.C., 1985, App. II, No.1.
Treaty Between Her Majesty And The United Stated Of America, For The Settlement Of
     The Oregon Boundary (Oregon Boundary Treaty, 1846), TS 120.
Authors Cited
Burn, E. H. Cheshire and Burn’s Modern Law of Real Property, 14th ed. London:
     Butterworths, 1988.
Canada. Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. Report of the Royal Commission
    on Aboriginal Peoples, vols. 1 (Looking Forward, Looking Back) and 2
    (Restructuring the Relationship). Ottawa: The Commission, 1996.
Gagne, Jocelyn. “The Content of Aboriginal Title at Common Law: A Look at the
    Nishga Claim” (1982-83), 47 Sask. L. Rev. 309.
Hogg, Peter W. Constitutional Law of Canada, 3rd ed. Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell,
    1992.
Howard, Michael Newman, Peter Crane and Daniel A. Hochberg. Phipson on Evidence,
    14th ed. London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1990.
Macklem, Patrick. “First Nations Self-Government and the Borders of the Canadian
    Legal Imagination” (1991), 36 McGill L.J. 382.
McLeod, Clay. “The Oral Histories of Canada’s Northern People, Anglo-Canadian
    Evidence Law, and Canada’s Fiduciary Duty to First Nations: Breaking Down the
    Barriers of the Past” (1992), 30 Alta. L. Rev. 1276.
McNeil, Kent. Common Law Aboriginal Title. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
McNeil, Kent. “The Constitutional Rights of the Aboriginal Peoples of Canada” (1982),
   4 Sup. Ct. L. Rev. 255.
McNeil, Kent. “The Meaning of Aboriginal Title”. In Michael Asch, ed., Aboriginal
   and Treaty Rights in Canada. Vancouver: U.B.C. Press, 1997.
                                              - 19 -
Megarry, Robert E., and H. W. R. Wade. The Law of Real Property, 4th ed. London:
    Stevens, 1975.
O’Reilly, James. “La Loi constitutionnelle de 1982, droit des autochtones” (1984), 25
    C. de D. 125.
                                                                                            1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
Pentney, William. “The Rights of the Aboriginal Peoples of Canada in the Constitution
     Act, 1982 Part II -- Section 35: The Substantive Guarantee” (1988), 22 U.B.C. L.
     Rev. 207.
Sanders, Douglas. “Pre-Existing Rights: The Aboriginal Peoples of Canada”. In
    Gérald-A. Beaudoin and Ed Ratushny, eds., The Canadian Charter of Rights and
    Freedoms, 2nd ed. Toronto: Carswell, 1989, 707.
Sanders, Douglas. “The Rights of the Aboriginal Peoples of Canada” (1983), 61 Can.
    Bar Rev. 314.
Slattery, Brian. Ancestral Lands, Alien Laws: Judicial Perspectives on Aboriginal Title.
      Saskatoon: University of Saskatchewan Native Law Centre, 1983.
Slattery, Brian. “The Constitutional Guarantee of Aboriginal and Treaty Rights”
(1982-83), 8 Queen’s L.J. 232.
Slattery, Brian. “Understanding Aboriginal Rights” (1987), 66 Can. Bar Rev. 727.
                APPEAL and CROSS-APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia
Court of Appeal (1993), 30 B.C.A.C. 1, 49 W.A.C. 1, 104 D.L.R. (4th) 470, [1993] 5
W.W.R. 97, [1993] 5 C.N.L.R. 1, [1993] B.C.J. No. 1395 (QL), varying an order of
McEachern C.J., [1991] 3 W.W.R. 97, [1991] 5 C.N.L.R. xiii, (1991), 79 D.L.R. (4th)
185, [1991] B.C.J. No. 525 (QL), and dismissing British Columbia’s cross-appeal as
abandoned. Appeal allowed in part; cross-appeal dismissed.
                Stuart Rush, Q.C., Peter Grant, Michael Jackson, Louise Mandell and David
Paterson, for the appellants and respondents on the cross-appeal, the Gitksan Hereditary
Chiefs et al.
                                           - 20 -
            Marvin R. V. Storrow, Q.C., Joanne R. Lysyk and Joseph C. McArthur, for
the appellants and respondents on the cross-appeal, the Wet’suwet’en Hereditary Chiefs
et al.
                                                                                           1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
            Joseph J. Arvay, Q.C., Mark G. Underhill and Brenda Edwards, for the
respondent and appellant on the cross-appeal, Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the
Province of British Columbia.
            Graham Garton, Q.C., Judith Bowers, Q.C., Murray T. Wolf and Geoffrey
S. Lester, for the respondent the Attorney General of Canada.
            Arthur Pape, Harry A. Slade, Peter Hogg and Jean Teillet, for the intervener
the First Nations Summit.
            Jack Woodward and Albert C. Peeling, for the intervener the Westbank First
Nation.
            Marvin R. V. Storrow, Q.C., Joanne R. Lysyk and Joseph C. McArthur, for
the interveners the Musqueam Nation et al.
            J. Keith Lowes, for the interveners the B.C. Cattlemen’s Association et al.
            Charles F. Willms, for the intervener Skeena Cellulose Inc.
            J. Edward Gouge, Q.C., and Jill M. Marks, for the intervener Alcan
Aluminum Ltd.
                                                  - 21 -
    //The Chief Justice//
                The judgment of Lamer C.J. and Cory and Major JJ. was delivered by
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                THE CHIEF JUSTICE --
    I. Introduction
1               This appeal is the latest in a series of cases in which it has fallen to this
    Court to interpret and apply the guarantee of existing aboriginal rights found in s. 35(1)
    of the Constitution Act, 1982. Although that line of decisions, commencing with R. v.
    Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, proceeding through the Van der Peet trilogy (R. v. Van
    der Peet, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507, R. v. N.T.C. Smokehouse Ltd., [1996] 2 S.C.R. 672, and
    R. v. Gladstone, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723), and ending in R. v. Pamajewon, [1996] 2 S.C.R.
    821, R. v. Adams, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 101, and R. v. Côté, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 139, have laid
    down the jurisprudential framework for s. 35(1), this appeal raises a set of interrelated
    and novel questions which revolve around a single issue -- the nature and scope of the
    constitutional protection afforded by s. 35(1) to common law aboriginal title.
2               In Adams, and in the companion decision in Côté, I considered and rejected
    the proposition that claims to aboriginal rights must also be grounded in an underlying
    claim to aboriginal title. But I held, nevertheless, that aboriginal title was a distinct
    species of aboriginal right that was recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1). Since
    aboriginal title was not being claimed in those earlier appeals, it was unnecessary to say
    more. This appeal demands, however, that the Court now explore and elucidate the
    implications of the constitutionalization of aboriginal title. The first is the specific
    content of aboriginal title, a question which this Court has not yet definitively addressed,
                                                    - 22 -
    either at common law or under s. 35(1). The second is the related question of the test for
    the proof of title, which, whatever its content, is a right in land, and its relationship to the
    definition of the aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1) in Van der Peet
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
    in terms of activities. The third is whether aboriginal title, as a right in land, mandates
    a modified approach to the test of justification first laid down in Sparrow and elaborated
    upon in Gladstone.
3                In addition to the relationship between aboriginal title and s. 35(1), this
    appeal also raises an important practical problem relevant to the proof of aboriginal title
    which is endemic to aboriginal rights litigation generally — the treatment of the oral
    histories of Canada’s aboriginal peoples by the courts. In Van der Peet, I held that the
    common law rules of evidence should be adapted to take into account the sui generis
    nature of aboriginal rights. In this appeal, the Court must address what specific form
    those modifications must take.
4                Finally, given the existence of aboriginal title in British Columbia, this Court
    must address, on cross-appeal, the question of whether the province of British
    Columbia, from the time it joined Confederation in 1871, until the entrenchment of s.
    35(1) in 1982, had jurisdiction to extinguish the rights of aboriginal peoples, including
    aboriginal title, in that province. Moreover, if the province was without this jurisdiction,
    a further question arises -- whether provincial laws of general application that would
    otherwise be inapplicable to Indians and Indian lands could nevertheless extinguish
    aboriginal rights through the operation of s. 88 of the Indian Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-5.
    II. Facts
                                                 - 23 -
5                At the British Columbia Supreme Court, McEachern C.J. heard 374 days of
    evidence and argument. Some of that evidence was not in a form which is familiar to
    common law courts, including oral histories and legends. Another significant part was
                                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
    the evidence of experts in genealogy, linguistics, archeology, anthropology, and
    geography.
6                The trial judge’s decision (reported at [1991] 3 W.W.R. 97) is nearly 400
    pages long, with another 100 pages of schedules. Although I am of the view that there
    must be a new trial, I nevertheless find it useful to summarize some of the relevant facts,
    so as to put the remainder of the judgment into context.
    A. The Claim at Trial
7                This action was commenced by the appellants, who are all Gitksan or
    Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs, who, both individually and on behalf of their “Houses”
    claimed separate portions of 58,000 square kilometres in British Columbia. For the
    purpose of the claim, this area was divided into 133 individual territories, claimed by the
    71 Houses. This represents all of the Wet’suwet’en people, and all but 12 of the Gitksan
    Houses. Their claim was originally for “ownership” of the territory and “jurisdiction”
    over it. (At this Court, this was transformed into, primarily, a claim for aboriginal title
    over the land in question.) The province of British Columbia counterclaimed for a
    declaration that the appellants have no right or interest in and to the territory or
    alternatively, that the appellants’ cause of action ought to be for compensation from the
    Government of Canada.
    B. The Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en Peoples
                                                  - 24 -
                 (1) Demography
8                The Gitksan consist of approximately 4,000 to 5,000 persons, most of whom
                                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     now live in the territory claimed, which is generally the watersheds of the north and
     central Skeena, Nass and Babine Rivers and their tributaries. The Wet’suwet’en consist
     of approximately 1,500 to 2,000 persons, who also predominantly live in the territory
     claimed. This territory is mainly in the watersheds of the Bulkley and parts of the
     Fraser-Nechako River systems and their tributaries. It lies immediately east and south
     of the Gitksan.
9                Of course, the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en are not the only people living in
     the claimed territory. As noted by both McEachern C.J. at trial (at p. 440) and Lambert
     J.A. on appeal (at p. 243), there are other aboriginals who live in the claimed territory,
     notably the Carrier-Sekani and Nishga peoples. Some of these people have unsettled
     land claims overlapping with the territory at issue here. Moreover, there are also
     numerous non-aboriginals living there. McEachern C.J. found that, at the time of the
     trial, the non-aboriginal population in the territory was over 30,000.
                 (2) History
10               There were numerous theories of the history of the Gitksan and
     Wet’suwet’en peoples before the trial judge. His conclusion from the evidence was that
     their ancestors migrated from Asia, probably through Alaska, and spread south and west
     into the areas which they found to be liveable. There was archeological evidence, which
     he accepted, that there was some form of human habitation in the territory and its
     surrounding areas from 3,500 to 6,000 years ago, and intense occupation of the
     Hagwilget Canyon site (near Hazelton), prior to about 4,000 to 3,500 years ago. This
                                                 - 25 -
     occupation was mainly in or near villages on the Skeena River, the Babine River or the
     Bulkley River, where salmon, the staple of their diet, was easily obtainable. The other
     parts of the territory surrounding and between their villages and rivers were used for
                                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     hunting and gathering for both food and ceremonial purposes. The scope of this hunting
     and gathering area depended largely on the availability of the required materials in the
     areas around the villages. Prior to the commencement of the fur trade, there was no
     reason to travel far from the villages for anything other than their subsistence
     requirements.
                 (3) North American Exploration
11               There was little European influence in western Canada until the arrival of
     Capt. Cook at Nootka on Vancouver Island in 1778, which led to the sea otter hunt in the
     north Pacific. This influence grew with the establishment of the first Hudson’s Bay
     trading post west of the Rockies (although east of the territories claimed) by Simon
     Fraser in 1805-1806. Trapping for the commercial fur trade was not an aboriginal
     practice, but rather one influenced by European contact. The trial judge held that the
     time of direct contact between the Aboriginal Peoples in the claimed territory was
     approximately 1820, after the trader William Brown arrived and Hudson’s Bay had
     merged with the North West Company.
                 (4) Present Social Organization
12               McEachern C.J. set out a description of the present social organization of the
     appellants. In his opinion, this was necessary because “one of the ingredients of
     aboriginal land claims is that they arise from long-term communal rather than personal
     use or possession of land” (at p. 147). The fundamental premise of both the Gitksan and
                                                    - 26 -
     the Wet’suwet’en peoples is that they are divided into clans and Houses. Every person
     born of a Gitksan or Wet’suwet’en woman is automatically a member of his or her
     mother’s House and clan. There are four Gitksan and four Wet’suwet’en clans, which
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     are subdivided into Houses. Each House has one or more Hereditary Chief as its titular
     head, selected by the elders of their House, as well as possibly the Head Chief of the
     other Houses of the clan. There is no head chief for the clans, but there is a ranking
     order of precedence within communities or villages, where one House or clan may be
     more prominent than others.
13                At trial, the appellants’ claim was based on their historical use and
     “ownership” of one or more of the territories. The trial judge held that these are marked,
     in some cases, by physical and tangible indicators of their association with the territories.
     He cited as examples totem poles with the Houses’ crests carved, or distinctive regalia.
     In addition, the Gitksan Houses have an “adaawk” which is a collection of sacred oral
     tradition about their ancestors, histories and territories. The Wet’suwet’en each have a
     “kungax” which is a spiritual song or dance or performance which ties them to their land.
     Both of these were entered as evidence on behalf of the appellants (see my discussion
     of the trial judge’s view of this evidence, infra).
14                The most significant evidence of spiritual connection between the Houses
     and their territory is a feast hall. This is where the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples
     tell and retell their stories and identify their territories to remind themselves of the sacred
     connection that they have with their lands. The feast has a ceremonial purpose, but is
     also used for making important decisions. The trial judge also noted the Criminal Code
     prohibition on aboriginal feast ceremonies, which existed until 1951.
     III. Judgments Below
                                                    - 27 -
     A. Supreme Court of British Columbia
                  (1) General Principles
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
15                The trial judge began his analysis by considering the significant cases in this
     area: St. Catharines Milling and Lumber Co. v. The Queen (1887), 13 S.C.R. 577,
     Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia, [1973] S.C.R. 313, Baker Lake v.
     Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, [1980] 1 F.C. 518 (T.D.), Guerin
     v. The Queen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, R. v. Sioui, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1025, and Sparrow,
     supra. On the basis of this jurisprudence, he set out four propositions of law. First,
     aboriginal interests arise out of occupation or use of specific land for aboriginal purposes
     for an indefinite or long, long time before the assertion of sovereignty. Second,
     aboriginal interests are communal, consisting of subsistence activities and are not
     proprietary. Third, at common law, aboriginal rights exist at the pleasure of the Crown
     and may be extinguished when the intention of the Crown is clear and plain. This power
     reposed with the Imperial Crown during the colonial period. Upon Confederation the
     province obtained title to all Crown land in the province subject to the “interests” of the
     Indians. Finally, unextinguished aboriginal rights are not absolute. Crown action and
     aboriginal rights may, in proper circumstances, be reconciled. Generally speaking,
     aboriginal rights may be regulated by the Crown only when such regulation operates to
     interfere with aboriginal rights pursuant to legitimate Crown objectives which can
     honourably be justified, without undue interference with such rights. Moreover, when
     regulating, government must be mindful of the appropriate level of priority which
     aboriginal rights have over competing, inconsistent activities.
16                With respect to the appellants’ claims, McEachern C.J. divided his analysis
     into three parts: (1) jurisdiction over the territory; (2) ownership of the territory; and (in
                                                   - 28 -
     the alternative) (3) particular aboriginal rights over the territory. In the ownership claim,
     the appellants asserted they were “absolutely entitled to occupy and possess the
     individual territories” claimed (at p. 126). The claim to jurisdiction was understood by
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     the trial judge as comprising jurisdiction over land and people in the territory, and
     amounted to aboriginal sovereignty, a right to “govern the territory free of provincial
     control in all matters where their aboriginal laws conflict with the general law” (at
     p. 128). Although the claim advanced at trial was advanced by individual chiefs on
     behalf of themselves or their House members, the trial judge held that since aboriginal
     rights are communal in nature, any judgment must be for the benefit of the Gitksan and
     Wet’suwet’en peoples generally.
                  (2) Aboriginal Ownership
17                McEachern C.J. started from the proposition, for which he cited St.
     Catharines Milling, that aboriginal rights are not proprietary in nature, but rather
     “personal and usufructuary”, and dependent upon the good will of the Sovereign. He
     was satisfied that at the date of British sovereignty, the appellants’ ancestors were living
     in their villages on the great rivers, in a form of communal society. He was satisfied that
     they were occupying or possessing fishing sites and the adjacent lands, as their ancestors
     had done for the purpose of hunting and gathering that which they required for
     sustenance. However, he was not satisfied that they owned the territory in its entirety
     in any sense that would be recognized by the law.
18                There were several specific claims of the plaintiffs as to their uses of the
     land before the assertion of sovereignty. He concluded that the appellants’ ancestors
     lived within the territory, but predominantly at the village sites. He accepted, at p. 372,
     that they harvested the resources of the lands, but that there was only evidence of
                                                   - 29 -
     “commonsense subsistence practices . . . entirely compatible with bare occupation for
     the purposes of subsistence”. He was not persuaded that there was any system of
     governance or uniform custom relating to land outside the villages. He refused to accept
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     that the spiritual beliefs exercised within the territory were necessarily common to all the
     people or that they were universal practices. He was not persuaded that the present
     institutions of the plaintiffs’ society were recognized by their ancestors. Rather, he
     found, at p. 373, that “they more likely acted as they did because of survival instincts”.
     He stated that the maintenance and protection of the boundaries were unproven because
     of the numerous intrusions into the territory by other peoples. The oral histories, totem
     poles and crests were not sufficiently reliable or site specific to discharge the plaintiff’s
     burden of proof. Although McEachern C.J. recognized the social importance of the feast
     system and the fact that it evolved from earlier practices, he did not accept its role in the
     management and allocation of lands, particularly after the fur trade. McEachern C.J.
     concluded, at p. 383, that “I cannot infer from the evidence that the Indians possessed
     or controlled any part of the territory, other than for village sites and for aboriginal use
     in a way that would justify a declaration equivalent to ownership”.
19                Although he was of the opinion that the status of the villages and their
     immediate surrounding area may be different from the territory as a whole, they were
     already predominantly reserve lands.         Hence, the question of the Gitksan and
     Wet’suwet’en peoples’ rights to these particular lands did not need to be dealt with.
     Moreover, to the extent that there were hunting grounds not included on those lands,
     McEachern C.J. believed he had no jurisdiction to extend their boundaries.
                  (3) Aboriginal Sovereignty
                                                  - 30 -
20               McEachern C.J. interpreted the appellants’ claim for “jurisdiction” as a
     claim to govern the territories in question. This would include the right to enforce
     existing aboriginal law, as well as make and enforce new laws, as required for the
                                                                                                 1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     governance of the people and their land. Most notably, this would also include a right
     to supersede the laws of British Columbia if the two were in conflict. McEachern C.J.
     rejected the appellants’ claim for a right of self-government, relying on both the
     sovereignty of the Crown at common law, and what he considered to be the relative
     paucity of evidence regarding an established governance structure. First, he stated, at
     p. 386, that when British Columbia was united with Canada, “all legislative jurisdiction
     was divided between Canada and the province, and there was no room for aboriginal
     jurisdiction or sovereignty which would be recognized by the law or the courts”.
     Second, he characterized the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en legal system, at p. 379, as a
     “most uncertain and highly flexible set of customs which are frequently not followed by
     the Indians themselves”. He continued, at pp. 379-80, stating:
                 I heard many instances of prominent Chiefs conducting themselves other
                 than in accordance with these rules, such as logging or trapping on another
                 chief’s territory, although there always seemed to be an aboriginal exception
                 which made almost any departure from aboriginal rules permissible. In my
                 judgment, these rules are so flexible and uncertain that they cannot be
                 classified as laws.
     As a result of the flexibility and uncertainty of the customs and rules, McEachern C.J.
     rejected the appellants’ claim to jurisdiction or sovereignty over the territories.
                 (4) Aboriginal Rights
21               After rejecting the appellants’ claim for ownership of and jurisdiction over
     the disputed territories, McEachern C.J. turned to the possibility that the appellants
                                                  - 31 -
     nevertheless have aboriginal rights exercisable therein. He set out, at p. 388, the four
     part test from Baker Lake for an aboriginal right:
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                 1. That they (the plaintiffs) and their ancestors were members of an
                 organized society.
                 2. That the organized society occupied the specific territory over which
                 they assert the aboriginal title.
                 3. That the occupation was to the exclusion of other organized societies.
                 4. That the occupation was an established fact at the time sovereignty was
                 asserted by England.
     McEachern C.J. noted that the requirement for an organized society had been satisfied,
     even though he did not believe the appellants’ ancestors had institutions and governed
     themselves. However, he held that no specific level of sophistication ought to be
     required in satisfying this requirement. He then stated that there was evidence that the
     ancestors of the plaintiffs occupied specific locations in the territory (the villages) and
     they used surrounding lands. Although there was evidence that the Gitksan and
     Wet’suwet’en would not have been able to keep invaders or traders out of their territory,
     no other organized societies had established themselves in the core areas on any
     permanent basis. Moreover, he noted at the outset of his reasons on this point that he
     was uncertain about the requirement for exclusivity.
22               The activities that were to be protected were only those carried on at the time
     of contact or European influence and that were still carried on at the time of sovereignty.
     This included “all those sustenance practices and the gathering of all those products of
     the land and waters of the territory I shall define which they practised and used before
     exposure to European civilization (or sovereignty) for subsistence or survival” (at p.
     391). This did not include trapping for the fur trade, or other land-based commercial
     enterprise. McEachern C.J. ultimately concluded, at p. 395 that “the plaintiffs have
                                                  - 32 -
     established, as of the date of British sovereignty, the requirements for continued
     residence in their villages, and for non-exclusive aboriginal sustenance rights within
     [certain] portions of the territory”.
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                  (5) Extinguishment and Fiduciary Duties
23                McEachern C.J. started with the proposition, at pp. 396-97, that the law
     “never recognized that the settlement of new lands depended upon the consent of the
     Indians”. All aboriginal rights existed at the pleasure of the Crown, and could be
     extinguished by unilateral act. He accepted the “clear and plain” intention test for
     extinguishment, but took the view that it need not be express or even mention aboriginal
     rights, if the intention can be identified by necessary implication. An example of such
     implied extinguishment might be a fee simple grant to a third party, or a grant of a lease,
     licence, permit or other tenure inconsistent with continuing aboriginal interest.
24                McEachern C.J. held that any aboriginal rights to the land had been
     extinguished. The extinguishment arose out of certain colonial enactments which
     demonstrated an intention to manage Crown lands in a way that was inconsistent with
     continuing aboriginal rights. He stated, at p. 411, that “the Crown with full knowledge
     of the local situation fully intended to settle the colony and to grant titles and tenures
     unburdened by any aboriginal interests”. Crown grantees who received land in colonial
     times were clearly intended to receive the land free from any aboriginal encumbrances.
     Moreover, this intention to extinguish did not only apply to lands that had actually been
     granted to third parties, but rather all Crown land in British Columbia. However, it
     should be noted that he was careful to distinguish between land and fishing rights. Since
     McEachern C.J. was of the view that all aboriginal title to the territories in question had
                                                  - 33 -
     been extinguished during colonial times, it was not necessary to consider whether the
     province had the power to extinguish aboriginal rights after Confederation.
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
25               Notwithstanding the complete extinguishment of all aboriginal rights in land,
     McEachern C.J. held, at p. 417, that the Crown was under a fiduciary obligation to
     continue to allow native persons to use vacant crown lands for lawful purposes until the
     land “is dedicated to another purpose”. This is not an aboriginal “right”, to which s. 35
     can be applied, since any such “rights” over the land had been extinguished. However,
     he held that where the Crown extinguishes an aboriginal right, and makes a promise
     regarding use of Crown land at the same time, this creates the same fiduciary obligation
     as if the aboriginal people had surrendered the land to the Crown. In articulating
     guidelines for the application of the Crown’s fiduciary obligation, McEachern C.J. made
     it clear that the Crown must be free to direct resource management in the province in the
     best interests of both the aboriginal and non-aboriginal persons in the province.
     However, Crown authorities should always keep the “aboriginal interests of the plaintiffs
     very much in mind” (at p. 423) in developing policies for the territory, and should ensure
     that aboriginal activities on the land are not unduly impaired.
                 (6) Damages
26               Since the plaintiffs failed to establish that existing ownership, jurisdiction,
     or aboriginal rights had been breached, the claim for damages for wrongful appropriation
     of their territory was dismissed by McEachern C.J.
                 (7) Lands Subject to Aboriginal Rights at Sovereignty
                                                  - 34 -
27               McEachern C.J. felt it necessary to delineate the boundaries of the lands that
     were subject to aboriginal rights at the time of sovereignty in case he was wrong that
     these rights had been extinguished. He considered the evidence regarding the external
                                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     boundary of the territory, and the internal boundaries therein. He found numerous
     inconsistencies, and generally did not find it to be reliable. He rejected the boundaries
     as put forth by the appellants.
28               Nevertheless, since he had held that the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en had
     aboriginal sustenance rights over part of the land, he had to delineate their boundaries.
     He put forth three alternatives, and ultimately chose “Map 5” (at p. 400). This area
     recognized that the plaintiffs’ ancestors likely used more distant areas in the territory.
     However, McEachern C.J. was not persuaded of such use in either the northernmost or
     southernmost portions of the territory. The northern boundary was drawn through the
     centre of the Skeena River, with 20 miles on the north side of the river being added. The
     southern boundary was drawn following some of the internal boundaries, but excluding
     several of the southern Wet’suwet’en individual territories. He selected this alternative
     because it worked less injustice for the Wet’suwet’en who lived more spread out and less
     concentrated near the rivers. However, he cut off the north and south portions of the
     claimed territory because he did not have confidence in the presence of the Gitksan or
     Wet’suwet’en in the areas north or south of the boundaries he drew.
                 (8) Other Matters
29               McEachern C.J. concluded his reasons by rejecting the province’s argument
     that the plaintiffs’ aboriginal rights to some of the lands had been abandoned. He did not
     think courts should be quick to treat aboriginal lands as abandoned. He could not say
     with confidence which lands should be abandoned, and which should not, even though
                                                  - 35 -
     there was clearly declining aboriginal use of some of the lands. He also stressed that the
     onus of demonstrating abandonment rested with the province and that they had not
     discharged that onus. He also rejected the argument that the plaintiffs had waived their
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     rights by accepting and using reserves and by conforming to the general law of the
     province. The honour of the Crown precluded the province from relying on this defence.
                 (9) Final Order
30               In result, therefore, McEachern C.J. dismissed the action against Canada,
     dismissed the plaintiffs’ claims for ownership and jurisdiction and for aboriginal rights
     in the territory, granted a declaration that the plaintiffs were entitled to use unoccupied
     or vacant land subject to the general law of the province, dismissed the claim for
     damages and dismissed the province’s counterclaim. No order for costs was made.
     B. British Columbia Court of Appeal
                 (1) Judgment of Macfarlane J.A. (Taggart J.A. concurring)
31               Macfarlane J.A. set out the following propositions of law which he indicated
     were the starting points for analysing aboriginal rights in land, which he garnered from
     Baker Lake, Calder, Guerin, Sparrow, and Mabo v. Queensland (1992), 107 A.L.R. 1
     (H.C.). First, such rights arise from historic occupation and possession of the aboriginal
     peoples’ tribal lands. Second, they arise by operation of law and do not depend on a
     grant from the Crown. Third, they are not absolute, but they are subject to regulation and
     extinguishment. Fourth, they are sui generis communal rights. Fifth, they cannot be
     alienated other than to the Crown. Finally, they are related to aboriginal activities which
     formed an integral part of traditional Indian life prior to sovereignty.
                                                   - 36 -
                    (a) Ownership Rights
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
32                  Examining the appellants’ ownership claim, Macfarlane J.A. agreed that an
     exclusive right to occupy land is required to support a claim akin to ownership. He
     noted that the use of the term “ownership” (which was used in the plaintiffs in their
     pleadings) was unfortunate, since Guerin specifically held that the aboriginal interest
     does not amount to beneficial ownership. In his view, the trial judge properly applied
     the law to the plaintiffs’ claim of ownership. Similarly, he found no merit in the
     appellants’ challenge to the trial judge’s findings of fact on a number of points.
     Although some of the areas of the evidence were cause for concern, he concluded that
     the issues required an interpretation of the evidence as a whole and that it would be
     inappropriate for this court to intervene and substitute its opinions for that of the trial
     judge. Hence, he did not disturb the judge’s conclusion with regard to ownership of the
     territory, nor his conclusion that any interest which the appellants have in the land is not
     proprietary.
                    (b) Aboriginal Sustenance Rights
33                  Macfarlane J.A. canvassed the trial judge’s findings regarding aboriginal
     sustenance rights. He noted that McEachern C.J.’s error in requiring a “time-depth” of
     a long time prior to contact in order to establish the rights did not affect his view of the
     territorial limits of the right. He agreed with the trial judge’s application of the Baker
     Lake test. In particular, he viewed the significant question to be whether the practices
     were integral to aboriginal society or had only resulted from European influences.
     Macfarlane J.A. concluded that it would be inappropriate to intervene and substitute his
     view for that of the trial judge with respect to the weight of the evidence. Hence, if the
                                                  - 37 -
     appellants succeeded on the appeal with respect to extinguishment, they were entitled
     to sustenance rights in the area as identified by McEachern C.J. on Map 5.
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                 (c) Jurisdiction
34               Macfarlane J.A. essentially agreed with the trial judge with respect to his
     analysis of the jurisdiction, or sovereignty issue. He characterized the claim as the right
     to control and manage the use of lands and resources in the territory, as well as the right
     to govern the people within the territory, to the possible exclusion of laws of general
     application within the province. He stated that the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples
     do not need a court declaration to permit internal self-regulation, if they consent to be
     governed. However, the rights of self-government encompassing a power to make
     general laws governing the land, resources, and people in the territory are legislative
     powers which cannot be awarded by the courts. Such jurisdiction is inconsistent with
     the Constitution Act, 1867 and its division of powers. When the Crown imposed English
     law on all the inhabitants of the colony and when British Columbia entered
     Confederation, the aboriginal people became subject to Canadian (and provincial)
     legislative authority. For this reason, the claim to jurisdiction failed.
                 (d) Extinguishment
35               Macfarlane J.A. began by noting that treaty-making is the most desirable
     way to resolve aboriginal land issues. However, he noted that prior to 1982, the rights
     of aboriginal people could be extinguished by the unilateral act of the sovereign, without
     the consent of the aboriginal people. Intention to extinguish must be clear and plain.
     Although express language is not strictly necessary, the honour of the Crown requires
     its intentions to be either express or manifested by unavoidable implication.
                                                  - 38 -
     Unavoidable implication should not be easily found -- it occurs only where the
     interpretation of the instrument permits no other result. This, in turn, depends on the
     nature of the aboriginal interest and of the impugned grant.
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
36               Macfarlane J.A. disagreed with the trial judge that the colonial instruments
     manifested the required clear and plain intention to extinguish all aboriginal interests in
     land. The purpose of the colonial instruments in question was to facilitate an orderly
     settlement of the province, and to give the Crown control over grants to third parties. It
     is not inevitable, upon a reading of the statutory scheme, that the aboriginal interest was
     to be disregarded. They did not foreclose the possibility of treaties or of co-existence of
     aboriginal and Crown interests. Similarly, even fee simple grants to third parties do not
     necessarily exclude aboriginal use. For example, uncultivated vacant land held in fee
     simple does not necessarily preclude the exercise of hunting rights. Moreover, it is clear
     that, at common law, two or more interests in land less than fee simple can co-exist.
     However, since the record was not sufficiently specific to permit the detailed analysis
     of such issues, Macfarlane J.A. suggested that these issues be dealt with in negotiation.
     He concluded that extinguishment by a particular grant needed to be determined on a
     case by case basis.
37               Macfarlane J.A. considered the constitutional power of the province to
     extinguish aboriginal rights after 1871, and in particular, whether valid provincial
     legislation could extinguish aboriginal rights in land by incidental effect. After 1871,
     the exclusive power to legislate in relation to “Indians, and Lands reserved for the
     Indians” was given to the federal government by virtue of s. 91(24) of the Constitution
     Act, 1867. Valid provincial legislation may apply to Indians, so long is it is a law of
     general application and not one that affects their Indianness, their status, or their core
     values (Four B Manufacturing Ltd. v. United Garment Workers of America, [1980] 1
                                                   - 39 -
     S.C.R. 1031; Natural Parents v. Superintendent of Child Welfare, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 751;
     Dick v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 309). However, the proposition that provincial laws
     could extinguish Indian title by incidental effect must be examined in light of federal
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     authority relating to Indians and of the aboriginal perspective. The traditional homelands
     of aboriginal people are integral to their traditional way of life and their self-concept.
     If the effect of provincial legislation were to strip the aboriginal people of the use and
     occupation of their traditional homelands, it would be an impermissible intrusion into
     federal jurisdiction, as such a law would “trench on the very core of the subject matter
     of s. 91(24)” (at p. 169). Hence, he concluded that provincial legislatures do not have
     the constitutional competence to extinguish common law aboriginal rights. Moreover,
     extinguishment by adverse dominion could only be accomplished by the federal
     government. Similarly, s. 88 of the Indian Act did not assist the province. Laws of
     general application which do not affect the “core of Indianness” apply by their own
     force. However, provincial laws which do affect that core rely on s. 88, which
     referentially incorporates them into federal law. For s. 88 of the Indian Act to give the
     province authority to extinguish aboriginal rights, it would have to show a clear and
     plain intention to do so. Since no such intention exists in s. 88 in particular or the Indian
     Act in general, it cannot authorize outright extinguishment. However, it may authorize
     provincial regulation of and interference with aboriginal rights. Of course, now the
     operation of such regulations are now subject to s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982.
                  (e) Relief Allowed
38                Macfarlane J.A. granted a declaration that the plaintiffs’ aboriginal rights
     were not all extinguished by the colonial instruments enacted prior to British Columbia’s
     entry into Confederation in 1871. He also granted a declaration that the appellants have
     unextinguished, non-exclusive aboriginal rights, formerly protected at common law, and
                                                   - 40 -
     now protected under s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. These rights are not
     ownership or property rights, and are located within the area indicated on Map 5. Their
     characteristics may vary depending on the particular context in which the rights are said
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     to exist, and are dependent on the specific facts of each case.
39                Macfarlane J.A. did not grant a declaration with respect to jurisdiction over
     land and resources or people within the territory, leaving this to negotiation. He also did
     not interfere with the decision of the trial judge that the claim for damages must be
     dismissed. He noted that the parties wished to negotiate the precise location, scope,
     content and consequences of the aboriginal rights which the trial judge has held may be
     exercised in that part of the territory, the approximate area of which is illustrated on Map
     5. However, no order of the court was required to permit the parties to enter into such
     negotiations.
40                Finally, Macfarlane J.A. stated that he would not give effect to the
     alternative declarations sought by the province relating to the alleged extinguishment of
     aboriginal rights by grants of fee simple and of lesser interests in the period from
     1871-1982. The province did not have the power after 1871 to extinguish aboriginal
     rights. However, some provincial land and resource laws affecting aboriginal rights may
     be given force as federal laws through the operation of s. 88 of the Indian Act. The
     effect of fee simple and lesser grants on the particular aboriginal rights would require a
     detailed and complete analysis, which neither the record nor the submissions permitted.
     He made no order for costs, adopting the reasons of the trial judge.
                  (2) Wallace J.A. (concurring)
                  (a) Scope of Appellate Review
                                                    - 41 -
41                Wallace J.A. considered the appropriate principles for appellate review of
     a trial judge’s findings of fact. An appellate court should find error on the part of the
     trial judge with respect to those aspects of the finding of facts which involve questions
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     of credibility or weight to be given the evidence of a witness only if it is established that
     the trial judge made some “palpable and overriding error” which affected his assessment
     of the material facts. Such an error exists in three situations: firstly, when it can be
     demonstrated there was no evidence to support a material finding of fact of the trial
     judge; secondly, when the trial judge wrongly overlooked admissible evidence relevant
     and material to the issue before the court; or thirdly, where the trial judge’s finding of
     fact cannot be supported as reasonable. In reversing the trial judge for “palpable and
     overriding error” the Court of Appeal must designate the specific error and state why the
     nature of the error justifies reversing the trial judge’s finding of fact. Wallace J.A. held
     that these principles applied to the trial judge’s determination of the nature and territorial
     scope of the aboriginal activities, the question of jurisdiction and control over the
     territory, and the weight to be attributed to the evidence of the various witnesses.
                  (b) General Principles
42                Wallace J.A. stated that aboriginal rights of occupation and use originate in
     the Indians’ historic occupation and use of their tribal lands, and is recognized by the
     common law. Unlike the trial judge, he recognized that these rights may resemble a
     proprietary title, not unlike those in western property law systems, or they may be
     restricted to certain uses of the land. He set out the requirements for establishing
     aboriginal rights, varying from the Baker Lake test used by the trial judge. In Wallace
     J.A.’s formulation of the test, the practices supporting the rights in question had to be
     integral to the claimants’ distinctive and traditional society or culture. Moreover, he
     resolved the trial judge’s concerns about the requirement of exclusivity as follows: if the
                                                  - 42 -
     plaintiffs claim exclusive occupation and use, the traditional occupation had to be to the
     exclusion of other organized societies.
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                  (c) Aboriginal Ownership
43                Wallace J.A. considered there to be reasonable support for the trial judge’s
     conclusions regarding the nature and scope of the appellants’ interest in the territory.
     The standard of occupation required to support the claim of ownership depended on the
     nature of the interest. The appellants’ claim was to manage the lands and natural
     resources. This suggests exclusive control and possession of the territory, requiring the
     appellants to demonstrate exclusive possession. Since they could not do so, he
     concluded that the trial judge correctly dismissed their claim for ownership.
                  (d) Aboriginal Rights of Occupation and Use of Traditional Lands
44                Even if the appellants’ claim were characterized as a claim for aboriginal
     title, rather than ownership, Wallace J.A. agreed with the criteria applied by the trial
     judge: the occupation of specific territory, the exclusion of other organized societies,
     occupation at the time of British sovereignty and long-time aboriginal practices.
     Applying these principles to the trial judge’s findings of fact, Wallace J.A. concluded
     that the appellants had not established a manifest or palpable error in concluding that the
     appellants’ rights were non-exclusive, and confined to user rights. However, he was of
     the view that the court was not in a position to express an opinion on the specific
     territorial scope of these rights.
                  (e) Aboriginal Jurisdiction or Self-Government
                                                   - 43 -
45                Wallace J.A. agreed that the claim for “jurisdiction” was for an undefined
     form of government over land and people in the territory, which would be paramount as
     against provincial laws in the case of a conflict. Wallace J.A. held, at p. 225, that this
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     claim was “incompatible with every principle of the parliamentary sovereignty which
     vested in the Imperial Parliament in 1846”. Moreover, British Columbia’s entry into
     Canada in 1871 exhaustively distributed legislative power between the province and the
     federal government. Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982 could not revive and
     protect any sovereignty rights which the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en may have had.
                  (f) Extinguishment
46                Wallace J.A. agreed with Macfarlane J.A. on this issue. He set out the test
     (“clear and plain intention”) and decided that the rights of use and occupation discussed
     above had not been extinguished.
                  (g) Miscellaneous
47                Wallace J.A. agreed that the appellants’ damages claim should be dismissed,
     without deciding whether damages might be payable for wrongful interference with the
     Gitksan’s and Wet’suwet’en’s non-exclusive aboriginal rights in the territory. He also
     considered the appellants’ claim that the appeal be adjourned in part for two years,
     during which time the parties would attempt to negotiate an agreement regarding the
     geographic parameters of the claimed territory. The court would retain jurisdiction to
     determine issues or refer them to the trial court if the parties failed to reach an agreement
     during the two-year period. However, he noted that the role of the Court of Appeal is
     not to tailor its judgment to facilitate negotiation. The Court of Appeal is restricted to
     declaring the legal status of rights claimed, on the basis of the trial record.
                                                   - 44 -
                  (3) Lambert J.A. (dissenting)
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                  (a) General Principles
48                Lambert J.A. considered at length the leading cases with regard to aboriginal
     rights in British Columbia. He set out a number of conclusions. He recognized that
     aboriginal title and aboriginal rights are sui generis, and not easily explicable in terms
     of ordinary western jurisprudential analysis or common law concepts. He noted that
     aboriginal title is a form of aboriginal rights, and is therefore protected by s. 35. All
     rights arise from the practices, customs and traditions which form an integral part of the
     distinctive culture of the aboriginal people, and were part of the social fabric of
     aboriginal society at the time of the arrival of the first Europeans. This co-existed with
     the settlors’ common law rights from the time of contact until sovereignty. After that
     time, aboriginal rights that continued as part of the social fabric of the aboriginal society
     were protected by both their own internal institutions and the common law.
49                Lambert J.A. believed that aboriginal rights were not frozen at the time of
     contact. Rather, they must be permitted to maintain contemporary relevance in relation
     to the needs of the holders of the rights as those needs change along with the changes in
     overall society. The rights may be individual, or they may be collective, depending on
     how they were and are treated by aboriginal people. Moreover, they do not come from
     aboriginal practice dating from time immemorial. Rather, they come, under the doctrine
     of continuity, from the practices, customs and traditions of the aboriginal people.
50                Aboriginal rights are neither abrogated by the fact that similar rights may be
     held by non-aboriginal people nor because the holders of the rights participate in the
                                                   - 45 -
     wage or cash economy. A right to occupy, possess, use and enjoy land to the exclusion
     of all others does not mean that it must be confined to the activities carried on in 1846,
     or that its exercise requires a renunciation of the contemporary world.
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                 (b) Extinguishment
51                Lambert J.A. considered the test for extinguishment from Calder, and
     expressly rejected Judson J.’s views. He derived the authority to do so from the way in
     which extinguishment was dealt with in Sparrow.                  In considering implicit
     extinguishment, he stated that it will only be held to occur where no other conclusion is
     possible from the particular instrument or conduct. It could not take place through
     adverse dominion. In the case of an inconsistency between a Crown grant of land and
     aboriginal title, the title should not necessarily give way in the absence of a clear and
     plain intention to extinguish. In any case, no grants or other interests were granted in the
     territory prior to 1871, and after that date, the British Columbia legislature had no power
     to legislate to extinguish, by adverse dominion, or otherwise. Lambert J.A. recognized,
     at p. 312, that because of s. 91(24) of the Constitution Act, 1867, and the doctrine of
     interjurisdictional immunity, provincial legislation could not affect “Indians in their
     Indianness”. This included aboriginal rights, since they are an integral part of aboriginal
     culture. This is not affected by s. 88 of the Indian Act.
52                Lambert J.A. applied the same principles to a consideration of whether the
     right to self-government had been extinguished. Neither the assertion of sovereignty nor
     the colonial enactments mentioned by the trial judge were sufficient to extinguish
     aboriginal rights in the claimed territory. He saw no incompatibility between statements
     that the Crown owned the land of the province and the notion that aboriginal title was
     a burden on the Crown’s radical title. Moreover, there was no “inescapable inference”
                                                  - 46 -
     that the colonial enactments were intended to extinguish aboriginal interests. If this were
     the case, aboriginal peoples would instantly become trespassers on any lands not
     reserved for them as soon as the Crown took title. Finally, the evidence that the
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     aboriginal peoples of northern British Columbia surrendered their title under Treaty No.
     8 also suggested that they had title interests to surrender.
                 (c) Findings at Trial
53               Lambert J.A. considered the factual findings made by the trial judge and
     made a number of general observations. First, if a finding of fact is necessary to the
     decision in the case, it should be given more deference than a fact which is merely made
     in the course of the decision or for some incidental reason. Second, findings of historical
     fact based on historical or anthropological evidence given by historians and
     anthropologists should be given only the kind of weight that other historians or
     anthropologists might have given them. These social scientists do not always agree,
     circumstances change, and new material is discovered and interpreted. Third, the
     appellants’ oral evidence should be weighed, like all evidence, against the weight of
     countervailing evidence and not against an absolute standard so long as it is enough to
     support an air of reality. Fourth, with the election of an NDP government in British
     Columbia in 1991, the province reconsidered its legal stance in this case. As such, it
     invited the court to confirm the existence of aboriginal rights of unspecified content over
     unspecified areas and to permit the parties to negotiate the precise content and the
     precise areas. In Lambert J.A.’s view, the Crown, by adopting the position that it wished
     to negotiate the content and territorial scope of aboriginal rights, must be taken to have
     waived the argument that the findings of the trial judge must stand and that any
     aboriginal rights held by the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples must be confined to non-
                                                     - 47 -
     exclusive sustenance rights over the area covered by Map 5. In short, reliance on the
     findings of fact of the trial judge is entirely inconsistent with negotiation.
                                                                                                        1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
54                Nonetheless, Lambert J.A. was of the view that the findings of fact with
     respect to boundaries and with respect to the scope and content of aboriginal rights,
     including both rights in land and rights of self-government, cannot stand even in
     accordance with the usual principles governing the consideration of findings of fact,
     because they are flawed by errors of law.
55                With regard to the ownership claim, Lambert J.A. identified the following
     errors in the trial judge’s reasons. In his view, the trial judge erred: (1) in not treating the
     ownership claim as a claim to aboriginal title and applied incorrect legal standards as a
     result; (2) in treating the claim to aboriginal title as a claim to a proprietary interest in
     land; (3) in applying a test of indefinite or long, long time use and occupation before the
     assertion of sovereignty; (4) in treating evidence of commercial interaction with the first
     Europeans as not being evidence of aboriginal practices; (5) in treating the rights to trap
     as being the exercise of rights other than aboriginal rights; (6) in rejecting evidence about
     commercial trapping and the evidence of Dr. Ray, a historical geographer who gave
     evidence at trial; (7) in rejecting possession, occupation, use, and enjoyment in a social
     sense as sufficient to establish aboriginal title; (8) in treating the test of possession and
     occupation as being whether there was a law which would have required a trespasser to
     depart; (9) in considering that aboriginal rights cannot be held jointly by more than one
     people; (10) in not concluding that aboriginal title could rest on occupation, possession,
     use, and enjoyment of land even though that occupation may have diminished in the
     period after contact; (11) in his treatment of blanket extinguishment of aboriginal title;
     and (12) in concluding that all aboriginal rights had been extinguished by the colonial
     instruments. These errors of law led to an incorrect conclusion on the part of the trial
                                                    - 48 -
     judge about the existence of aboriginal title. His findings of fact can be reconsidered on
     appellate review.
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
56                With regard to the jurisdiction claim, Lambert J.A. stated that the trial judge
     erred: (1) in treating the claim to jurisdiction as a claim to govern territory and assert
     sovereignty over the territory; (2) in trying to define the appellants’ claim in terms of the
     answers given by one witness in cross-examination; (3) in concluding that the claim to
     jurisdiction must fail because the nature of aboriginal self-government and self-
     regulation was such that it does not produce a set of binding and enforceable laws; and
     (4) in considering that the existence of a legislative institution is an essential part of the
     existence of an aboriginal right to self-government. Because of these errors of law, the
     trial judge’s conclusions were wrong.
57                With regard to the claim to aboriginal rights, Lambert J.A. was of the view
     that the trial judge erred: (1) in not treating the evidence of occupation, possession, use,
     and enjoyment of the territory in an organized way by the appellants for their purposes,
     but particularly for sustenance, as being sufficient to establish aboriginal title to much
     of the land within the territory; (2) in separating commercial practices of aboriginal
     people from other practices and saying that commercial practices were not aboriginal
     practices; (3) in not considering the evidence of trading practices with neighbouring
     peoples; (4) in his treatment of the question of exclusivity both in relation to aboriginal
     title and sustenance rights; and (5) in considering participation in the wage or cash
     economy in relation to the existence (or non-existence) of aboriginal title. Again, given
     these errors of law, Lambert J.A. asserted that an appellate court had jurisdiction to
     intervene and set aside the trial judge’s findings.
                  (d) Substituted Findings
                                                   - 49 -
58                In light of these errors, Lambert J.A. substituted his own findings of fact for
     those of the trial judge. In his view, the evidence established that in 1846, the Gitksan
     and Wet’suwet’en peoples occupied, possessed, used and enjoyed their traditional
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     ancestral lands in accordance with their own practices, customs and traditions which
     were an integral part of their distinctive culture. Those ancestral lands extend throughout
     the claimed territory, well beyond the area indicated in Map 5. In areas where there were
     no conflicting claims to user rights, the appellants’ rights should be characterized as
     aboriginal title. In areas of shared occupancy and use, the appellants’ title would be
     shared-exclusive aboriginal title. In areas where the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples
     did not occupy, possess or use the land as an integral part of their culture, they would not
     have title, but may have aboriginal sustenance rights. These rights were not extinguished
     through any blanket extinguishment in the colonial period. Precise legislation related to
     a specific area may have extinguished some rights. However, no such legislation was
     before the court. The geographic scope of the rights was a matter to be negotiated
     between the parties, and failing negotiation, needed to be determined by a new trial.
59                Lambert J.A. also concluded that in 1846, the appellants’ ancestors had
     rights of self-government and self-regulation, which rested on the practices, customs and
     traditions of those people which formed an integral part of their distinctive cultures. It
     is true that the rights may have been diminished by the assertion of British sovereignty,
     but those rights that continue are protected by s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982.
60                Turning to aboriginal sustenance rights, Lambert J.A. stated that they are
     entirely encompassed within aboriginal title in those areas where Gitksan and
     Wet’suwet’en aboriginal title exists. They also may exist in areas outside of title lands.
     In areas where such rights were shared by a number of peoples, the appellants’ rights
                                                 - 50 -
     may be limited to specific sustenance activities as opposed to exclusive or shared-
     exclusive use and occupation.
                                                                                                 1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                 (e) Other Issues
61               With regard to the Royal Proclamation, 1763, R.S.C., 1985, App. II, No. 1,
     Lambert J.A. expressed no views on its application or effect in the claimed territory and
     its inhabitants. With regard to infringement or denial of the appellants’ rights in the
     claimed territory, Lambert J.A. concluded that the evidence in the case did not permit
     a proper consideration of the issues. Each infringement or denial would have to be
     examined in relation to the specific circumstances.
                 (f) Disposition
62               Lambert J.A. would have allowed the appeal, and made a number of
     declarations. First, he would declare that the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples had, at
     the time of the assertion of British sovereignty in 1846, aboriginal title to occupy,
     possess, use and enjoy all or some of the land within the claimed territory. The land
     covered by aboriginal title at that time extended far beyond village sites and the
     immediate areas surrounding.       Second, he would declare that the Gitksan and
     Wet’suwet’en peoples may have had aboriginal sustenance rights, including hunting,
     fishing, gathering, and similar rights over any parts of the land within the claimed
     territory to which aboriginal title did not extend. He would also declare that the
     aboriginal title and the aboriginal sustenance rights described may have been exclusive
     to the Gitksan in certain areas and exclusive to the Wet’suwet’en in others, and in some
     they may have shared with each other, or other aboriginal peoples, or non-aboriginals.
                                                    - 51 -
63                Lambert J.A. would have also declared that the appellants’ ancestors had,
     at the time of the assertion of British sovereignty in 1846, aboriginal rights of self-
     government and self-regulation relating to their own organized society, its members, its
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     institutions and its sustenance rights. These rights were recognized by, incorporated
     into, and protected by the common law after 1846. They have not been extinguished by
     any form of blanket extinguishment. Hence, they exist in modern form, subject only to
     specific extinguishment of the specific title or specific sustenance right in a specific area.
     However, the right of aboriginal self-government did not include any rights that were
     inconsistent with British sovereignty, any rights that are repugnant to natural justice,
     equity and good conscience, and have not been modified to overcome that repugnancy,
     and any rights which are contrary to the part of the common law that applied to the
     territory, the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples and their institutions.
64                Lambert J.A. would also declare that these aboriginal title rights, aboriginal
     rights of self-government and self-regulation, and aboriginal sustenance rights may have
     been subject, after 1846 to specific extinguishment by the clear and plain extinguishing
     intention of the Sovereign Power, legislatively expressed by Parliament. Any specific
     extinguishment of specific rights might have been express or implicit, and, if implicit,
     it may have been brought about by the legislation itself (implied extinguishment) or by
     acts authorized by the legislation (extinguishment by adverse dominion), provided the
     intention to extinguish was contained within the legislative expression and was clear and
     plain. Instances of such specific extinguishment could not be decided on this appeal.
65                Lambert J.A. would declare that the present aboriginal rights of
     self-government and self-regulation of the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples,
     exercisable in relation to their aboriginal title, would include the specific rights claimed
     in this appeal by the plaintiffs in relation to aboriginal title. He would also declare that
                                                     - 52 -
     the present aboriginal rights of self-government and self-regulation of the Gitksan and
     Wet’suwet’en peoples would include rights of self-government and self-regulation
     exercisable through their own institutions to preserve and enhance their social, political,
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     cultural, linguistic and spiritual identity.
66                Finally, Lambert J.A. would remit a number of questions back to trial.
     These include the question of the territorial boundaries for both title and sustenance
     rights; the degree of exclusivity or shared exclusivity which the appellants hold, on both
     the territories over which they have title and the territories over which they have
     sustenance rights; the scope and content of the sustenance rights; the scope and content
     of the rights to self-government and self-regulation; and all questions relating to the
     plaintiffs’ entitlement to damages and the quantum of damages. He would have also
     awarded the plaintiffs their costs, both in the Court of Appeal, and at trial.
                  (4) Hutcheon J.A. (dissenting in part)
                  (a) Rights to Land
67                Hutcheon J.A. agreed with the trial judge that the Royal Proclamation, 1763
     did not apply to the territory or its inhabitants. Nonetheless, the policy reflected in the
     Proclamation was, generally speaking, acceptance of aboriginal rights to land.
     Moreover, Hutcheon J.A. concluded on the basis of Calder and Sparrow that the colonial
     enactments did not extinguish the aboriginal rights in the claimed territory. He found
     it unnecessary to decide whether a grant in fee simple extinguishes aboriginal title or
     whether entitlement to compensation arises in such circumstances.
                  (b) Nature of the Rights
                                                   - 53 -
68                Hutcheon J.A. accepted that aboriginal rights to land existed prior to 1846
     over the claimed territory. He found it sufficient to say, at p. 389, that aboriginal rights
     can “compete on an equal footing” with proprietary interests. Additionally, he noted that
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     these rights are collective, inalienable except to the Crown, and extend to the traditional
     territory of the particular people.
                  (c) Territory
69                Hutcheon J.A. disagreed with the trial judge’s conclusion that the appellants’
     ancestors occupied or controlled only the villages in the territory and the immediately
     surrounding areas. In Hutcheon J.A.’s view, the trial judge misapprehended the legal
     test for occupation and disregarded the independent evidence which showed that the
     territory occupied or controlled by the appellants extended far beyond the villages.
                  (d) Self-Regulation
70                The traditions of the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples existed long before
     1846 and continued thereafter. They included the right to names and titles, the use of
     masks and symbols in rituals, the use of ceremonial robes, and the right to occupy and
     control places of economic importance. The traditions also included the institution of
     the clans and the Houses in which membership descended through the mother and the
     feast system. They regulated marriage and relations with neighbouring societies. The
     right to practise these traditions was not lost, although the Indian Act and provincial laws
     have affected the appellants’ right to self-regulation. Only negotiations will define with
     greater specificity the areas and terms under which the appellants and the federal and
     provincial governments will exercise jurisdiction in respect of the appellants, their
     institutions, and laws.
                                                   - 54 -
                  (e) Disposition
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
71                Hutcheon J.A. would have allowed the appeal and have made a number of
     declarations. First, he would declare that all of the aboriginal rights of the appellants
     were not extinguished before 1871. Second, the appellants continue to have existing
     aboriginal rights to undefined portions of land within the claimed territory. Third, the
     appellants have rights of self-regulation exercisable through their own institutions to
     preserve and enhance their social, political, cultural, linguistic and spiritual identity. He
     would have remitted the outstanding matters to the Supreme Court of British Columbia,
     and stayed the proceedings for two years from the date of the judgment, or such shorter
     or longer period, in order for the parties to agree about the lands in respect of which the
     appellants have aboriginal rights, the scope of such rights on and to such lands, the scope
     of the right of self-regulation, and the appellants’ entitlement to and quantum of
     damages. Hutcheon J.A. would have awarded the appellants their costs throughout the
     proceedings.
     IV. Issues
72                The following are the principal issues which must be addressed in this
     appeal. As will become apparent in my analysis, some of these issues in turn raise a
     number of sub-issues which I will address as well:
                  A. Do the pleadings preclude the Court from entertaining claims for
                     aboriginal title and self-government?
                  B. What is the ability of this Court to interfere with the factual findings
                     made by the trial judge?
                                                  - 55 -
                 C. What is the content of aboriginal title, how is it protected by s. 35(1) of
                    the Constitution Act, 1982, and what is required for its proof?
                 D. Has a claim to self-government been made out by the appellants?
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                 E. Did the province have the power to extinguish aboriginal rights after
                    1871, either under its own jurisdiction or through the operation of s. 88
                    of the Indian Act?
     V. Analysis
     A.          Do the pleadings preclude the Court from entertaining claims for aboriginal
                 title and self-government?
73               In their pleadings, the appellants, 51 Chiefs representing most of the Houses
     of the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en nations, originally advanced 51 individual claims on
     their own behalf and on behalf of their houses for “ownership” and “jurisdiction” over
     133 distinct territories which together comprise 58,000 square kilometres of
     northwestern British Columbia. On appeal, that original claim was altered in two
     different ways. First, the claims for ownership and jurisdiction have been replaced with
     claims for aboriginal title and self-government, respectively. Second, the individual
     claims by each house have been amalgamated into two communal claims, one advanced
     on behalf of each nation. However, there were no formal amendments to the pleadings
     to this effect, and the respondents accordingly argue that claims which are central to this
     appeal are not properly before the Court. Furthermore, the respondents argue that they
     have suffered prejudice as a result because they might have conducted the defence quite
     differently had they known the case to meet.
74               I reject the respondents’ submission with respect to the substitution of
     aboriginal title and self-government for the original claims of ownership and jurisdiction.
     Although it is true that the pleadings were not formally amended, the trial judge, at p.
     158, did allow a de facto amendment to permit “a claim for aboriginal rights other than
                                                  - 56 -
     ownership and jurisdiction”. Had the respondents been concerned about the prejudice
     arising from this ruling, they could have appealed accordingly. However, they did not,
     and, as a result, the decision of the trial judge on this point must stand.
                                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
75               Moreover, in my opinion, that ruling was correct because it was made
     against the background of considerable legal uncertainty surrounding the nature and
     content of aboriginal rights, under both the common law and s. 35(1). The content of
     common law aboriginal title, for example, has not been authoritatively determined by
     this Court and has been described by some as a form of “ownership”. As well, this case
     was pleaded prior to this Court’s decision in Sparrow, supra, which was the first
     statement from this Court on the types of rights that come within the scope of s. 35(1).
     The law has rapidly evolved since then. Accordingly, it was just and appropriate for the
     trial judge to allow for an amendment to pleadings which were framed when the
     jurisprudence was in its infancy.
76               However, no such amendment was made with respect to the amalgamation
     of the individual claims brought by the 51 Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en Houses into two
     collective claims, one by each nation, for aboriginal title and self-government. Given the
     absence of an amendment to the pleadings, I must reluctantly conclude that the
     respondents suffered some prejudice. The appellants argue that the respondents did not
     experience prejudice since the collective and individual claims are related to the extent
     that the territory claimed by each nation is merely the sum of the individual claims of
     each House; the external boundaries of the collective claims therefore represent the outer
     boundaries of the outer territories. Although that argument carries considerable weight,
     it does not address the basic point that the collective claims were simply not in issue at
     trial. To frame the case in a different manner on appeal would retroactively deny the
     respondents the opportunity to know the appellants’ case.
                                                   - 57 -
77                This defect in the pleadings prevents the Court from considering the merits
     of this appeal. However, given the importance of this case and the fact that much of the
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     evidence of individual territorial holdings is extremely relevant to the collective claims
     now advanced by each of the appellants, the correct remedy for the defect in pleadings
     is a new trial, where, to quote the trial judge at p. 368, “[i]t will be for the parties to
     consider whether any amendment is required in order to make the pleadings conform
     with the evidence”. Moreover, as I will now explain, there are other reasons why a new
     trial should be ordered.
     B.          What is the ability of this Court to interfere with the factual findings made
                 by the trial judge?
                 (1) General Principles
78                I recently reviewed the principles governing the appellate review of findings
     of fact in Van der Peet, supra. As a general rule, this Court has been extremely reluctant
     to interfere with the findings of fact made at trial, especially when those findings of fact
     are based on an assessment of the testimony and credibility of witnesses. Unless there
     is a “palpable and overriding error”, appellate courts should not substitute their own
     findings of fact for those of the trial judge. The leading statement of this principle can
     be found in Stein v. The Ship “Kathy K”, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802, per Ritchie J., at p. 808:
                 These authorities are not to be taken as meaning that the findings of fact
                 made at trial are immutable, but rather that they are not to be reversed unless
                 it can be established that the learned trial judge made some palpable and
                 overriding error which affected his assessment of the facts. While the Court
                 of Appeal is seized with the duty of re-examining the evidence in order to
                 be satisfied that no such error occurred, it is not, in my view, a part of its
                 function to substitute its assessment of the balance of probability for the
                 findings of the judge who presided at the trial.
                                                   - 58 -
     The same deference must be accorded to the trial judge’s assessment of the credibility
     of expert witnesses: see N.V. Bocimar S.A. v. Century Insurance Co. of Canada, [1987]
     1 S.C.R. 1247.
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
79                The policy reason underlying this rule is protection of “[t]he autonomy and
     integrity of the trial process” (Schwartz v. Canada, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 254, at p. 278),
     which recognizes that the trier of fact, who is in direct contact with the mass of the
     evidence, is in the best position to make findings of fact, particularly those which turn
     on credibility. Moreover, Van der Peet clarified that deference was owed to findings of
     fact even when the trial judge misapprehended the law which was applied to those facts,
     a problem which can arise in quickly evolving areas of law such as the jurisprudence
     surrounding s. 35(1).
80                I recently held, in Van der Peet, that these general principles apply to cases
     litigated under s. 35(1). On the other hand, while accepting the general principle of non-
     interference, this Court has also identified specific situations in which an appeal court
     can interfere with a finding of fact made at trial. For example, appellate intervention is
     warranted “where the courts below have misapprehended or overlooked material
     evidence”: see Chartier v. Attorney General of Quebec, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 474, at p. 493.
     In cases involving the determination of aboriginal rights, appellate intervention is also
     warranted by the failure of a trial court to appreciate the evidentiary difficulties inherent
     in adjudicating aboriginal claims when, first, applying the rules of evidence and, second,
     interpreting the evidence before it. As I said in Van der Peet, at para. 68:
                      In determining whether an aboriginal claimant has produced evidence
                  sufficient to demonstrate that her activity is an aspect of a practice, custom
                  or tradition integral to a distinctive aboriginal culture, a court should
                  approach the rules of evidence, and interpret the evidence that exists, with
                  a consciousness of the special nature of aboriginal claims, and of the
                                                  - 59 -
                 evidentiary difficulties in proving a right which originates in times where
                 there were no written records of the practices, customs and traditions
                 engaged in. The courts must not undervalue the evidence presented by
                 aboriginal claimants simply because that evidence does not conform
                 precisely with the evidentiary standards that would be applied in, for
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                 example, a private law torts case. [Emphasis added.]
81               The justification for this special approach can be found in the nature of
     aboriginal rights themselves. I explained in Van der Peet that those rights are aimed at
     the reconciliation of the prior occupation of North America by distinctive aboriginal
     societies with the assertion of Crown sovereignty over Canadian territory. They attempt
     to achieve that reconciliation by “their bridging of aboriginal and non-aboriginal
     cultures” (at para. 42). Accordingly, “a court must take into account the perspective of
     the aboriginal people claiming the right. . . . while at the same time taking into account
     the perspective of the common law” such that “[t]rue reconciliation will, equally, place
     weight on each” (at paras. 49 and 50).
82               In other words, although the doctrine of aboriginal rights is a common law
     doctrine, aboriginal rights are truly sui generis, and demand a unique approach to the
     treatment of evidence which accords due weight to the perspective of aboriginal peoples.
     However, that accommodation must be done in a manner which does not strain “the
     Canadian legal and constitutional structure” (at para. 49). Both the principles laid down
     in Van der Peet -- first, that trial courts must approach the rules of evidence in light of
     the evidentiary difficulties inherent in adjudicating aboriginal claims, and second, that
     trial courts must interpret that evidence in the same spirit -- must be understood against
     this background.
83               A concrete application of the first principle can be found in Van der Peet
     itself, where I addressed the difficulties inherent in demonstrating a continuity between
                                                    - 60 -
     current aboriginal activities and the pre-contact practices, customs and traditions of
     aboriginal societies. As I reiterate below, the requirement for continuity is one
     component of the definition of aboriginal rights (although, as I explain below, in the case
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     of title, the issue is continuity from sovereignty, not contact). However, given that many
     aboriginal societies did not keep written records at the time of contact or sovereignty, it
     would be exceedingly difficult for them to produce (at para. 62) “conclusive evidence
     from pre-contact times about the practices, customs and traditions of their community”.
     Accordingly, I held that (at para. 62):
                  The evidence relied upon by the applicant and the courts may relate to
                  aboriginal practices, customs and traditions post-contact; it simply needs to
                  be directed at demonstrating which aspects of the aboriginal community and
                  society have their origins pre-contact. [Emphasis added.]
     The same considerations apply when the time from which title is determined is
     sovereignty.
84                This appeal requires us to apply not only the first principle in Van der Peet
     but the second principle as well, and adapt the laws of evidence so that the aboriginal
     perspective on their practices, customs and traditions and on their relationship with the
     land, are given due weight by the courts. In practical terms, this requires the courts to
     come to terms with the oral histories of aboriginal societies, which, for many aboriginal
     nations, are the only record of their past. Given that the aboriginal rights recognized and
     affirmed by s. 35(1) are defined by reference to pre-contact practices or, as I will
     develop below, in the case of title, pre-sovereignty occupation, those histories play a
     crucial role in the litigation of aboriginal rights.
                                                  - 61 -
85               A useful and informative description of aboriginal oral history is provided
     by the Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (1996), vol. 1 (Looking
     Forward, Looking Back), at p. 33:
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                      The Aboriginal tradition in the recording of history is neither linear nor
                 steeped in the same notions of social progress and evolution [as in the non-
                 Aboriginal tradition]. Nor is it usually human-centred in the same way as
                 the western scientific tradition, for it does not assume that human beings are
                 anything more than one -- and not necessarily the most important -- element
                 of the natural order of the universe. Moreover, the Aboriginal historical
                 tradition is an oral one, involving legends, stories and accounts handed
                 down through the generations in oral form. It is less focused on establishing
                 objective truth and assumes that the teller of the story is so much a part of
                 the event being described that it would be arrogant to presume to classify or
                 categorize the event exactly or for all time.
                     In the Aboriginal tradition the purpose of repeating oral accounts from
                 the past is broader than the role of written history in western societies. It
                 may be to educate the listener, to communicate aspects of culture, to
                 socialize people into a cultural tradition, or to validate the claims of a
                 particular family to authority and prestige. . . .
                     Oral accounts of the past include a good deal of subjective experience.
                 They are not simply a detached recounting of factual events but, rather, are
                 “facts enmeshed in the stories of a lifetime”. They are also likely to be
                 rooted in particular locations, making reference to particular families and
                 communities. This contributes to a sense that there are many histories, each
                 characterized in part by how a people see themselves, how they define their
                 identity in relation to their environment, and how they express their
                 uniqueness as a people.
86               Many features of oral histories would count against both their admissibility
     and their weight as evidence of prior events in a court that took a traditional approach
     to the rules of evidence. The most fundamental of these is their broad social role not
     only “as a repository of historical knowledge for a culture” but also as an expression of
     “the values and mores of [that] culture”: Clay McLeod, “The Oral Histories of Canada’s
     Northern People, Anglo-Canadian Evidence Law, and Canada’s Fiduciary Duty to First
     Nations: Breaking Down the Barriers of the Past” (1992), 30 Alta. L. Rev. 1276, at p.
     1279. Dickson J. (as he then was) recognized as much when he stated in Kruger v. The
     Queen, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 104, at p. 109, that “[c]laims to aboriginal title are woven with
                                                   - 62 -
     history, legend, politics and moral obligations.” The difficulty with these features of oral
     histories is that they are tangential to the ultimate purpose of the fact-finding process at
     trial -- the determination of the historical truth. Another feature of oral histories which
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     creates difficulty is that they largely consist of out-of-court statements, passed on
     through an unbroken chain across the generations of a particular aboriginal nation to the
     present-day. These out-of-court statements are admitted for their truth and therefore
     conflict with the general rule against the admissibility of hearsay.
87                Notwithstanding the challenges created by the use of oral histories as proof
     of historical facts, the laws of evidence must be adapted in order that this type of
     evidence can be accommodated and placed on an equal footing with the types of
     historical evidence that courts are familiar with, which largely consists of historical
     documents. This is a long-standing practice in the interpretation of treaties between the
     Crown and aboriginal peoples: Sioui, supra, at p. 1068; R. v. Taylor (1981), 62 C.C.C.
     (2d) 227 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 232. To quote Dickson C.J., given that most aboriginal
     societies “did not keep written records”, the failure to do so would “impose an
     impossible burden of proof” on aboriginal peoples, and “render nugatory” any rights that
     they have (Simon v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 387, at p. 408). This process must be
     undertaken on a case-by-case basis. I will take this approach in my analysis of the trial
     judge’s findings of fact.
88                On a final note, it is important to understand that even when a trial judge has
     erred in making a finding of fact, appellate intervention does not proceed automatically.
     The error must be sufficiently serious that it was “overriding and determinative in the
     assessment of the balance of probabilities with respect to that factual issue” (Schwartz,
     supra, at p. 281).
                                                  - 63 -
                 (2) Application of General Principles
                 (a) General Comments
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
89               The general principle of appellate non-interference applies with particular
     force in this appeal. The trial was lengthy and very complex. There were 318 days of
     testimony. There were a large number of witnesses, lay and expert. The volume of
     evidence is enormous. To quote the trial judge at pp. 116-17:
                      A total of 61 witnesses gave evidence at trial, many using translators
                 from their native Gitksan or Wet’suwet’en language; “word spellers” to
                 assist the official reporters were required for many witnesses; a further 15
                 witnesses gave their evidence on commission; 53 territorial affidavits were
                 filed; 30 deponents were cross-examined out of court; there are 23,503
                 pages of transcript evidence at trial; 5898 pages of transcript of argument;
                 3,039 pages of commission evidence and 2,553 pages of cross-examination
                 on affidavits (all evidence and oral arguments are conveniently preserved
                 in hard copy and on diskettes); about 9,200 exhibits were filed at trial
                 comprising, I estimate, well over 50,000 pages; the plaintiffs’ draft outline
                 of argument comprises 3,250 pages, the province’s 1,975 pages, and
                 Canada’s over 1,000 pages; there are 5,977 pages of transcript of argument
                 in hard copy and on diskettes. All parties filed some excerpts from the
                 exhibits they referred to in argument. The province alone submitted 28 huge
                 binders of such documents. At least 15 binders of reply argument were left
                 with me during that stage of the trial.
     The result was a judgment of over 400 pages in length.
90               It is not open to the appellants to challenge the trial judge’s findings of fact
     merely because they disagree with them. I fear that a significant number of the
     appellants’ objections fall into this category. Those objections are too numerous to list
     in their entirety. The bulk of these objections, at best, relate to alleged instances of
     misapprehension or oversight of material evidence by the trial judge. However, the
     respondents have established that, in most situations, there was some contradictory
     evidence that supported the trial judge’s conclusion. The question, ultimately, was one
                                                   - 64 -
     of weight, and the appellants have failed to demonstrate that the trial judge erred in this
     respect.
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
91                One objection that I would like to mention specifically, albeit in passing, is
     the trial judge’s refusal to accept the testimony of two anthropologists who were brought
     in as expert witnesses by the appellants. This aspect of the trial judge’s reasons was
     hotly contested by the appellants in their written submissions. However, I need only
     reiterate what I have stated above, that findings of credibility, including the credibility
     of expert witnesses, are for the trial judge to make, and should warrant considerable
     deference from appellate courts.
92                On the other hand, the appellants have alleged that the trial judge made a
     number of serious errors relating to the treatment of the oral histories of the appellants.
     Those oral histories were expressed in three different forms: (i) the adaawk of the
     Gitksan, and the kungax of the Wet’suwet’en; (ii) the personal recollections of members
     of the appellant nations, and (iii) the territorial affidavits filed by the heads of the
     individual houses within each nation. The trial judge ruled on both the admissibility of,
     and the weight to be given to, these various forms of oral history without the benefit of
     my reasons in Van der Peet, as will become evident in the discussion that follows.
                  (b) Adaawk and Kungax
93                The adaawk and kungax of the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en nations,
     respectively, are oral histories of a special kind. They were described by the trial judge,
     at p. 164, as a “sacred ‘official’ litany, or history, or recital of the most important laws,
     history, traditions and traditional territory of a House”. The content of these special oral
     histories includes its physical representation totem poles, crests and blankets. The
                                                   - 65 -
     importance of the adaawk and kungax is underlined by the fact that they are “repeated,
     performed and authenticated at important feasts” (at p. 164). At those feasts, dissenters
     have the opportunity to object if they question any detail and, in this way, help ensure
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     the authenticity of the adaawk and kungax. Although they serve largely the same role,
     the trial judge found that there are some differences in both the form and content of the
     adaawk and the kungax. For example, the latter is “in the nature of a song . . . which is
     intended to represent the special authority and responsibilities of a chief . . . .” However,
     these differences are not legally relevant for the purposes of the issue at hand.
94                It is apparent that the adaawk and kungax are of integral importance to the
     distinctive cultures of the appellant nations. At trial, they were relied on for two distinct
     purposes. First, the adaawk was relied on as a component of and, therefore, as proof of
     the existence of a system of land tenure law internal to the Gitksan, which covered the
     whole territory claimed by that appellant. In other words, it was offered as evidence of
     the Gitksan’s historical use and occupation of that territory. For the Wet’suwet’en, the
     kungax was offered as proof of the central significance of the claimed lands to their
     distinctive culture. As I shall explain later in these reasons, both use and occupation,
     and the central significance of the lands occupied, are relevant to proof of aboriginal
     title.
95                The admissibility of the adaawk and kungax was the subject of a general
     decision of the trial judge handed down during the course of the trial regarding the
     admissibility of all oral histories (incorrectly indexed as Uukw v. R., [1987] 6 W.W.R.
     155 (B.C.S.C.)). Although the trial judge recognized that the evidence at issue was a
     form of hearsay, he ruled it admissible on the basis of the recognized exception that
     declarations made by deceased persons could be given in evidence by witnesses as proof
     of public or general rights: see Michael N. Howard, Peter Crane and Daniel A.
                                                   - 66 -
     Hochberg, Phipson on Evidence (14th ed. 1990), at p. 736. He affirmed that earlier
     ruling in his trial judgment, correctly in my view, by stating, at p. 180, that the adaawk
     and kungax were admissible “out of necessity as exceptions to the hearsay rule” because
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
     there was no other way to prove the history of the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en nations.
96                The trial judge, however, went on to give these oral histories no independent
     weight at all. He held, at p. 180, that they were only admissible as “direct evidence of
     facts in issue . . . in a few cases where they could constitute confirmatory proof of early
     presence in the territory”. His central concern that the adaawk and kungax could not
     serve “as evidence of detailed history, or land ownership, use or occupation”. I disagree
     with some of the reasons he relied on in support of this conclusion.
97                Although he had earlier recognized, when making his ruling on
     admissibility, that it was impossible to make an easy distinction between the
     mythological and “real” aspects of these oral histories, he discounted the adaawk and
     kungax because they were not “literally true”, confounded “what is fact and what is
     belief”, “included some material which might be classified as mythology”, and projected
     a “romantic view” of the history of the appellants. He also cast doubt on the authenticity
     of these special oral histories (at p. 181) because, inter alia, “the verifying group is so
     small that they cannot safely be regarded as expressing the reputation of even the Indian
     community, let alone the larger community whose opportunity to dispute territorial
     claims would be essential to weight”. Finally, he questioned (at p. 181) the utility of the
     adaawk and kungax to demonstrate use and occupation because they were “seriously
     lacking in detail about the specific lands to which they are said to relate”.
98                Although he framed his ruling on weight in terms of the specific oral
     histories before him, in my respectful opinion, the trial judge in reality based his decision
                                                     - 67 -
      on some general concerns with the use of oral histories as evidence in aboriginal rights
      cases. In summary, the trial judge gave no independent weight to these special oral
      histories because they did not accurately convey historical truth, because knowledge
                                                                                                        1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      about those oral histories was confined to the communities whose histories they were and
      because those oral histories were insufficiently detailed. However, as I mentioned
      earlier, these are features, to a greater or lesser extent, of all oral histories, not just the
      adaawk and kungax. The implication of the trial judge’s reasoning is that oral histories
      should never be given any independent weight and are only useful as confirmatory
      evidence in aboriginal rights litigation. I fear that if this reasoning were followed, the
      oral histories of aboriginal peoples would be consistently and systematically undervalued
      by the Canadian legal system, in contradiction of the express instruction to the contrary
      in Van der Peet that trial courts interpret the evidence of aboriginal peoples in light of
      the difficulties inherent in adjudicating aboriginal claims.
                   (c) Recollections of Aboriginal Life
99                 The trial judge also erred when he discounted the “recollections of aboriginal
      life” offered by various members of the appellant nations. I take that term to be a
      reference to testimony about personal and family history that is not part of an adaawk or
      a kungax. That evidence consisted of the personal knowledge of the witnesses and
      declarations of witnesses’ ancestors as to land use. This history had been adduced by the
      appellants in order to establish the requisite degree of use and occupation to make out
      a claim to ownership and, for the same reason as the adaawk and kungax, is material to
      the proof of aboriginal title.
100                The trial judge limited the uses to which the evidence could be put. He
      reasoned, at p. 177, that this evidence, at most, established “without question, that the
                                                    - 68 -
      plaintiff’s immediate ancestors, for the past 100 years or so” had used land in the
      claimed territory for aboriginal purposes. However, the evidence was insufficiently
      precise to demonstrate that the more distant ancestors of the witnesses had engaged in
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      specific enough land use “far enough back in time to permit the plaintiffs to succeed on
      issues such as internal boundaries”. In the language of Van der Peet, the trial judge
      effectively held that this evidence did not demonstrate the requisite continuity between
      present occupation and past occupation in order to ground a claim for aboriginal title.
101               In my opinion, the trial judge expected too much of the oral history of the
      appellants, as expressed in the recollections of aboriginal life of members of the
      appellant nations. He expected that evidence to provide definitive and precise evidence
      of pre-contact aboriginal activities on the territory in question. However, as I held in
      Van der Peet, this will be almost an impossible burden to meet. Rather, if oral history
      cannot conclusively establish pre-sovereignty (after this decision) occupation of land,
      it may still be relevant to demonstrate that current occupation has its origins prior to
      sovereignty. This is exactly what the appellants sought to do.
                  (d) Territorial Affidavits
102               Finally, the trial judge also erred in his treatment of the territorial affidavits
      filed by the appellant chiefs. Those affidavits were declarations of the territorial
      holdings of each of the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en houses and, at trial, were introduced
      for the purposes of establishing each House’s ownership of its specific territory. Before
      this Court, the appellants tried to amalgamate these individual claims into collective
      claims on behalf of each nation and the relevance of the affidavits changed accordingly.
      I have already held that it is not open to the appellants to alter fundamentally the nature
      of their claim in this way on appeal. Nevertheless, the treatment of the affidavits is
                                                    - 69 -
      important because they will be relevant at a new trial to the existence and nature of the
      land tenure system within each nation and, therefore, material to the proof of title.
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
103                The affidavits rely heavily on the declarations of deceased persons of use or
      ownership of the lands, which are a form of oral history. But those declarations are a
      kind of hearsay and the appellants therefore argued that the affidavits should be admitted
      through the reputation exception to the hearsay rule. Although he recognized, at p. 438,
      that the territorial affidavits were “the best evidence [the appellants] could adduce on this
      question of internal boundaries”, the trial judge held that this exception did not apply and
      refused to admit the declarations contained in the affidavits.
104                I am concerned by the specific reasons the trial judge gave for refusing to
      apply the reputation exception. He questioned the degree to which the declarations
      amounted to a reputation because they were largely confined to the appellants’
      communities. The trial judge asserted that neighbouring aboriginal groups whose
      territorial claims conflicted with those of the appellants, as well as non-aboriginals who
      potentially possessed a legal interest in the claimed territory, were unaware of the
      content of the alleged reputation at all. Furthermore, the trial judge reasoned that since
      the subject-matter of the affidavits was disputed, its reliability was doubtful. Finally, the
      trial judge questioned, at p. 441, “the independence and objectivity” of the information
      contained in the affidavits, because the appellants and their ancestors (at p. 440) “have
      been actively discussing land claims for many years”.
105                Although he regretted this finding, the trial judge felt bound to apply the
      rules of evidence because it did not appear to him (at p. 442) “that the Supreme Court
      of Canada has decided that the ordinary rules of evidence do not apply to this kind of
      case”. The trial judge arrived at this conclusion, however, without the benefit of Van der
                                                    - 70 -
      Peet, where I held that the ordinary rules of evidence must be approached and adapted
      in light of the evidentiary difficulties inherent in adjudicating aboriginal claims.
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
106                Many of the reasons relied on by the trial judge for excluding the evidence
      contained in the territorial affidavits are problematic because they run against this
      fundamental principle. The requirement that a reputation be known in the general
      community, for example, ignores the fact that oral histories, as noted by the Royal
      Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, generally relate to particular locations, and refer to
      particular families and communities and may, as a result, be unknown outside of that
      community, even to other aboriginal nations. Excluding the territorial affidavits because
      the claims to which they relate are disputed does not acknowledge that claims to
      aboriginal rights, and aboriginal title in particular, are almost always disputed and
      contested. Indeed, if those claims were uncontroversial, there would be no need to bring
      them to the courts for resolution. Casting doubt on the reliability of the territorial
      affidavits because land claims had been actively discussed for many years also fails to
      take account of the special context surrounding aboriginal claims, in two ways. First,
      those claims have been discussed for so long because of British Columbia’s persistent
      refusal to acknowledge the existence of aboriginal title in that province until relatively
      recently, largely as a direct result of the decision of this Court in Calder, supra. It would
      be perverse, to say the least, to use the refusal of the province to acknowledge the rights
      of its aboriginal inhabitants as a reason for excluding evidence which may prove the
      existence of those rights. Second, this rationale for exclusion places aboriginal claimants
      whose societies record their past through oral history in a grave dilemma. In order for
      the oral history of a community to amount to a form of reputation, and to be admissible
      in court, it must remain alive through the discussions of members of that community;
      those discussions are the very basis of that reputation. But if those histories are
      discussed too much, and too close to the date of litigation, they may be discounted as
                                                    - 71 -
      being suspect, and may be held to be inadmissible. The net effect may be that a society
      with such an oral tradition would never be able to establish a historical claim through the
      use of oral history in court.
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                   (e) Conclusion
107                The trial judge’s treatment of the various kinds of oral histories did not
      satisfy the principles I laid down in Van der Peet. These errors are particularly
      worrisome because oral histories were of critical importance to the appellants’ case.
      They used those histories in an attempt to establish their occupation and use of the
      disputed territory, an essential requirement for aboriginal title. The trial judge, after
      refusing to admit, or giving no independent weight to these oral histories, reached the
      conclusion that the appellants had not demonstrated the requisite degree of occupation
      for “ownership”. Had the trial judge assessed the oral histories correctly, his conclusions
      on these issues of fact might have been very different.
108                In the circumstances, the factual findings cannot stand. However, given the
      enormous complexity of the factual issues at hand, it would be impossible for the Court
      to do justice to the parties by sifting through the record itself and making new factual
      findings. A new trial is warranted, at which the evidence may be considered in light of
      the principles laid down in Van der Peet and elaborated upon here. In applying these
      principles, the new trial judge might well share some or all of the findings of fact of
      McEachern C.J.
      C.           What is the content of aboriginal title, how is it protected by s. 35(1) of the
                   Constitution Act, 1982, and what is required for its proof?
                   (1) Introduction
                                                     - 72 -
109                The parties disagree over whether the appellants have established aboriginal
      title to the disputed area. However, since those factual issues require a new trial, we
      cannot resolve that dispute in this appeal. But factual issues aside, the parties also have
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      a more fundamental disagreement over the content of aboriginal title itself, and its
      reception into the Constitution by s. 35(1). In order to give guidance to the judge at the
      new trial, it is to this issue that I will now turn.
110                I set out these opposing positions by way of illustration and introduction
      because I believe that all of the parties have characterized the content of aboriginal title
      incorrectly. The appellants argue that aboriginal title is tantamount to an inalienable fee
      simple, which confers on aboriginal peoples the rights to use those lands as they choose
      and which has been constitutionalized by s. 35(1). The respondents offer two alternative
      formulations: first, that aboriginal title is no more than a bundle of rights to engage in
      activities which are themselves aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1),
      and that the Constitution Act, 1982, merely constitutionalizes those individual rights, not
      the bundle itself, because the latter has no independent content; and second, that
      aboriginal title, at most, encompasses the right to exclusive use and occupation of land
      in order to engage in those activities which are aboriginal rights themselves, and that s.
      35(1) constitutionalizes this notion of exclusivity.
111                The content of aboriginal title, in fact, lies somewhere in between these
      positions. Aboriginal title is a right in land and, as such, is more than the right to engage
      in specific activities which may be themselves aboriginal rights. Rather, it confers the
      right to use land for a variety of activities, not all of which need be aspects of practices,
      customs and traditions which are integral to the distinctive cultures of aboriginal
      societies. Those activities do not constitute the right per se; rather, they are parasitic on
      the underlying title. However, that range of uses is subject to the limitation that they
                                                    - 73 -
      must not be irreconcilable with the nature of the attachment to the land which forms the
      basis of the particular group’s aboriginal title. This inherent limit, to be explained more
      fully below, flows from the definition of aboriginal title as a sui generis interest in land,
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      and is one way in which aboriginal title is distinct from a fee simple.
                   (2) Aboriginal Title at Common Law
                   (a) General Features
112                The starting point of the Canadian jurisprudence on aboriginal title is the
      Privy Council’s decision in St. Catherine’s Milling and Lumber Co. v. The Queen
      (1888), 14 A.C. 46, which described aboriginal title as a “personal and usufructuary
      right” (at p. 54). The subsequent jurisprudence has attempted to grapple with this
      definition, and has in the process demonstrated that the Privy Council’s choice of
      terminology is not particularly helpful to explain the various dimensions of aboriginal
      title. What the Privy Council sought to capture is that aboriginal title is a sui generis
      interest in land. Aboriginal title has been described as sui generis in order to distinguish
      it from “normal” proprietary interests, such as fee simple. However, as I will now
      develop, it is also sui generis in the sense that its characteristics cannot be completely
      explained by reference either to the common law rules of real property or to the rules of
      property found in aboriginal legal systems. As with other aboriginal rights, it must be
      understood by reference to both common law and aboriginal perspectives.
113                The idea that aboriginal title is sui generis is the unifying principle
      underlying the various dimensions of that title. One dimension is its inalienability.
      Lands held pursuant to aboriginal title cannot be transferred, sold or surrendered to
      anyone other than the Crown and, as a result, is inalienable to third parties. This Court
                                                     - 74 -
      has taken pains to clarify that aboriginal title is only “personal” in this sense, and does
      not mean that aboriginal title is a non-proprietary interest which amounts to no more than
      a licence to use and occupy the land and cannot compete on an equal footing with other
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      proprietary interests: see Canadian Pacific Ltd. v. Paul, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 654, at p. 677.
114                Another dimension of aboriginal title is its source. It had originally been
      thought that the source of aboriginal title in Canada was the Royal Proclamation, 1763:
      see St. Catherine’s Milling. However, it is now clear that although aboriginal title was
      recognized by the Proclamation, it arises from the prior occupation of Canada by
      aboriginal peoples. That prior occupation, however, is relevant in two different ways,
      both of which illustrate the sui generis nature of aboriginal title. The first is the physical
      fact of occupation, which derives from the common law principle that occupation is
      proof of possession in law: see Kent McNeil, Common Law Aboriginal Title (1989), at
      p. 7. Thus, in Guerin, supra, Dickson J. described aboriginal title, at p. 376, as a “legal
      right derived from the Indians’ historic occupation and possession of their tribal lands”.
      What makes aboriginal title sui generis is that it arises from possession before the
      assertion of British sovereignty, whereas normal estates, like fee simple, arise afterward:
      see Kent McNeil, “The Meaning of Aboriginal Title”, in Michael Asch, ed., Aboriginal
      and Treaty Rights in Canada (1997), 135, at p. 144. This idea has been further
      developed in Roberts v. Canada, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 322, where this Court unanimously
      held at p. 340 that “aboriginal title pre-dated colonization by the British and survived
      British claims of sovereignty” (also see Guerin, at p. 378). What this suggests is a
      second source for aboriginal title -- the relationship between common law and pre-
      existing systems of aboriginal law.
115                A further dimension of aboriginal title is the fact that it is held communally.
      Aboriginal title cannot be held by individual aboriginal persons; it is a collective right
                                                   - 75 -
      to land held by all members of an aboriginal nation. Decisions with respect to that land
      are also made by that community. This is another feature of aboriginal title which is sui
      generis and distinguishes it from normal property interests.
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                  (b) The Content of Aboriginal Title
116               Although cases involving aboriginal title have come before this Court and
      Privy Council before, there has never been a definitive statement from either court on the
      content of aboriginal title. In St. Catherine’s Milling, the Privy Council, as I have
      mentioned, described the aboriginal title as a “personal and usufructuary right”, but
      declined to explain what that meant because it was not “necessary to express any opinion
      upon the point” (at p. 55). Similarly, in Calder, Guerin, and Paul, the issues were the
      extinguishment of, the fiduciary duty arising from the surrender of, and statutory
      easements over land held pursuant to, aboriginal title, respectively; the content of title
      was not at issue and was not directly addressed.
117               Although the courts have been less than forthcoming, I have arrived at the
      conclusion that the content of aboriginal title can be summarized by two propositions:
      first, that aboriginal title encompasses the right to exclusive use and occupation of the
      land held pursuant to that title for a variety of purposes, which need not be aspects of
      those aboriginal practices, customs and traditions which are integral to distinctive
      aboriginal cultures; and second, that those protected uses must not be irreconcilable with
      the nature of the group’s attachment to that land. For the sake of clarity, I will discuss
      each of these propositions separately.
                  Aboriginal title encompasses the right to use the land held pursuant to that
                  title for a variety of purposes, which need not be aspects of those aboriginal
                                                    - 76 -
                   practices, cultures and traditions which are integral to distinctive aboriginal
                   cultures
118                The respondents argue that aboriginal title merely encompasses the right to
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      engage in activities which are aspects of aboriginal practices, customs and traditions
      which are integral to distinctive aboriginal cultures of the aboriginal group claiming the
      right and, at most, adds the notion of exclusivity; i.e., the exclusive right to use the land
      for those purposes. However, the uses to which lands held pursuant to aboriginal title
      can be put are not restricted in this way. This conclusion emerges from three sources: (i)
      the Canadian jurisprudence on aboriginal title, (ii) the relationship between reserve lands
      and lands held pursuant to aboriginal title, and (iii) the Indian Oil and Gas Act., R.S.C.,
      1985, c. I-7. As well, although this is not legally determinative, it is supported by the
      critical literature. In particular, I have profited greatly from Professor McNeil’s article,
      “The Meaning of Aboriginal Title”, supra.
                   (i) Canadian Jurisprudence on Aboriginal Title
119                Despite the fact that the jurisprudence on aboriginal title is somewhat
      underdeveloped, it is clear that the uses to which lands held pursuant to aboriginal title
      can be put is not restricted to the practices, customs and traditions of aboriginal peoples
      integral to distinctive aboriginal cultures. In Guerin, for example, Dickson J. described
      aboriginal title as an “interest in land” which encompassed “a legal right to occupy and
      possess certain lands” (at p. 382). The “right to occupy and possess” is framed in broad
      terms and, significantly, is not qualified by reference to traditional and customary uses
      of those lands. Any doubt that the right to occupancy and possession encompasses a
      broad variety of uses of land was put to rest in Paul, where the Court went even further
      and stated that aboriginal title was “more than the right to enjoyment and occupancy” (at
      p. 678). Once again, there is no reference to aboriginal practices, customs and traditions
                                                   - 77 -
      as a qualifier on that right. Moreover, I take the reference to “more” as emphasis of the
      broad notion of use and possession.
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                  (ii) Reserve Land
120               Another source of support for the conclusion that the uses to which lands
      held under aboriginal title can be put are not restricted to those grounded in practices,
      customs and traditions integral to distinctive aboriginal cultures can be found in Guerin,
      where Dickson J. stated at p. 379 that the same legal principles governed the aboriginal
      interest in reserve lands and lands held pursuant to aboriginal title:
                       It does not matter, in my opinion, that the present case is concerned with
                  the interest of an Indian Band in a reserve rather than with unrecognized
                  aboriginal title in traditional tribal lands. The Indian interest in the land is
                  the same in both cases. . . . [Emphasis added.]
121               The nature of the Indian interest in reserve land is very broad, and can be
      found in s. 18 of the Indian Act, which I reproduce in full:
                      18. (1) Subject to this Act, reserves are held by Her Majesty for the use
                  and benefit of the respective bands for which they were set apart, and
                  subject to this Act and to the terms of any treaty or surrender, the Governor
                  in Council may determine whether any purpose for which lands in a reserve
                  are used or are to be used is for the use and benefit of the band.
                      (2) The Minister may authorize the use of lands in a reserve for the
                  purpose of Indian schools, the administration of Indian affairs, Indian burial
                  grounds, Indian health projects or, with the consent of the council of the
                  band, for any other purpose for the general welfare of the band, and may
                  take any lands in a reserve required for those purposes, but where an
                  individual Indian, immediately prior to the taking, was entitled to the
                  possession of those lands, compensation for that use shall be paid to the
                  Indian, in such amount as may be agreed between the Indian and the
                  Minister, or, failing agreement, as may be determined in such manner as the
                  Minister may direct. [Emphasis added.]
                                                    - 78 -
      The principal provision is s. 18(1), which states that reserve lands are held “for the use
      and benefit” of the bands which occupy them; those uses and benefits, on the face of the
      Indian Act, do not appear to be restricted to practices, customs and traditions integral to
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      distinctive aboriginal cultures. The breadth of those uses is reinforced by s. 18(2), which
      states that reserve lands may be used “for any other purpose for the general welfare of
      the band”. The general welfare of the band has not been defined in terms of aboriginal
      practices, customs and traditions, nor in terms of those activities which have their origin
      pre-contact; it is a concept, by definition, which incorporates a reference to the present-
      day needs of aboriginal communities. On the basis of Guerin, lands held pursuant to
      aboriginal title, like reserve lands, are also capable of being used for a broad variety of
      purposes.
                   (iii) Indian Oil and Gas Act
122                The third source for the proposition that the content of aboriginal title is not
      restricted to practices, customs and traditions which are integral to distinctive aboriginal
      cultures is the Indian Oil and Gas Act. The overall purpose of the statute is to provide
      for the exploration of oil and gas on reserve lands through their surrender to the Crown.
      The statute presumes that the aboriginal interest in reserve land includes mineral rights,
      a point which this Court unanimously accepted with respect to the Indian Act in
      Blueberry River Indian Band v. Canada (Department of Indian Affairs and Northern
      Development), [1995] 4 S.C.R. 344. On the basis of Guerin, aboriginal title also
      encompass mineral rights, and lands held pursuant to aboriginal title should be capable
      of exploitation in the same way, which is certainly not a traditional use for those lands.
      This conclusion is reinforced by s. 6(2) of the Act, which provides:
                       6. . . .
                                                    - 79 -
                       (2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to abrogate the rights of Indian
                   people or preclude them from negotiating for oil and gas benefits in those
                   areas in which land claims have not been settled.
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      The areas referred to in s. 6(2), at the very least, must encompass lands held pursuant to
      aboriginal title, since those lands by definition have not been surrendered under land
      claims agreements. The presumption underlying s. 6(2) is that aboriginal title permits
      the development of oil and gas reserves.
123                Although this is not determinative, the conclusion that the content of
      aboriginal title is not restricted to those uses with their origins in the practices, customs
      and traditions integral to distinctive aboriginal societies has wide support in the critical
      literature: Jocelyn Gagne, “The Content of Aboriginal Title at Common Law: A Look
      at the Nishga Claim” (1982-83), 47 Sask. L. Rev. 309 at pp. 336-37; Kent McNeil,
      Common Law Aboriginal Title, supra, at p. 242; Kent McNeil, “The Meaning of
      Aboriginal Title”, supra, at pp. 143-150; William Pentney, “The Rights of the Aboriginal
      Peoples of Canada in the Constitution Act, 1982 Part II -- Section 35: The Substantive
      Guarantee” (1988), 22 U.B.C. L. Rev. 207, at p. 221; Report of the Royal Commission
      on Aboriginal Peoples, vol. 2 (Restructuring the Relationship), at p. 561; Brian Slattery,
      “The Constitutional Guarantee of Aboriginal and Treaty Rights” (1982-83), 8 Queen’s
      L.J. 232, at pp. 268-9; Brian Slattery, Ancestral Lands, Alien Laws: Judicial Perspectives
      on Aboriginal Title (1983), at p. 34; Brian Slattery, “Understanding Aboriginal Rights”,
      66 Can. Bar Rev. 727, at pp. 746-48.
124                In conclusion, the content of aboriginal title is not restricted to those uses
      which are elements of a practice, custom or tradition integral to the distinctive culture
      of the aboriginal group claiming the right. However, nor does aboriginal title amount
      to a form of inalienable fee simple, as I will now explain.
                                                   - 80 -
                  (c) Inherent Limit: Lands Held Pursuant to Aboriginal Title Cannot Be
                  Used in a Manner that Is Irreconcilable with the Nature of the Attachment
                  to the Land Which Forms the Basis of the Group’s Claim to Aboriginal Title
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
125               The content of aboriginal title contains an inherent limit that lands held
      pursuant to title cannot be used in a manner that is irreconcilable with the nature of the
      claimants’ attachment to those lands. This limit on the content of aboriginal title is a
      manifestation of the principle that underlies the various dimensions of that special
      interest in land -- it is a sui generis interest that is distinct from “normal” proprietary
      interests, most notably fee simple.
126               I arrive at this conclusion by reference to the other dimensions of aboriginal
      title which are sui generis as well. I first consider the source of aboriginal title. As I
      discussed earlier, aboriginal title arises from the prior occupation of Canada by
      aboriginal peoples. That prior occupation is relevant in two different ways: first, because
      of the physical fact of occupation, and second, because aboriginal title originates in part
      from pre-existing systems of aboriginal law. However, the law of aboriginal title does
      not only seek to determine the historic rights of aboriginal peoples to land; it also seeks
      to afford legal protection to prior occupation in the present-day. Implicit in the
      protection of historic patterns of occupation is a recognition of the importance of the
      continuity of the relationship of an aboriginal community to its land over time.
127               I develop this point below with respect to the test for aboriginal title. The
      relevance of the continuity of the relationship of an aboriginal community with its land
      here is that it applies not only to the past, but to the future as well. That relationship
      should not be prevented from continuing into the future. As a result, uses of the lands
                                                    - 81 -
      that would threaten that future relationship are, by their very nature, excluded from the
      content of aboriginal title.
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
128                Accordingly, in my view, lands subject to aboriginal title cannot be put to
      such uses as may be irreconcilable with the nature of the occupation of that land and the
      relationship that the particular group has had with the land which together have given
      rise to aboriginal title in the first place. As discussed below, one of the critical elements
      in the determination of whether a particular aboriginal group has aboriginal title to
      certain lands is the matter of the occupancy of those lands. Occupancy is determined by
      reference to the activities that have taken place on the land and the uses to which the land
      has been put by the particular group. If lands are so occupied, there will exist a special
      bond between the group and the land in question such that the land will be part of the
      definition of the group’s distinctive culture. It seems to me that these elements of
      aboriginal title create an inherent limitation on the uses to which the land, over which
      such title exists, may be put. For example, if occupation is established with reference
      to the use of the land as a hunting ground, then the group that successfully claims
      aboriginal title to that land may not use it in such a fashion as to destroy its value for
      such a use (e.g., by strip mining it). Similarly, if a group claims a special bond with the
      land because of its ceremonial or cultural significance, it may not use the land in such
      a way as to destroy that relationship (e.g., by developing it in such a way that the bond
      is destroyed, perhaps by turning it into a parking lot).
129                It is for this reason also that lands held by virtue of aboriginal title may not
      be alienated. Alienation would bring to an end the entitlement of the aboriginal people
      to occupy the land and would terminate their relationship with it. I have suggested above
      that the inalienability of aboriginal lands is, at least in part, a function of the common
      law principle that settlers in colonies must derive their title from Crown grant and,
                                                    - 82 -
      therefore, cannot acquire title through purchase from aboriginal inhabitants. It is also,
      again only in part, a function of a general policy “to ensure that Indians are not
      dispossessed of their entitlements”: see Mitchell v. Peguis Indian Band, [1990] 2 S.C.R.
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      85, at p. 133. What the inalienability of lands held pursuant to aboriginal title suggests
      is that those lands are more than just a fungible commodity. The relationship between
      an aboriginal community and the lands over which it has aboriginal title has an important
      non-economic component. The land has an inherent and unique value in itself, which
      is enjoyed by the community with aboriginal title to it. The community cannot put the
      land to uses which would destroy that value.
130                I am cognizant that the sui generis nature of aboriginal title precludes the
      application of “traditional real property rules” to elucidate the content of that title (St.
      Mary’s Indian Band v. Cranbrook (City), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 657, at para. 14).
      Nevertheless, a useful analogy can be drawn between the limit on aboriginal title and the
      concept of equitable waste at common law. Under that doctrine, persons who hold a life
      estate in real property cannot commit “wanton or extravagant acts of destruction” (E. H.
      Burn, Cheshire and Burn’s Modern Law of Real Property (14th ed. 1988), at p. 264) or
      “ruin the property” (Robert E. Megarry and H. W. R. Wade, The Law of Real Property
      (4th ed. 1975), at p. 105). This description of the limits imposed by the doctrine of
      equitable waste capture the kind of limit I have in mind here.
131                Finally, what I have just said regarding the importance of the continuity of
      the relationship between an aboriginal community and its land, and the non-economic
      or inherent value of that land, should not be taken to detract from the possibility of
      surrender to the Crown in exchange for valuable consideration. On the contrary, the idea
      of surrender reinforces the conclusion that aboriginal title is limited in the way I have
      described. If aboriginal peoples wish to use their lands in a way that aboriginal title does
                                                     - 83 -
      not permit, then they must surrender those lands and convert them into non-title lands
      to do so.
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
132                The foregoing amounts to a general limitation on the use of lands held by
      virtue of aboriginal title. It arises from the particular physical and cultural relationship
      that a group may have with the land and is defined by the source of aboriginal title over
      it. This is not, I must emphasize, a limitation that restricts the use of the land to those
      activities that have traditionally been carried out on it. That would amount to a legal
      straitjacket on aboriginal peoples who have a legitimate legal claim to the land. The
      approach I have outlined above allows for a full range of uses of the land, subject only
      to an overarching limit, defined by the special nature of the aboriginal title in that land.
                   (d) Aboriginal Title under s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982
133                Aboriginal title at common law is protected in its full form by s. 35(1). This
      conclusion flows from the express language of s. 35(1) itself, which states in full: “[t]he
      existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby
      recognized and affirmed” (emphasis added). On a plain reading of the provision, s. 35(1)
      did not create aboriginal rights; rather, it accorded constitutional status to those rights
      which were “existing” in 1982. The provision, at the very least, constitutionalized those
      rights which aboriginal peoples possessed at common law, since those rights existed at
      the time s. 35(1) came into force. Since aboriginal title was a common law right whose
      existence was recognized well before 1982 (e.g., Calder, supra), s. 35(1) has
      constitutionalized it in its full form.
134                I expressed this understanding of the relationship between common law
      aboriginal rights, including aboriginal title, and the aboriginal rights protected by s. 35(1)
                                                    - 84 -
      in Van der Peet. While explaining the purposes behind s. 35(1), I stated that “it must be
      remembered that s. 35(1) did not create the legal doctrine of aboriginal rights; aboriginal
      rights existed and were recognized under the common law” (at para. 28). Through the
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      enactment of s. 35(1), “a pre-existing legal doctrine was elevated to constitutional status”
      (at para. 29), or in other words, s. 35(1) had achieved “the constitutionalization of those
      rights” (at para. 29).
135                Finally, this view of the effect of s. 35(1) on common law aboriginal title is
      supported by numerous commentators: Patrick Macklem, “First Nations Self-
      Government and the Borders of the Canadian Legal Imagination” (1991), 36 McGill L.J.
      382, at pp. 447-48; Kent McNeil, “The Constitutional Rights of the Aboriginal Peoples
      of Canada” (1982), 4 Sup. Ct. L. Rev. 255, at pp. 256-57; James O’Reilly, “La Loi
      constitutionnelle de 1982, droit des autochtones” (1984), 25 C. de D. 125, at p. 137;
      William Pentney, “The Rights of the Aboriginal Peoples of Canada in the Constitution
      Act, 1982 Part II -- Section 35: The Substantive Guarantee”, supra, at pp. 220-21;
      Douglas Sanders, “The Rights of the Aboriginal Peoples of Canada” (1983), 61 Can. Bar
      Rev. 314, at p. 329; Douglas Sanders, “Pre-Existing Rights: The Aboriginal Peoples of
      Canada”, in Gérald-A. Beaudoin and Ed Ratushny, eds., The Canadian Charter of Rights
      and Freedoms (2nd ed. 1989), 707, at pp. 731-32; Brian Slattery, “The Constitutional
      Guarantee of Aboriginal and Treaty Rights”, supra, at p. 254; Brian Slattery, Ancestral
      Lands, Alien Laws: Judicial Perspectives on Aboriginal Title, supra, at p. 45.
136                I hasten to add that the constitutionalization of common law aboriginal rights
      by s. 35(1) does not mean that those rights exhaust the content of s. 35(1). As I said in
      Côté, supra, at para. 52:
                                                    - 85 -
                   Section 35(1) would fail to achieve its noble purpose of preserving the
                   integral and defining features of distinctive aboriginal societies if it only
                   protected those defining features which were fortunate enough to have
                   received the legal recognition and approval of European colonizers.
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      I relied on this proposition in Côté to defeat the argument that the possible absence of
      aboriginal rights under French colonial law was a bar to the existence of aboriginal rights
      under s. 35(1) within the historic boundaries of New France. But it also follows that the
      existence of a particular aboriginal right at common law is not a sine qua non for the
      proof of an aboriginal right that is recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1). Indeed, none of
      the decisions of this Court handed down under s. 35(1) in which the existence of an
      aboriginal right has been demonstrated has relied on the existence of that right at
      common law. The existence of an aboriginal right at common law is therefore sufficient,
      but not necessary, for the recognition and affirmation of that right by s. 35(1).
137                The acknowledgement that s. 35(1) has accorded constitutional status to
      common law aboriginal title raises a further question — the relationship of aboriginal
      title to the “aboriginal rights” protected by s. 35(1). I addressed that question in Adams,
      supra, where the Court had been presented with two radically different conceptions of
      this relationship. The first conceived of aboriginal rights as being “inherently based in
      aboriginal title to the land” (at para. 25), or as fragments of a broader claim to aboriginal
      title. By implication, aboriginal rights must rest either in a claim to title or the
      unextinguished remnants of title. Taken to its logical extreme, this suggests that
      aboriginal title is merely the sum of a set of individual aboriginal rights, and that it
      therefore has no independent content. However, I rejected this position for another —
      that aboriginal title is “simply one manifestation of a broader-based conception of
      aboriginal rights” (at para. 25). Thus, although aboriginal title is a species of aboriginal
      right recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1), it is distinct from other aboriginal rights
                                                     - 86 -
      because it arises where the connection of a group with a piece of land “was of a central
      significance to their distinctive culture” (at para. 26).
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
138                The picture which emerges from Adams is that the aboriginal rights which
      are recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1) fall along a spectrum with respect to their degree
      of connection with the land. At the one end, there are those aboriginal rights which are
      practices, customs and traditions that are integral to the distinctive aboriginal culture of
      the group claiming the right. However, the “occupation and use of the land” where the
      activity is taking place is not “sufficient to support a claim of title to the land” (at para.
      26 (emphasis in original)).       Nevertheless, those activities receive constitutional
      protection. In the middle, there are activities which, out of necessity, take place on land
      and indeed, might be intimately related to a particular piece of land. Although an
      aboriginal group may not be able to demonstrate title to the land, it may nevertheless
      have a site-specific right to engage in a particular activity. I put the point this way in
      Adams, at para. 30:
                   Even where an aboriginal right exists on a tract of land to which the
                   aboriginal people in question do not have title, that right may well be site
                   specific, with the result that it can be exercised only upon that specific tract
                   of land. For example, if an aboriginal people demonstrates that hunting on
                   a specific tract of land was an integral part of their distinctive culture then,
                   even if the right exists apart from title to that tract of land, the aboriginal
                   right to hunt is nonetheless defined as, and limited to, the right to hunt on
                   the specific tract of land. [Emphasis added.]
      At the other end of the spectrum, there is aboriginal title itself. As Adams makes clear,
      aboriginal title confers more than the right to engage in site-specific activities which are
      aspects of the practices, customs and traditions of distinctive aboriginal cultures. Site-
      specific rights can be made out even if title cannot. What aboriginal title confers is the
      right to the land itself.
                                                   - 87 -
139               Because aboriginal rights can vary with respect to their degree of connection
      with the land, some aboriginal groups may be unable to make out a claim to title, but will
      nevertheless possess aboriginal rights that are recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1),
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      including site-specific rights to engage in particular activities. As I explained in Adams,
      this may occur in the case of nomadic peoples who varied “the location of their
      settlements with the season and changing circumstances” (at para. 27). The fact that
      aboriginal peoples were non-sedentary, however (at para. 27)
                  does not alter the fact that nomadic peoples survived through reliance on the
                  land prior to contact with Europeans and, further, that many of the practices,
                  customs and traditions of nomadic peoples that took place on the land were
                  integral to their distinctive cultures.
                  (e) Proof of Aboriginal Title
                  (i) Introduction
140               In addition to differing in the degree of connection with the land, aboriginal
      title differs from other aboriginal rights in another way. To date, the Court has defined
      aboriginal rights in terms of activities. As I said in Van der Peet (at para. 46):
                  [I]n order to be an aboriginal right an activity must be an element of a
                  practice, custom or tradition integral to the distinctive culture of the
                  aboriginal group claiming the right. [Emphasis added.]
      Aboriginal title, however, is a right to the land itself. Subject to the limits I have laid
      down above, that land may be used for a variety of activities, none of which need be
      individually protected as aboriginal rights under s. 35(1). Those activities are parasitic
      on the underlying title.
                                                    - 88 -
141                This difference between aboriginal rights to engage in particular activities
      and aboriginal title requires that the test I laid down in Van der Peet be adapted
      accordingly. I anticipated this possibility in Van der Peet itself, where I stated that (at
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      para. 74):
                   Aboriginal rights arise from the prior occupation of land, but they also arise
                   from the prior social organization and distinctive cultures of aboriginal
                   peoples on that land. In considering whether a claim to an aboriginal right
                   has been made out, courts must look at both the relationship of an aboriginal
                   claimant to the land and at the practices, customs and traditions arising from
                   the claimant’s distinctive culture and society. Courts must not focus so
                   entirely on the relationship of aboriginal peoples with the land that they lose
                   sight of the other factors relevant to the identification and definition of
                   aboriginal rights. [Emphasis added; “and” emphasized in original.]
      Since the purpose of s. 35(1) is to reconcile the prior presence of aboriginal peoples in
      North America with the assertion of Crown sovereignty, it is clear from this statement
      that s. 35(1) must recognize and affirm both aspects of that prior presence — first, the
      occupation of land, and second, the prior social organization and distinctive cultures of
      aboriginal peoples on that land. To date the jurisprudence under s. 35(1) has given more
      emphasis to the second aspect. To a great extent, this has been a function of the types
      of cases which have come before this Court under s. 35(1) — prosecutions for regulatory
      offences that, by their very nature, proscribe discrete types of activity.
142                The adaptation of the test laid down in Van der Peet to suit claims to title
      must be understood as the recognition of the first aspect of that prior presence. However,
      as will now become apparent, the tests for the identification of aboriginal rights to
      engage in particular activities and for the identification of aboriginal title share broad
      similarities. The major distinctions are first, under the test for aboriginal title, the
      requirement that the land be integral to the distinctive culture of the claimants is
      subsumed by the requirement of occupancy, and second, whereas the time for the
                                                    - 89 -
      identification of aboriginal rights is the time of first contact, the time for the
      identification of aboriginal title is the time at which the Crown asserted sovereignty over
      the land.
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                   (ii) The Test for the Proof of Aboriginal Title
143                In order to make out a claim for aboriginal title, the aboriginal group
      asserting title must satisfy the following criteria: (i) the land must have been occupied
      prior to sovereignty,   (ii) if present occupation is relied on as proof of occupation pre-
      sovereignty, there must be a continuity between present and pre-sovereignty occupation,
      and (iii) at sovereignty, that occupation must have been exclusive.
                   The land must have been occupied prior to sovereignty
144                In order to establish a claim to aboriginal title, the aboriginal group asserting
      the claim must establish that it occupied the lands in question at the time at which the
      Crown asserted sovereignty over the land subject to the title. The relevant time period
      for the establishment of title is, therefore, different than for the establishment of
      aboriginal rights to engage in specific activities. In Van der Peet, I held, at para. 60 that
      “[t]he time period that a court should consider in identifying whether the right claimed
      meets the standard of being integral to the aboriginal community claiming the right is the
      period prior to contact . . . .” This arises from the fact that in defining the central and
      distinctive attributes of pre-existing aboriginal societies it is necessary to look to a time
      prior to the arrival of Europeans. Practices, customs or traditions that arose solely as a
      response to European influences do not meet the standard for recognition as aboriginal
      rights.
                                                     - 90 -
145                On the other hand, in the context of aboriginal title, sovereignty is the
      appropriate time period to consider for several reasons.          First, from a theoretical
      standpoint, aboriginal title arises out of prior occupation of the land by aboriginal
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      peoples and out of the relationship between the common law and pre-existing systems
      of aboriginal law.      Aboriginal title is a burden on the Crown’s underlying title.
      However, the Crown did not gain this title until it asserted sovereignty over the land in
      question. Because it does not make sense to speak of a burden on the underlying title
      before that title existed, aboriginal title crystallized at the time sovereignty was asserted.
      Second, aboriginal title does not raise the problem of distinguishing between distinctive,
      integral aboriginal practices, customs and traditions and those influenced or introduced
      by European contact.        Under common law, the act of occupation or possession is
      sufficient to ground aboriginal title and it is not necessary to prove that the land was a
      distinctive or integral part of the aboriginal society before the arrival of Europeans.
      Finally, from a practical standpoint, it appears that the date of sovereignty is more certain
      than the date of first contact. It is often very difficult to determine the precise moment
      that each aboriginal group had first contact with European culture. I note that this is the
      approach has support in the academic literature: Brian Slattery, “Understanding
      Aboriginal Rights”, supra, at p. 742; Kent McNeil, Common Law Aboriginal Title,
      supra, at p. 196. For these reasons, I conclude that aboriginals must establish occupation
      of the land from the date of the assertion of sovereignty in order to sustain a claim for
      aboriginal title. McEachern C.J. found, at pp. 233-34, and the parties did not dispute on
      appeal, that British sovereignty over British Columbia was conclusively established by
      the Oregon Boundary Treaty of 1846. This is not to say that circumstances subsequent
      to sovereignty may never be relevant to title or compensation; this might be the case, for
      example, where native bands have been dispossessed of traditional lands after
      sovereignty.
                                                   - 91 -
146               There was a consensus among the parties on appeal that proof of historic
      occupation was required to make out a claim to aboriginal title. However, the parties
      disagreed on how that occupancy could be proved. The respondents assert that in order
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      to establish aboriginal title, the occupation must be the physical occupation of the land
      in question. The appellant Gitksan nation argue, by contrast, that aboriginal title may
      be established, at least in part, by reference to aboriginal law.
147               This debate over the proof of occupancy reflects two divergent views of the
      source of aboriginal title. The respondents argue, in essence, that aboriginal title arises
      from the physical reality at the time of sovereignty, whereas the Gitksan effectively take
      the position that aboriginal title arises from and should reflect the pattern of land
      holdings under aboriginal law. However, as I have explained above, the source of
      aboriginal title appears to be grounded both in the common law and in the aboriginal
      perspective on land; the latter includes, but is not limited to, their systems of law. It
      follows that both should be taken into account in establishing the proof of occupancy.
      Indeed, there is precedent for doing so. In Baker Lake, supra, Mahoney J. held that to
      prove aboriginal title, the claimants needed both to demonstrate their “physical presence
      on the land they occupied” (at p. 561) and the existence “among [that group of ] . . . a
      recognition of the claimed rights. . . . by the regime that prevailed before” (at p. 559).
148               This approach to the proof of occupancy at common law is also mandated
      in the context of s. 35(1) by Van der Peet. In that decision, as I stated above, I held at
      para. 50 that the reconciliation of the prior occupation of North America by aboriginal
      peoples with the assertion of Crown sovereignty required that account be taken of the
      “aboriginal perspective while at the same time taking into account the perspective of the
      common law” and that “[t]rue reconciliation will, equally, place weight on each”. I also
      held that the aboriginal perspective on the occupation of their lands can be gleaned, in
                                                    - 92 -
      part, but not exclusively, from their traditional laws, because those laws were elements
      of the practices, customs and traditions of aboriginal peoples: at para. 41. As a result,
      if, at the time of sovereignty, an aboriginal society had laws in relation to land, those
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      laws would be relevant to establishing the occupation of lands which are the subject of
      a claim for aboriginal title. Relevant laws might include, but are not limited to, a land
      tenure system or laws governing land use.
149                However, the aboriginal perspective must be taken into account alongside
      the perspective of the common law. Professor McNeil has convincingly argued that at
      common law, the fact of physical occupation is proof of possession at law, which in turn
      will ground title to the land: Common Law Aboriginal Title, supra, at p. 73; also see
      Cheshire and Burn’s Modern Law of Real Property, supra, at p. 28; and Megarry and
      Wade, The Law of Real Property, supra, at p. 1006. Physical occupation may be
      established in a variety of ways, ranging from the construction of dwellings through
      cultivation and enclosure of fields to regular use of definite tracts of land for hunting,
      fishing or otherwise exploiting its resources: see McNeil, Common Law Aboriginal Title,
      at pp. 201-2. In considering whether occupation sufficient to ground title is established,
      “one must take into account the group’s size, manner of life, material resources, and
      technological abilities, and the character of the lands claimed”: Brian Slattery,
      “Understanding Aboriginal Rights”, at p. 758.
150                In Van der Peet, I drew a distinction between those practices, customs and
      traditions of aboriginal peoples which were “an aspect of, or took place in” the society
      of the aboriginal group asserting the claim and those which were “a central and
      significant part of the society’s distinctive culture” (at para. 55). The latter stood apart
      because they “made the culture of the society distinctive . . . it was one of the things that
      truly made the society what it was” (at para. 55, emphasis in original). The same
                                                     - 93 -
      requirement operates in the determination of the proof of aboriginal title. As I said in
      Adams, a claim to title is made out when a group can demonstrate “that their connection
      with the piece of land . . . was of a central significance to their distinctive culture” (at
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      para. 26).
151                Although this remains a crucial part of the test for aboriginal rights, given
      the occupancy requirement in the test for aboriginal title, I cannot imagine a situation
      where this requirement would actually serve to limit or preclude a title claim. The
      requirement exists for rights short of title because it is necessary to distinguish between
      those practices which were central to the culture of claimants and those which were more
      incidental. However, in the case of title, it would seem clear that any land that was
      occupied pre-sovereignty, and which the parties have maintained a substantial
      connection with since then, is sufficiently important to be of central significance to the
      culture of the claimants. As a result, I do not think it is necessary to include explicitly
      this element as part of the test for aboriginal title.
                   If present occupation is relied on as proof of occupation pre-sovereignty,
                   there must be a continuity between present and pre-sovereignty occupation
152                In Van der Peet, I explained that it is the pre-contact practices, customs and
      traditions of aboriginal peoples which are recognized and affirmed as aboriginal rights
      by s. 35(1). But I also acknowledged it would be “next to impossible” (at para. 62) for
      an aboriginal group to provide conclusive evidence of its pre-contact practices, customs
      and traditions. What would suffice instead was evidence of post-contact practices, which
      was “directed at demonstrating which aspects of the aboriginal community and society
      have their origins pre-contact” (at para. 62). The same concern, and the same solution,
      arises with respect to the proof of occupation in claims for aboriginal title, although there
                                                      - 94 -
      is a difference in the time for determination of title. Conclusive evidence of pre-
      sovereignty occupation may be difficult to come by. Instead, an aboriginal community
      may provide evidence of present occupation as proof of pre-sovereignty occupation in
                                                                                                        1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      support of a claim to aboriginal title. What is required, in addition, is a continuity
      between present and pre-sovereignty occupation, because the relevant time for the
      determination of aboriginal title is at the time before sovereignty.
153                  Needless to say, there is no need to establish “an unbroken chain of
      continuity” (Van der Peet, at para. 65) between present and prior occupation. The
      occupation and use of lands may have been disrupted for a time, perhaps as a result of
      the unwillingness of European colonizers to recognize aboriginal title. To impose the
      requirement of continuity too strictly would risk “undermining the very purpose of s.
      35(1) by perpetuating the historical injustice suffered by aboriginal peoples at the hands
      of colonizers who failed to respect” aboriginal rights to land (Côté, supra, at para. 53).
      In Mabo, supra, the High Court of Australia set down the requirement that there must
      be “substantial maintenance of the connection” between the people and the land. In my
      view, this test should be equally applicable to proof of title in Canada.
154                  I should also note that there is a strong possibility that the precise nature of
      occupation will have changed between the time of sovereignty and the present. I would
      like to make it clear that the fact that the nature of occupation has changed would not
      ordinarily preclude a claim for aboriginal title, as long as a substantial connection
      between the people and the land is maintained. The only limitation on this principle
      might be the internal limits on uses which land that is subject to aboriginal title may be
      put, i.e., uses which are inconsistent with continued use by future generations of
      aboriginals.
                                                    - 95 -
                   At sovereignty, occupation must have been exclusive
155                Finally, at sovereignty, occupation must have been exclusive.              The
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      requirement for exclusivity flows from the definition of aboriginal title itself, because
      I have defined aboriginal title in terms of the right to exclusive use and occupation of
      land. Exclusivity, as an aspect of aboriginal title, vests in the aboriginal community
      which holds the ability to exclude others from the lands held pursuant to that title. The
      proof of title must, in this respect, mirror the content of the right. Were it possible to
      prove title without demonstrating exclusive occupation, the result would be absurd,
      because it would be possible for more than one aboriginal nation to have aboriginal title
      over the same piece of land, and then for all of them to attempt to assert the right to
      exclusive use and occupation over it.
156                As with the proof of occupation, proof of exclusivity must rely on both the
      perspective of the common law and the aboriginal perspective, placing equal weight on
      each. At common law, a premium is placed on the factual reality of occupation, as
      encountered by the Europeans. However, as the common law concept of possession
      must be sensitive to the realities of aboriginal society, so must the concept of exclusivity.
      Exclusivity is a common law principle derived from the notion of fee simple ownership
      and should be imported into the concept of aboriginal title with caution. As such, the test
      required to establish exclusive occupation must take into account the context of the
      aboriginal society at the time of sovereignty. For example, it is important to note that
      exclusive occupation can be demonstrated even if other aboriginal groups were present,
      or frequented the claimed lands. Under those circumstances, exclusivity would be
      demonstrated by “the intention and capacity to retain exclusive control” (McNeil,
      Common Law Aboriginal Title, supra, at p. 204). Thus, an act of trespass, if isolated,
      would not undermine a general finding of exclusivity, if aboriginal groups intended to
                                                   - 96 -
      and attempted to enforce their exclusive occupation. Moreover, as Professor McNeil
      suggests, the presence of other aboriginal groups might actually reinforce a finding of
      exclusivity. For example, “[w]here others were allowed access upon request, the very
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      fact that permission was asked for and given would be further evidence of the group’s
      exclusive control” (at p. 204).
157               A consideration of the aboriginal perspective may also lead to the conclusion
      that trespass by other aboriginal groups does not undermine, and that presence of those
      groups by permission may reinforce, the exclusive occupation of the aboriginal group
      asserting title. For example, the aboriginal group asserting the claim to aboriginal title
      may have trespass laws which are proof of exclusive occupation, such that the presence
      of trespassers does not count as evidence against exclusivity. As well, aboriginal laws
      under which permission may be granted to other aboriginal groups to use or reside even
      temporarily on land would reinforce the finding of exclusive occupation. Indeed, if that
      permission were the subject of treaties between the aboriginal nations in question, those
      treaties would also form part of the aboriginal perspective.
158               In their submissions, the appellants pressed the point that requiring proof of
      exclusive occupation might preclude a finding of joint title, which is shared between two
      or more aboriginal nations. The possibility of joint title has been recognized by
      American courts: United States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Co., 314 U.S. 339 (1941).
      I would suggest that the requirement of exclusive occupancy and the possibility of joint
      title could be reconciled by recognizing that joint title could arise from shared
      exclusivity. The meaning of shared exclusivity is well-known to the common law.
      Exclusive possession is the right to exclude others. Shared exclusive possession is the
      right to exclude others except those with whom possession is shared. There clearly may
      be cases in which two aboriginal nations lived on a particular piece of land and
                                                     - 97 -
      recognized each other’s entitlement to that land but nobody else’s. However, since no
      claim to joint title has been asserted here, I leave it to another day to work out all the
      complexities and implications of joint title, as well as any limits that another band’s title
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      may have on the way in which one band uses its title lands.
159                I should also reiterate that if aboriginals can show that they occupied a
      particular piece of land, but did not do so exclusively, it will always be possible to
      establish aboriginal rights short of title. These rights will likely be intimately tied to the
      land and may permit a number of possible uses. However, unlike title, they are not a
      right to the land itself. Rather, as I have suggested, they are a right to do certain things
      in connection with that land. If, for example, it were established that the lands near those
      subject to a title claim were used for hunting by a number of bands, those shared lands
      would not be subject to a claim for aboriginal title, as they lack the crucial element of
      exclusivity. However, they may be subject to site-specific aboriginal rights by all of the
      bands who used it. This does not entitle anyone to the land itself, but it may entitle all
      of the bands who hunted on the land to hunting rights. Hence, in addition to shared title,
      it will be possible to have shared, non-exclusive, site-specific rights. In my opinion, this
      accords with the general principle that the common law should develop to recognize
      aboriginal rights (and title, when necessary) as they were recognized by either de facto
      practice or by the aboriginal system of governance. It also allows sufficient flexibility
      to deal with this highly complex and rapidly evolving area of the law.
                   (f) Infringements of Aboriginal Title: the Test of Justification
                   (i) Introduction
                                                    - 98 -
160                The aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1), including
      aboriginal title, are not absolute. Those rights may be infringed, both by the federal
      (e.g., Sparrow) and provincial (e.g., Côté) governments. However, s. 35(1) requires that
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      those infringements satisfy the test of justification. In this section, I will review the
      Court’s nascent jurisprudence on justification and explain how that test will apply in the
      context of infringements of aboriginal title.
                   (ii) General Principles
161                The test of justification has two parts, which I shall consider in turn. First,
      the infringement of the aboriginal right must be in furtherance of a legislative objective
      that is compelling and substantial. I explained in Gladstone that compelling and
      substantial objectives were those which were directed at either one of the purposes
      underlying the recognition and affirmation of aboriginal rights by s. 35(1), which are (at
      para. 72):
                   . . . the recognition of the prior occupation of North America by aboriginal
                   peoples or . . . the reconciliation of aboriginal prior occupation with the
                   assertion of the sovereignty of the Crown.
      I noted that the latter purpose will often “be most relevant” (at para. 72) at the stage of
      justification. I think it important to repeat why (at para. 73) that is so:
                   Because . . . distinctive aboriginal societies exist within, and are a part of,
                   a broader social, political and economic community, over which the Crown
                   is sovereign, there are circumstances in which, in order to pursue objectives
                   of compelling and substantial importance to that community as a whole
                   (taking into account the fact that aboriginal societies are a part of that
                   community), some limitation of those rights will be justifiable. Aboriginal
                   rights are a necessary part of the reconciliation of aboriginal societies with
                   the broader political community of which they are part; limits placed on
                   those rights are, where the objectives furthered by those limits are of
                   sufficient importance to the broader community as a whole, equally a
                                                    - 99 -
                  necessary part of that reconciliation. [Emphasis added; “equally”
                  emphasized in original.]
      The conservation of fisheries, which was accepted as a compelling and substantial
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      objective in Sparrow, furthers both of these purposes, because it simultaneously
      recognizes that fishing is integral to many aboriginal cultures, and also seeks to reconcile
      aboriginal societies with the broader community by ensuring that there are fish enough
      for all. But legitimate government objectives also include “the pursuit of economic and
      regional fairness” and “the recognition of the historical reliance upon, and participation
      in, the fishery by non-aboriginal groups” (para. 75). By contrast, measures enacted for
      relatively unimportant reasons, such as sports fishing without a significant economic
      component (Adams, supra) would fail this aspect of the test of justification.
162                The second part of the test of justification requires an assessment of whether
      the infringement is consistent with the special fiduciary relationship between the Crown
      and aboriginal peoples. What has become clear is that the requirements of the fiduciary
      duty are a function of the “legal and factual context” of each appeal (Gladstone, supra,
      at para. 56). Sparrow and Gladstone, for example, interpreted and applied the fiduciary
      duty in terms of the idea of priority. The theory underlying that principle is that the
      fiduciary relationship between the Crown and aboriginal peoples demands that aboriginal
      interests be placed first. However, the fiduciary duty does not demand that aboriginal
      rights always be given priority. As was said in Sparrow, supra, at pp. 1114-15:
                  The nature of the constitutional protection afforded by s. 35(1) in this
                  context demands that there be a link between the question of justification
                  and the allocation of priorities in the fishery. [Emphasis added.]
      Other contexts permit, and may even require, that the fiduciary duty be articulated in
      other ways (at p. 1119):
                                                      - 100 -
                        Within the analysis of justification, there are further questions to be
                   addressed, depending on the circumstances of the inquiry. These include the
                   questions of whether there has been as little infringement as possible in
                   order to effect the desired result; whether, in a situation of expropriation,
                   fair compensation is available; and, whether the aboriginal group in question
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                   has been consulted with respect to the conservation measures being
                   implemented.
      Sparrow did not explain when the different articulations of the fiduciary duty should be
      used. Below, I suggest that the choice between them will in large part be a function of
      the nature of the aboriginal right at issue.
163                In addition to variation in the form which the fiduciary duty takes, there will
      also be variation in degree of scrutiny required by the fiduciary duty of the infringing
      measure or action. The degree of scrutiny is a function of the nature of the aboriginal
      right at issue. The distinction between Sparrow and Gladstone, for example, turned on
      whether the right amounted to the exclusive use of a resource, which in turn was a
      function of whether the right had an internal limit. In Sparrow, the right was internally
      limited, because it was a right to fish for food, ceremonial and social purposes, and as
      a result would only amount to an exclusive right to use the fishery in exceptional
      circumstances. Accordingly, the requirement of priority was applied strictly to mean that
      (at p. 1116) “any allocation of priorities after valid conservation measures have been
      implemented must give top priority to Indian food fishing”.
164                In Gladstone, by contrast, the right to sell fish commercially was only
      limited by supply and demand. Had the test for justification been applied in a strict form
      in Gladstone, the aboriginal right would have amounted to an exclusive right to exploit
      the fishery on a commercial basis. This was not the intention of Sparrow, and I
      accordingly modified the test for justification, by altering the idea of priority in the
      following way (at para. 62):
                                                   - 101 -
                   . . . the doctrine of priority requires that the government demonstrate that,
                   in allocating the resource, it has taken account of the existence of aboriginal
                   rights and allocated the resource in a manner respectful of the fact that those
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                   rights have priority over the exploitation of the fishery by other users. This
                   right is at once both procedural and substantive; at the stage of justification
                   the government must demonstrate both that the process by which it allocated
                   the resource and the actual allocation of the resource which results from that
                   process reflect the prior interest of aboriginal rights holders in the fishery.
      After Gladstone, in the context of commercial activity, the priority of aboriginal rights
      is constitutionally satisfied if the government had taken those rights into account and has
      allocated a resource “in a manner respectful” (at para. 62) of that priority. A court must
      be satisfied that “the government has taken into account the existence and importance
      of [aboriginal] rights” (at para. 63) which it determines by asking the following questions
      (at para. 64):
                   Questions relevant to the determination of whether the government has
                   granted priority to aboriginal rights holders are . . . questions such as
                   whether the government has accommodated the exercise of the aboriginal
                   right to participate in the fishery (through reduced licence fees, for
                   example), whether the government’s objectives in enacting a particular
                   regulatory scheme reflect the need to take into account the priority of
                   aboriginal rights holders, the extent of the participation in the fishery of
                   aboriginal rights holders relative to their percentage of the population, how
                   the government has accommodated different aboriginal rights in a particular
                   fishery (food versus commercial rights, for example), how important the
                   fishery is to the economic and material well-being of the band in question,
                   and the criteria taken into account by the government in, for example,
                   allocating commercial licences amongst different users.
                   (iii)   Justification and Aboriginal Title
165                The general principles governing justification laid down in Sparrow, and
      embellished by Gladstone, operate with respect to infringements of aboriginal title. In
      the wake of Gladstone, the range of legislative objectives that can justify the
      infringement of aboriginal title is fairly broad. Most of these objectives can be traced
                                                     - 102 -
      to the reconciliation of the prior occupation of North America by aboriginal peoples with
      the assertion of Crown sovereignty, which entails the recognition that “distinctive
      aboriginal societies exist within, and are a part of, a broader social, political and
                                                                                                         1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      economic community” (at para. 73). In my opinion, the development of agriculture,
      forestry, mining, and hydroelectric power, the general economic development of the
      interior of British Columbia, protection of the environment or endangered species, the
      building of infrastructure and the settlement of foreign populations to support those aims,
      are the kinds of objectives that are consistent with this purpose and, in principle, can
      justify the infringement of aboriginal title. Whether a particular measure or government
      act can be explained by reference to one of those objectives, however, is ultimately a
      question of fact that will have to be examined on a case-by-case basis.
166                The manner in which the fiduciary duty operates with respect to the second
      stage of the justification test -- both with respect to the standard of scrutiny and the
      particular form that the fiduciary duty will take -- will be a function of the nature of
      aboriginal title. Three aspects of aboriginal title are relevant here. First, aboriginal title
      encompasses the right to exclusive use and occupation of land; second, aboriginal title
      encompasses the right to choose to what uses land can be put, subject to the ultimate
      limit that those uses cannot destroy the ability of the land to sustain future generations
      of aboriginal peoples; and third, that lands held pursuant to aboriginal title have an
      inescapable economic component.
167                The exclusive nature of aboriginal title is relevant to the degree of scrutiny
      of the infringing measure or action. For example, if the Crown’s fiduciary duty requires
      that aboriginal title be given priority, then it is the altered approach to priority that I laid
      down in Gladstone which should apply. What is required is that the government
      demonstrate (at para. 62) “both that the process by which it allocated the resource and
                                                   - 103 -
      the actual allocation of the resource which results from that process reflect the prior
      interest” of the holders of aboriginal title in the land. By analogy with Gladstone, this
      might entail, for example, that governments accommodate the participation of aboriginal
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      peoples in the development of the resources of British Columbia, that the conferral of fee
      simples for agriculture, and of leases and licences for forestry and mining reflect the
      prior occupation of aboriginal title lands, that economic barriers to aboriginal uses of
      their lands (e.g., licensing fees) be somewhat reduced. This list is illustrative and not
      exhaustive. This is an issue that may involve an assessment of the various interests at
      stake in the resources in question. No doubt, there will be difficulties in determining the
      precise value of the aboriginal interest in the land and any grants, leases or licences given
      for its exploitation. These difficult economic considerations obviously cannot be solved
      here.
168                Moreover, the other aspects of aboriginal title suggest that the fiduciary duty
      may be articulated in a manner different than the idea of priority. This point becomes
      clear from a comparison between aboriginal title and the aboriginal right to fish for food
      in Sparrow. First, aboriginal title encompasses within it a right to choose to what ends
      a piece of land can be put. The aboriginal right to fish for food, by contrast, does not
      contain within it the same discretionary component. This aspect of aboriginal title
      suggests that the fiduciary relationship between the Crown and aboriginal peoples may
      be satisfied by the involvement of aboriginal peoples in decisions taken with respect to
      their lands. There is always a duty of consultation. Whether the aboriginal group has
      been consulted is relevant to determining whether the infringement of aboriginal title is
      justified, in the same way that the Crown’s failure to consult an aboriginal group with
      respect to the terms by which reserve land is leased may breach its fiduciary duty at
      common law: Guerin. The nature and scope of the duty of consultation will vary with
      the circumstances. In occasional cases, when the breach is less serious or relatively
                                                   - 104 -
      minor, it will be no more than a duty to discuss important decisions that will be taken
      with respect to lands held pursuant to aboriginal title. Of course, even in these rare cases
      when the minimum acceptable standard is consultation, this consultation must be in good
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      faith, and with the intention of substantially addressing the concerns of the aboriginal
      peoples whose lands are at issue. In most cases, it will be significantly deeper than mere
      consultation. Some cases may even require the full consent of an aboriginal nation,
      particularly when provinces enact hunting and fishing regulations in relation to
      aboriginal lands.
169                Second, aboriginal title, unlike the aboriginal right to fish for food, has an
      inescapably economic aspect, particularly when one takes into account the modern uses
      to which lands held pursuant to aboriginal title can be put. The economic aspect of
      aboriginal title suggests that compensation is relevant to the question of justification as
      well, a possibility suggested in Sparrow and which I repeated in Gladstone. Indeed,
      compensation for breaches of fiduciary duty are a well-established part of the landscape
      of aboriginal rights: Guerin. In keeping with the duty of honour and good faith on the
      Crown, fair compensation will ordinarily be required when aboriginal title is infringed.
      The amount of compensation payable will vary with the nature of the particular
      aboriginal title affected and with the nature and severity of the infringement and the
      extent to which aboriginal interests were accommodated. Since the issue of damages
      was severed from the principal action, we received no submissions on the appropriate
      legal principles that would be relevant to determining the appropriate level of
      compensation of infringements of aboriginal title. In the circumstances, it is best that we
      leave those difficult questions to another day.
      D.           Has a claim to self-government been made out by the appellants?
                                                   - 105 -
170                In the courts below, considerable attention was given to the question of
      whether s. 35(1) can protect a right to self-government, and if so, what the contours of
      that right are. The errors of fact made by the trial judge, and the resultant need for a new
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      trial, make it impossible for this Court to determine whether the claim to self-
      government has been made out. Moreover, this is not the right case for the Court to lay
      down the legal principles to guide future litigation.           The parties seem to have
      acknowledged this point, perhaps implicitly, by giving the arguments on self-government
      much less weight on appeal. One source of the decreased emphasis on the right to self-
      government on appeal is this Court’s judgment Pamajewon. There, I held that rights to
      self-government, if they existed, cannot be framed in excessively general terms. The
      appellants did not have the benefit of my judgment at trial. Unsurprisingly, as counsel
      for the Wet’suwet’en specifically concedes, the appellants advanced the right to self-
      government in very broad terms, and therefore in a manner not cognizable under s. 35(1).
171                The broad nature of the claim at trial also led to a failure by the parties to
      address many of the difficult conceptual issues which surround the recognition of
      aboriginal self-government. The degree of complexity involved can be gleaned from the
      Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, which devotes 277 pages to the
      issue. That report describes different models of self-government, each differing with
      respect to their conception of territory, citizenship, jurisdiction, internal government
      organization, etc. We received little in the way of submissions that would help us to
      grapple with these difficult and central issues. Without assistance from the parties, it
      would be imprudent for the Court to step into the breach. In these circumstances, the
      issue of self-government will fall to be determined at trial.
                                                  - 106 -
      E.           Did the province have the power to extinguish aboriginal rights after 1871,
                   either under its own jurisdiction or through the operation of s. 88 of the
                   Indian Act?
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                   (1) Introduction
172                For aboriginal rights to be recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1), they must
      have existed in 1982. Rights which were extinguished by the sovereign before that time
      are not revived by the provision. In a federal system such as Canada’s, the need to
      determine whether aboriginal rights have been extinguished raises the question of which
      level of government has jurisdiction to do so. In the context of this appeal, that general
      question becomes three specific ones. First, there is the question whether the province
      of British    Columbia, from the time it joined Confederation in 1871, until the
      entrenchment of s. 35(1) in 1982, had the jurisdiction to extinguish the rights of
      aboriginal peoples, including aboriginal title, in that province. Second, if the province
      was without such jurisdiction, another question arises -- whether provincial laws which
      were not in pith and substance aimed at the extinguishment of aboriginal rights could
      have done so nevertheless if they were laws of general application. The third and final
      question is whether a provincial law, which could otherwise not extinguish aboriginal
      rights, be given that effect through referential incorporation by s. 88 of the Indian Act.
                   (2) Primary Jurisdiction
173                Since 1871, the exclusive power to legislate in relation to “Indians, and
      Lands reserved for the Indians” has been vested with the federal government by virtue
      of s. 91(24) of the Constitution Act, 1867. That head of jurisdiction, in my opinion,
      encompasses within it the exclusive power to extinguish aboriginal rights, including
      aboriginal title.
                                                    - 107 -
                   “Lands reserved for the Indians”
                                                                                                        1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
174                I consider the second part of this provision first, which confers jurisdiction
      to the federal government over “Lands reserved for the Indians”. The debate between
      the parties centred on whether that part of s. 91(24) confers jurisdiction to legislate with
      respect to aboriginal title. The province’s principal submission is that “Lands reserved
      for the Indians” are lands which have been specifically set aside or designated for Indian
      occupation, such as reserves. However, I must reject that submission, because it flies in
      the face of the judgment of the Privy Council in St. Catherine’s Milling. One of the
      issues in that appeal was the federal jurisdiction to accept the surrender of lands held
      pursuant to aboriginal title. It was argued that the federal government, at most, had
      jurisdiction over “Indian Reserves”. Lord Watson, speaking for the Privy Council,
      rejected this argument, stating that had the intention been to restrict s. 91(24) in this way,
      specific language to this effect would have been used. He accordingly held that (at p.
      59):
                   . . . the words actually used are, according to their natural meaning,
                   sufficient to include all lands reserved, upon any terms or conditions, for
                   Indian occupation.
      Lord Watson’s reference to “all lands” encompasses not only reserve lands, but lands
      held pursuant to aboriginal title as well. Section 91(24), in other words, carries with it
      the jurisdiction to legislate in relation to aboriginal title. It follows, by implication, that
      it also confers the jurisdiction to extinguish that title.
175                The province responds by pointing to the fact that underlying title to lands
      held pursuant to aboriginal title vested with the provincial Crown pursuant to s. 109 of
                                                   - 108 -
      the Constitution Act, 1867. In its submission, this right of ownership carried with it the
      right to grant fee simples which, by implication, extinguish aboriginal title, and so by
      negative implication excludes aboriginal title from the scope of s. 91(24). The difficulty
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      with the province’s submission is that it fails to take account of the language of s. 109,
      which states in part that:
                      109. All Lands, Mines, Minerals, and Royalties belonging to the several
                  Provinces of Canada . . . at the Union . . . shall belong to the several
                  Provinces . . . subject to any Trusts existing in respect thereof, and to any
                  Interest other than that of the Province in the same.
      Although that provision vests underlying title in provincial Crowns, it qualifies
      provincial ownership by making it subject to the “any Interest other than that of the
      Province in the same”. In St. Catherine’s Milling, the Privy Council held that aboriginal
      title was such an interest, and rejected the argument that provincial ownership operated
      as a limit on federal jurisdiction. The net effect of that decision, therefore, was to
      separate the ownership of lands held pursuant to aboriginal title from jurisdiction over
      those lands. Thus, although on surrender of aboriginal title the province would take
      absolute title, jurisdiction to accept surrenders lies with the federal government. The
      same can be said of extinguishment -- although on extinguishment of aboriginal title,
      the province would take complete title to the land, the jurisdiction to extinguish lies with
      the federal government.
176                I conclude with two remarks. First, even if the point were not settled, I
      would have come to the same conclusion. The judges in the court below noted that
      separating federal jurisdiction over Indians from jurisdiction over their lands would have
      a most unfortunate result -- the government vested with primary constitutional
      responsibility for securing the welfare of Canada’s aboriginal peoples would find itself
      unable to safeguard one of the most central of native interests — their interest in their
                                                   - 109 -
      lands. Second, although the submissions of the parties and my analysis have focussed
      on the question of jurisdiction over aboriginal title, in my opinion, the same reasoning
      applies to jurisdiction over any aboriginal right which relates to land. As I explained
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      earlier, Adams clearly establishes that aboriginal rights may be tied to land but
      nevertheless fall short of title. Those relationships with the land, however, may be
      equally fundamental to aboriginal peoples and, for the same reason that jurisdiction over
      aboriginal title must vest with the federal government, so too must the power to legislate
      in relation to other aboriginal rights in relation to land.
                   “Indians”
177                The extent of federal jurisdiction over Indians has not been definitively
      addressed by this Court. We have not needed to do so because the vires of federal
      legislation with respect to Indians, under the division of powers, has never been at issue.
      The cases which have come before the Court under s. 91(24) have implicated the
      question of jurisdiction over Indians from the other direction -- whether provincial laws
      which on their face apply to Indians intrude on federal jurisdiction and are inapplicable
      to Indians to the extent of that intrusion. As I explain below, the Court has held that s.
      91(24) protects a “core” of Indianness from provincial intrusion, through the doctrine of
      interjurisdictional immunity.
178                It follows, at the very least, that this core falls within the scope of federal
      jurisdiction over Indians. That core, for reasons I will develop, encompasses aboriginal
      rights, including the rights that are recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1). Laws which
      purport to extinguish those rights therefore touch the core of Indianness which lies at the
      heart of s. 91(24), and are beyond the legislative competence of the provinces to enact.
      The core of Indianness encompasses the whole range of aboriginal rights that are
                                                   - 110 -
      protected by s. 35(1). Those rights include rights in relation to land; that part of the core
      derives from s. 91(24)’s reference to “Lands reserved for the Indians”. But those rights
      also encompass practices, customs and traditions which are not tied to land as well; that
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      part of the core can be traced to federal jurisdiction over “Indians”. Provincial
      governments are prevented from legislating in relation to both types of aboriginal rights.
                   (3) Provincial Laws of General Application
179                The vesting of exclusive jurisdiction with the federal government over
      Indians and Indian lands under s. 91(24), operates to preclude provincial laws in relation
      to those matters. Thus, provincial laws which single out Indians for special treatment
      are ultra vires, because they are in relation to Indians and therefore invade federal
      jurisdiction: see R. v. Sutherland, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 451. However, it is a well-established
      principle that (Four B Manufacturing Ltd., supra, at p. 1048):
                        The conferring upon Parliament of exclusive legislative competence to
                   make laws relating to certain classes of persons does not mean that the
                   totality of these persons’ rights and duties comes under primary federal
                   competence to the exclusion of provincial laws of general application.
      In other words, notwithstanding s. 91(24), provincial laws of general application apply
      proprio vigore to Indians and Indian lands. Thus, this Court has held that provincial
      labour relations legislation (Four B) and motor vehicle laws (R. v. Francis, [1988] 1
      S.C.R. 1025), which purport to apply to all persons in the province, also apply to Indians
      living on reserves.
180                What must be answered, however, is whether the same principle allows
      provincial laws of general application to extinguish aboriginal rights. I have come to the
      conclusion that a provincial law of general application could not have this effect, for two
                                                   - 111 -
      reasons. First, a law of general application cannot, by definition, meet the standard
      which has been set by this Court for the extinguishment of aboriginal rights without
      being ultra vires the province. That standard was laid down in Sparrow, supra, at p.
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      1099, as one of “clear and plain” intent. In that decision, the Court drew a distinction
      between laws which extinguished aboriginal rights, and those which merely regulated
      them. Although the latter types of laws may have been “necessarily inconsistent” with
      the continued exercise of aboriginal rights, they could not extinguish those rights. While
      the requirement of clear and plain intent does not, perhaps, require that the Crown “use
      language which refers expressly to its extinguishment of aboriginal rights” (Gladstone,
      supra, at para. 34), the standard is still quite high. My concern is that the only laws with
      the sufficiently clear and plain intention to extinguish aboriginal rights would be laws
      in relation to Indians and Indian lands. As a result, a provincial law could never, proprio
      vigore, extinguish aboriginal rights, because the intention to do so would take the law
      outside provincial jurisdiction.
181                Second, as I mentioned earlier, s. 91(24) protects a core of federal
      jurisdiction even from provincial laws of general application, through the operation of
      the doctrine of interjurisdictional immunity. That core has been described as matters
      touching on “Indianness” or the “core of Indianness” (Dick, supra, at pp. 326 and 315;
      also see Four B, supra, at p. 1047 and Francis, supra, at pp. 1028-29). The core of
      Indianness at the heart of s. 91(24) has been defined in both negative and positive terms.
      Negatively, it has been held to not include labour relations (Four B) and the driving of
      motor vehicles (Francis). The only positive formulation of Indianness was offered in
      Dick. Speaking for the Court, Beetz J. assumed, but did not decide, that a provincial
      hunting law did not apply proprio vigore to the members of an Indian band to hunt and
      because those activities were “at the centre of what they do and what they are” (at p.
      320). But in Van der Peet, I described and defined the aboriginal rights that are
                                                   - 112 -
      recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1) in a similar fashion, as protecting the occupation of
      land and the activities which are integral to the distinctive aboriginal culture of the group
      claiming the right. It follows that aboriginal rights are part of the core of Indianness at
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      the heart of s. 91(24). Prior to 1982, as a result, they could not be extinguished by
      provincial laws of general application.
                   (4) Section 88 of the Indian Act
182                Provincial laws which would otherwise not apply to Indians proprio vigore,
      however, are allowed to do so by s. 88 of the Indian Act, which incorporates by reference
      provincial laws of general application: Dick, supra, at pp. 326-27; Derrickson v.
      Derrickson, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 285, at p. 297; Francis, supra, at pp. 1030-31. However,
      it is important to note, in Professor Hogg’s words, that s. 88 does not “invigorate”
      provincial laws which are invalid because they are in relation to Indians and Indian lands
      (Constitutional Law of Canada (3rd ed. 1992), at p. 676; also see Dick, supra, at p. 322).
      What this means is that s. 88 extends the effect of provincial laws of general application
      which cannot apply to Indians and Indian lands because they touch on the Indianness at
      the core of s. 91(24). For example, a provincial law which regulated hunting may very
      well touch on this core. Although such a law would not apply to aboriginal people
      proprio vigore, it would still apply through s. 88 of the Indian Act, being a law of general
      application. Such laws are enacted to conserve game and for the safety of all.
183                The respondent B.C. Crown argues that since such laws are intra vires the
      province, and applicable to aboriginal persons, s. 88 could allow provincial laws to
      extinguish aboriginal rights. I reject this submission, for the simple reason that s. 88
      does not evince the requisite clear and plain intent to extinguish aboriginal rights. The
      provision states in full:
                                                  - 113 -
                       88. Subject to the terms of any treaty and any other Act of Parliament,
                  all laws of general application from time to time in force in any province are
                  applicable to and in respect of Indians in the province, except to the extent
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                  that those laws are inconsistent with this Act or any order, rule, regulation
                  or by-law made thereunder, and except to the extent that those laws make
                  provision for any matter for which provision is made by or under this Act.
      I see nothing in the language of the provision which even suggests the intention to
      extinguish aboriginal rights. Indeed, the explicit reference to treaty rights in s. 88
      suggests that the provision was clearly not intended to undermine aboriginal rights.
      VI. Conclusion and Disposition
184               For the reasons I have given above, I would allow the appeal in part, and
      dismiss the cross-appeal. Reluctantly, I would also order a new trial.
185               I conclude with two observations. The first is that many aboriginal nations
      with territorial claims that overlap with those of the appellants did not intervene in this
      appeal, and do not appear to have done so at trial. This is unfortunate, because
      determinations of aboriginal title for the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en will undoubtedly
      affect their claims as well. This is particularly so because aboriginal title encompasses
      an exclusive right to the use and occupation of land, i.e., to the exclusion of both non-
      aboriginals and members of other aboriginal nations. It may, therefore, be advisable if
      those aboriginal nations intervened in any new litigation.
186               Finally, this litigation has been both long and expensive, not only in
      economic but in human terms as well. By ordering a new trial, I do not necessarily
      encourage the parties to proceed to litigation and to settle their dispute through the
      courts. As was said in Sparrow, at p. 1105, s. 35(1) “provides a solid constitutional base
                                                   - 114 -
      upon which subsequent negotiations can take place”. Those negotiations should also
      include other aboriginal nations which have a stake in the territory claimed. Moreover,
      the Crown is under a moral, if not a legal, duty to enter into and conduct those
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      negotiations in good faith. Ultimately, it is through negotiated settlements, with good
      faith and give and take on all sides, reinforced by the judgments of this Court, that we
      will achieve what I stated in Van der Peet, supra, at para. 31, to be a basic purpose of s.
      35(1) -- “the reconciliation of the pre-existence of aboriginal societies with the
      sovereignty of the Crown”. Let us face it, we are all here to stay.
      //La Forest J.//
                   The reasons of La Forest and L’Heureux-Dubé JJ. were delivered by
187                LA FOREST J. -- I have read the reasons of the Chief Justice, and while I
      agree with his conclusion, I disagree with various aspects of his reasons and in particular,
      with the methodology he uses to prove that aboriginal peoples have a general right of
      occupation of certain lands (often referred to as “aboriginal title”).
188                I begin by considering why a new trial is necessary in this case. It is true,
      as the Chief Justice points out, that the amalgamation of the appellants’ individual claims
      represents a defect in the pleadings and, technically speaking, this prevents us from
      considering the merits of the case. However, in my view, there is a more substantive
      problem with the pleadings in this case. Before this Court, the appellants sought a
      declaration of “aboriginal title” but attempted, in essence, to prove that they had
      complete control over the territory in question. The appellants effectively argued on
      appeal, as they did at trial, that by virtue of their social and land tenure systems --
      consisting of Chief authority, Houses, feasts, crests, and totem poles -- they acquired an
                                                   - 115 -
      absolute interest in the claimed territory, including ownership of and jurisdiction over
      the land. The problem with this approach is that it requires proof of governance and
      control as opposed to proof of general occupation of the affected land. Only the latter
                                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      is the sine qua non of “aboriginal title”. It follows that what the appellants sought by
      way of declaration from this Court and what they set out to prove by way of the evidence
      were two different matters. In light of this substantive defect in the pleadings, a new trial
      should be ordered to permit a reassessment of the matter on the basis of these reasons.
189                In my view, the foundation of “aboriginal title” was succinctly described by
      Judson J. in Calder v. Attorney-General of British Columbia, [1973] S.C.R. 313, where,
      at p. 328, he stated: “the fact is that when the settlers came, the Indians were there,
      organized in societies and occupying the land as their forefathers had done for centuries.
      This is what Indian title means . . . .” Relying in part on Judson J.’s remarks, Dickson
      J. (as he then was) wrote in Guerin v. The Queen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, at p. 382, that
      aboriginal peoples have a “legal right to occupy and possess certain lands, the ultimate
      title to which is in the Crown”. As well, in Canadian Pacific Ltd. v. Paul, [1988] 2
      S.C.R. 654, this Court stated, at p. 678: “The inescapable conclusion from the Court’s
      analysis of Indian title up to this point is that the Indian interest in land is truly sui
      generis. It is more than the right to enjoyment and occupancy although . . . it is difficult
      to describe what more in traditional property law terminology”. More recently, Judson
      J.’s views were reiterated in R. v. Van der Peet, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507. There Lamer C.J.
      wrote for the majority, at para. 30, that the doctrine of aboriginal rights (one aspect of
      which is “aboriginal title”) arises from “one simple fact: when Europeans arrived in
      North America, aboriginal peoples were already here, living in communities on the land,
      and participating in distinctive cultures, as they had done for centuries” (emphasis in
      original).
                                                    - 116 -
190                It follows from these cases that the aboriginal right of possession is derived
      from the historic occupation and use of ancestral lands by aboriginal peoples. Put
      another way, “aboriginal title” is based on the continued occupation and use of the land
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      as part of the aboriginal peoples’ traditional way of life. This sui generis interest is not
      equated with fee simple ownership; nor can it be described with reference to traditional
      property law concepts. The best description of “aboriginal title”, as set out above, is a
      broad and general one derived from Judson J.’s pronouncements in Calder, supra.
      Adopting the same approach, Dickson J. wrote in Guerin, supra, that the aboriginal right
      of occupancy is further characterized by two principal features. First, this sui generis
      interest in the land is personal in that it is generally inalienable except to the Crown.
      Second, in dealing with this interest, the Crown is subject to a fiduciary obligation to
      treat aboriginal peoples fairly. Dickson J. went on to conclude, at p. 382, that “[a]ny
      description of Indian title which goes beyond these two features is both unnecessary and
      potentially misleading”. I share his views and am therefore reluctant to define more
      precisely the “right [of aboriginal peoples] to continue to live on their lands as their
      forefathers had lived”; see Calder, at p. 328.
191                The approach I adopt, in defining the aboriginal right of occupancy, is also
      a highly contextual one. More specifically, I find it necessary to make a distinction
      between: (1) the recognition of a general right to occupy and possess ancestral lands;
      and (2) the recognition of a discrete right to engage in an aboriginal activity in a
      particular area. I defined the latter in R. v. Côté, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 139, at para. 97, as “the
      traditional use, by a tribe of Indians, that has continued from pre-contact times of a
      particular area for a particular purpose”. The issue in Côté, as in Van der Peet, was
      whether the use of a particular fishing spot was really an aspect of the aboriginal
      peoples’ way of life in pre-contact times; see also in the Van der Peet trilogy R. v.
      Gladstone, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723, and R. v. N.T.C. Smokehouse Ltd., [1996] 2 S.C.R. 672.
                                                   - 117 -
      In all those cases, the fishing rights asserted by the aboriginal claimants were not
      associated with a more general occupancy of the affected land. By contrast, the present
      case deals with a general claim to occupy and possess vast tracts of territory (58,000
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      square kilometres). This type of generalized land claim is not merely a bundle of
      discrete aboriginal rights to engage in specific activities. Rather, it is, as the Chief
      Justice states, at para. 111, the “right to use land for a variety of activities, not all of
      which need be aspects of practices, customs and traditions which are integral to the
      distinctive cultures of aboriginal societies”. These land-based activities are, of course,
      related to the aboriginal society’s habits and mode of life.
192                I note, as well, that in defining the nature of “aboriginal title”, one should
      generally not be concerned with statutory provisions and regulations dealing with reserve
      lands. In Guerin, supra, this Court held that the interest of an Indian band in a reserve
      is derived from, and is of the same nature as, the interest of an aboriginal society in its
      traditional tribal lands. Accordingly, the Court treated the aboriginal interest in reserve
      lands as one of occupation and possession while recognizing that the underlying title to
      those lands was in the Crown. It was not decided in Guerin, supra, and it by no means
      follows, that specific statutory provisions governing reserve lands should automatically
      apply to traditional tribal lands. For this reason, I am unable to assume that specific
      “reserve” provisions of the Indian Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-5, and the Indian Oil and Gas
      Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-7, apply to huge tracts of land which are subject to an aboriginal
      right of occupancy.
193                I turn next to this Court’s decision in Van der Peet, supra, where the Chief
      Justice identified a number of factors essential to the recognition of aboriginal rights
      under s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. As I have already indicated, the Van der
      Peet trilogy dealt with activity-based discrete rights and, more specifically, with fishing
                                                    - 118 -
      activities that were carried out in the face of statutory prohibitions. By contrast, the
      present case deals with a generalized claim over vast tracts of territory, a claim which
      is itself the foundation for particular rights and activities. Moreover, I agree with the
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      appellants that this generalized claim should not be defined as merely a compendium of
      aboriginal rights, each of which must meet the test set out in Van der Peet. Nonetheless,
      I am of the view that the “key” factors identified in Van der Peet, namely precision,
      specificity, continuity, and centrality are still met by my approach in the present case.
194                First, it is clear that the nature of an aboriginal claim must be identified
      precisely with regard to particular practices, customs and traditions. As already
      mentioned, when dealing with a claim of “aboriginal title”, the court will focus on the
      occupation and use of the land as part of the aboriginal society’s traditional way of life.
      In pragmatic terms, this means looking at the manner in which the society used the land
      to live, namely to establish villages, to work, to get to work, to hunt, to travel to hunting
      grounds, to fish, to get to fishing pools, to conduct religious rites, etc. These uses,
      although limited to the aboriginal society’s traditional way of life, may be exercised in
      a contemporary manner; see R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, at p. 1099.
195                Second, it is self-evident that an aboriginal society asserting the right to live
      on its ancestral lands must specify the area which has been continuously used and
      occupied. That is, the general boundaries of the occupied territory should be identified.
      I recognize, however, that when dealing with vast tracts of territory it may be impossible
      to identify geographical limits with scientific precision. Nonetheless, this should not
      preclude the recognition of a general right of occupation of the affected land. Rather,
      the drawing of exact territorial limits can be settled by subsequent negotiations between
      the aboriginal claimants and the government.
                                                  - 119 -
196               Some would also argue that specificity requires exclusive occupation and
      use of the land by the aboriginal group in question. The way I see it, exclusivity means
      that an aboriginal group must show that a claimed territory is indeed its ancestral
                                                                                                   1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      territory and not the territory of an unconnected aboriginal society. On the other hand,
      I recognize the possibility that two or more aboriginal groups may have occupied the
      same territory and used the land communally as part of their traditional way of life. In
      cases where two or more groups have accommodated each other in this way, I would not
      preclude a finding of joint occupancy. The result may be different, however, in cases
      where one dominant aboriginal group has merely permitted other groups to use the
      territory or where definite boundaries were established and maintained between two
      aboriginal groups in the same territory.
197               Third, as indicated above, the aboriginal right of possession is based on the
      continued occupation and use of traditional tribal lands. The Chief Justice concludes that
      the relevant time period for the establishment of “aboriginal title” is the time at which
      the Crown asserted sovereignty over the affected land. I agree that in the context of
      generalized land claims, it is more appropriate, from a practical and theoretical
      standpoint, to consider the time of sovereignty as opposed to the time of first contact
      between an aboriginal society and Europeans. However, I am also of the view that the
      date of sovereignty may not be the only relevant moment to consider. For instance,
      there may have been aboriginal settlements in one area of the province but, after the
      assertion of sovereignty, the aboriginal peoples may have all moved to another area
      where they remained from the date of sovereignty until the present. This relocation may
      have been due to natural causes, such as the flooding of villages, or to clashes with
      European settlers. In these circumstances, I would not deny the existence of “aboriginal
      title” in that area merely because the relocation occurred post-sovereignty. In other
                                                    - 120 -
      words, continuity may still exist where the present occupation of one area is connected
      to the pre-sovereignty occupation of another area.
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
198                Also, on the view I take of continuity, I agree with the Chief Justice that it
      is not necessary for courts to have conclusive evidence of pre-sovereignty occupation.
      Rather, aboriginal peoples claiming a right of possession may provide evidence of
      present occupation as proof of prior occupation. Further, I agree that there is no need to
      establish an unbroken chain of continuity and that interruptions in occupancy or use do
      not necessarily preclude a finding of “title”. I would go further, however, and suggest
      that the presence of two or more aboriginal groups in a territory may also have an impact
      on continuity of use. For instance, one aboriginal group may have ceded its possession
      to subsequent occupants or merged its territory with that of another aboriginal society.
      As well, the occupancy of one aboriginal society may be connected to the occupancy of
      another society by conquest or exchange. In these circumstances, continuity of use and
      occupation, extending back to the relevant time, may very well be established; see Brian
      Slattery, “Understanding Aboriginal Rights” (1987), 66 Can. Bar Rev. 727, at p. 759.
199                Fourth, if aboriginal peoples continue to occupy and use the land as part of
      their traditional way of life, it necessarily follows that the land is of central significance
      to them. As already suggested, aboriginal occupancy refers not only to the presence of
      aboriginal peoples in villages or permanently settled areas. Rather, the use of adjacent
      lands and even remote territories to pursue a traditional mode of life is also related to the
      notion of occupancy. Viewed in this light, occupancy is part of aboriginal culture in a
      broad sense and is, therefore, absorbed in the notion of distinctiveness. To use the
      language of Van der Peet, proof of occupancy is proof of centrality.
                                                   - 121 -
200                I would also add that my approach regarding the nature of aboriginal
      occupancy is supported by the terms of the Royal Proclamation, 1763, R.S.C., 1985,
      App. II, No. 1. Although the Proclamation is not the sole source of “aboriginal title” in
                                                                                                     1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      this country, it bears witness to the British policy towards aboriginal peoples which was
      based on respect for their right to occupy their ancestral lands; see Sparrow, supra, at p.
      1103. Specifically, the Proclamation provides:
                       And We do further declare it to be Our Royal Will and Pleasure, for the
                  present as aforesaid, to reserve under our Sovereignty, Protection, and
                  Dominion, for the use of the said Indians, all the Lands and Territories not
                  included within the Limits of Our said Three new Governments, or within
                  the Limits of the Territory granted to the Hudson’s Bay Company, as also
                  all the Lands and Territories lying to the Westward of the Sources of the
                  Rivers which fall into the Sea from the West and North West as aforesaid.
      In clear terms vast tracts of territory (including large portions of the area now comprising
      Ontario, Quebec, and the prairie provinces) were reserved for aboriginal peoples. These
      huge tracts of land were by no means limited to villages or permanent settlements but
      were reserved more generally as “Hunting Grounds” and “for the use of the said
      Indians”. Aboriginal peoples had the right to possess the lands reserved for them and
      “not be molested or disturbed in the Possession” of such territory. In essence, the rights
      set out in the Proclamation -- which were applied in principle to aboriginal peoples
      across the country -- underlie the view I have taken of aboriginal occupancy; see R. v.
      Wesley, [1932] 4 D.L.R. 774 (Alta. S.C., App. Div.), at p. 787, and R. v. Sikyea (1964),
      43 D.L.R. (2d) 150 (N.W.T.C.A.), aff’d Sikyea v. The Queen, [1964] S.C.R. 642.
201                The analysis thus far has focussed on the nature of the aboriginal right to
      occupy and possess certain lands -- a right recognized and affirmed under s. 35(1) of the
      Constitution Act, 1982. Nonetheless, as Dickson C.J. and I wrote in Sparrow, supra, at
      p. 1109: “Rights that are recognized and affirmed are not absolute”. Thus, government
                                                     - 122 -
      regulation can infringe upon aboriginal rights if it meets the test of justification under s.
      35(1). It is important to emphasize as well that the approach adopted under s. 35(1) is
      a highly contextual one. This is also clear from the reasons I wrote jointly with Dickson
                                                                                                       1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      C.J. in Sparrow, at p. 1111:
                   We wish to emphasize the importance of context and a case-by-case
                   approach to s. 35(1). Given the generality of the text of the constitutional
                   provision, and especially in light of the complexities of aboriginal history,
                   society and rights, the contours of a justificatory standard must be defined
                   in the specific factual context of each case.
202                In the context of the present case, I agree with the Chief Justice that the
      general economic development of the interior of British Columbia, through agriculture,
      mining, forestry, and hydroelectric power, as well as the related building of
      infrastructure and settlement of foreign populations are valid legislative objectives that,
      in principle, satisfy the first part of the justification analysis.
203                Under the second part of the justification test, these legislative objectives are
      subject to accommodation of the aboriginal peoples’ interests. This accommodation
      must always be in accordance with the honour and good faith of the Crown. Moreover,
      when dealing with a generalized claim over vast tracts of land, accommodation is not a
      simple matter of asking whether licences have been fairly allocated in one industry, or
      whether conservation measures have been properly implemented for a specific resource.
      Rather, the question of accommodation of “aboriginal title” is much broader than this.
      Certainly, one aspect of accommodation in this context entails notifying and consulting
      aboriginal peoples with respect to the development of the affected territory. Another
      aspect of accommodation is fair compensation. More specifically, in a situation of
      expropriation, one asks whether fair compensation is available to the aboriginal peoples;
      see Sparrow, supra, at p. 1119. Indeed, the treatment of “aboriginal title” as a
                                                  - 123 -
      compensable right can be traced back to the Royal Proclamation, 1763. The relevant
      portions of the Proclamation are as follows:
                                                                                                    1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                  . . . such Parts of Our Dominions and Territories as, not having been ceded
                  to or purchased by Us, are reserved to them [aboriginal peoples] or any of
                  them, as their Hunting Grounds. . . .
                  We do, with the Advice of our Privy Council strictly enjoin and require, that
                  no private Person do presume to make any purchase from the said Indians
                  of any Lands reserved to the said Indians . . . but that, if at any Time any of
                  the Said Indians should be inclined to dispose of the said Lands, the same
                  shall be Purchased only for Us, in our Name. . . . [Emphasis added.]
      Clearly, the Proclamation contemplated that aboriginal peoples would be compensated
      for the surrender of their lands; see also Slattery, “Understanding Aboriginal Rights”,
      supra, at pp. 751-52. It must be emphasized, nonetheless, that fair compensation in the
      present context is not equated with the price of a fee simple. Rather, compensation must
      be viewed in terms of the right and in keeping with the honour of the Crown. Thus,
      generally speaking, compensation may be greater where the expropriation relates to a
      village area as opposed to a remotely visited area. I add that account must be taken of
      the interdependence of traditional uses to which the land was put.
204               In summary, in developing vast tracts of land, the government is expected
      to consider the economic well being of all Canadians. But the aboriginal peoples must
      not be forgotten in this equation. Their legal right to occupy and possess certain lands,
      as confirmed by s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982, mandates basic fairness
      commensurate with the honour and good faith of the Crown.
205               With regard to the issue of self-government, I conclude, as does the Chief
      Justice, that there was insufficient evidence before this Court to make any determination
      regarding this aspect of the appellants’ claim.
                                                  - 124 -
206               As for the issue raised on the cross-appeal, I agree with the Chief Justice’s
      conclusion. The respondent province had no authority to extinguish aboriginal rights
                                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
      either under the Constitution Act, 1867 or by virtue of s. 88 of the Indian Act.
207               On a final note, I wish to emphasize that the best approach in these types of
      cases is a process of negotiation and reconciliation that properly considers the complex
      and competing interests at stake. This point was made by Lambert J.A. in the Court of
      Appeal, [1993] 5 W.W.R. 97, at pp. 379-80:
                  So, in the end, the legal rights of the Indian people will have to be
                  accommodated within our total society by political compromises and
                  accommodations based in the first instance on negotiation and agreement
                  and ultimately in accordance with the sovereign will of the community as
                  a whole. The legal rights of the Gitksan and Wet’suwet’en peoples, to
                  which this law suit is confined, and which allow no room for any approach
                  other than the application of the law itself, and the legal rights of all
                  aboriginal peoples throughout British Columbia, form only one factor in the
                  ultimate determination of what kind of community we are going to have in
                  British Columbia and throughout Canada in the years ahead. [Emphasis
                  added.]
      (See also Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (1996), vol. 2
      (Restructuring the Relationship), Part 2, at pp. 561-62.)
208               Accordingly, I would allow the appeal in part and order a new trial on the
      basis of the principles set out in these reasons. I would also dismiss the cross-appeal.
      //McLachlin J.//
                  The following are the reasons delivered by
                                                - 125 -
209               MCLACHLIN J. -- I concur with the Chief Justice. I add that I am also in
      substantial agreement with the comments of Justice La Forest.
                                                                                              1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                                              ***
                                        SCHEDULE 1
                                          Appellants
      DELGAMUUKW, also known as Earl Muldoe, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
      of all the members of the Houses of Delgamuukw and Haaxw
      GISDAY WA, also known as Alfred Joseph, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
      all the members of the House of Gisday Wa
      NII KYAP, also known as Gerald Gunanoot, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
      all the members of the House of Nii Kyap
      LELT, also known as Lloyd Ryan, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all the
      members of the Houses of Lelt and Haak’w
      ANTGULILBIX, also known as Mary Johnson, suing on her own behalf and on behalf
      of all the members of the House of Antgulilbix
      TENIMGYET, also known as Arthur Matthews, Jr., suing on his own behalf and on
      behalf of all the members of the House of Tenimgyet
      GOOHLAHT, also known as Lucy Namox, suing on her own behalf and on behalf of all
      the members of the Houses of Goohlaht and Samooh
      KLIIYEM LAX HAA, also known as Eva Sampson, suing on her own behalf and on
      behalf of all the members of the Houses of Kliiyem Lax Haa and Wii’mugulsxw
      GWIS GYEN, also known as Stanley Williams, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
      of all the members of the House of Gwis Gyen
      KWEESE, also known as Florence Hall, suing on her own behalf and on behalf of all the
      members of the House of Kweese
      DJOGASLEE, also known as Walter Wilson, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
      all the members of the House of Djogaslee
      GWAGL’LO, also known as Ernest Hyzims, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
      all the members of the Houses of Gwagl’lo and Duubisxw
      GYOLUGYET, also known as Mary McKenzie, suing on her own behalf and on behalf
      of all the members of the House of Gyolugyet
                                           - 126 -
GYETM GALDOO, also known as Sylvester Green, suing on his own behalf and on
behalf of all the members of the Houses of Gyetm Galdoo and Wii’Goob’l
HAAK ASXW, also known as Larry Wright, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
all the members of the House of Haak Asxw
                                                                                          1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
GEEL, also known as Walter Harris, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all the
members of the House of Geel
HAALUS, also known as Billy Morrison, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the House of Haalus
WII HLENGWAX, also known as Herbert Burke, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Wii Hlengwax
LUUTKUDZIIWUS, also known as Ben McKenzie, Sr., suing on his own behalf and on
behalf of all the members of the House of Luutkudziiwus
MA’UUS, also known as Jeffrey Harris, Jr., suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the House of Ma’uus
MILUU LAK, also known as Alice Jeffery, suing on her own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the Houses of Miluu Lak and Haiwas
NIKA TEEN, also known as James Woods, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the House of Nika Teen
SKIIK’M LAX HA, also known as John Wilson, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Skiik’m Lax Ha
WII MINOSIK, also known as Robert Stevens, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Wii Minosik
GWININ NITXW, also known as Solomon Jack, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Gwinin Nitxw
GWOIMT, also known as Kathleen Wale, suing on her own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the Houses of Gwoimt and Tsabux
LUUS, also known as Jeffrey Harris, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all the
members of the House of Luus
NIIST, also known as David Blackwater, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the Houses of Niist and Baskyelaxha
SPOOKW, also known as Steven Robinson, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
all the members of the Houses of Spookw and Yagosip
WII GAAK, also known as Neil Sterritt, Sr., suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
all the members of the House of Wii Gaak
DAWAMUXW, also known as Charlie Clifford, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Dawamuxw
                                         - 127 -
GITLUDAHL, also known as Peter Muldoe, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
all the members of the Houses of Gitludahl and Wiigyet
GUXSAN, also known as Herbert Wesley, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the House of Guxsan
                                                                                      1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
HANAMUXW, also known as Joan Ryan, suing on her own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the House of Hanamuxw
YAL, also known as George Turner, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all the
members of the House of Yal
GWIIYEEHL, also known as Chris Skulsh, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the House of Gwiiyeehl
SAKXUM HIGOOKX, also known as Vernon Smith, suing on his own behalf and on
behalf of all the members of the House of Sakxum Higookx
MA DEEK, also known as James Brown, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all
the members of the House of Ma Deek
WOOS, also known as Roy Morris, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all the
members of the House of Woos
KNEDEBEAS, also known as Sarah Layton, suing on her own behalf and on behalf of
all the members of the House of Knedebeas
SMOGELGEM, also known as Leonard George, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Smogelgem
KLO UM KHUN, also known as Patrick Pierre, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Klo Um Khun
HAG WIL NEGH, also known as Ron Mitchell, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Hag Wil Negh
WAH TAH KEG’HT, also known as Henry Alfred, suing on his own behalf and on
behalf of all the members of the House of Wah Tah Keg’ht
WAH TAH KWETS, also known as John Namox, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Wah Tah Kwets
WOOSIMLAXHA, also known as Victor Mowatt, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Gutginuxw
XSGOGIMLAXHA, also known as Vernon Milton, suing on his own behalf and on
behalf of all the members of the House of Xsgogimlaxha
WIIGYET, also known as Roy Wesley, suing on his own behalf and on behalf of all the
members of the House of Wiigyet
WII ELAAST, also known as Jim Angus, Jr., suing on his own behalf and on behalf of
all the members of the Houses of Wii Elaast and Amagyet
                                         - 128 -
GAXSBGABAXS, also known as Gertie Watson, suing on her own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Gaxsbgabaxs
WIGETIMSCHOL, also known as Dan Michell, suing on his own behalf and on behalf
of all the members of the House of Namox
                                                                                  1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
                                  SCHEDULE 2
                   Those Intervening with the Musqueam Nation
Delbert Guerin
Gail Y. Sparrow
Jim Kew
Larry Grant
Leona M. Sparrow
Mary Charles
Myrtle McKay
Nolan Charles
Susan A. Point
Chief George Guerin
                                  SCHEDULE 3
              Those Intervening with the B.C. Cattlemen’s Association
B.C. Chamber of Commerce
B.C. Wildlife Federation
Business Council of British Columbia
Council of Tourist Associations
Fisheries Council of British Columbia
Guideoutfitters Association of British Columbia
 Mining Association of British Columbia
Pacific Fishermen’s Defence Alliance
           Appeal allowed in part; cross-appeal dismissed.
                                                                                              1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
           Solicitors for the appellants and respondents on the cross-appeal, the
Gitksan Hereditary Chiefs et al.: Rush, Crane, Guenther & Adams, Vancouver.
           Solicitors for the appellants and respondents on the cross-appeal, the
Wet’suwet’en Hereditary Chiefs et al.: Blake, Cassels & Graydon, Vancouver.
           Solicitors for the respondent and appellant on the cross-appeal, Her Majesty
the Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia: Arvay, Finlay, Victoria.
           Solicitor for the respondent the Attorney General of Canada: The Attorney
General of Canada, Ottawa.
           Solicitors for the intervener the First Nations Summit: Ratcliff & Company,
North Vancouver.
           Solicitors for the intervener the Westbank First Nation: Woodward and
Company, Victoria.
           Solicitors for the interveners the Musqueam Nation et al.: Blake, Cassels &
Graydon, Vancouver.
           Solicitor for the interveners the B.C. Cattlemen’s Association, et al.: J. Keith
Lowes, Vancouver.
                                           - 130 -
             Solicitors for the intervener Skeena Cellulose Inc.: Russell & DuMoulin,
Vancouver.
                                                                                          1997 CanLII 302 (S.C.C.)
             Solicitors for the intervener Alcan Aluminum Ltd.: Lawson, Lundell, Lawson
& McIntosh, Vancouver.
Citation: Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.      Date: 19990812
1999 BCCA 470                        Docket: CA023526, CA023539
                                             Registry: Vancouver
           COURT OF APPEAL FOR BRITISH COLUMBIA
BETWEEN:
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
           CHIEF BERNIE METECHEAH, on his own behalf and
               on behalf of all other members of the
                HALFWAY RIVER FIRST NATION, and the
                     HALFWAY RIVER FIRST NATION
                                                       PETITIONERS
                                                     (RESPONDENTS)
AND:
                  DAVID LAWSON, DISTRICT MANAGER,
                 FORT ST. JOHN FOREST DISTRICT and
                      THE MINISTRY OF FORESTS
                                                       RESPONDENTS
                                                      (APPELLANTS)
AND:
                   CANADIAN FOREST PRODUCTS LTD.
                                                       RESPONDENTS
                                                      (APPELLANTS)
Before:     The Honourable Madam Justice Southin
            The Honourable Mr. Justice Finch
            The Honourable Madam Justice Huddart
M. W. W. Frey and                      Counsel for the Appellant,
H. M. Groberman, Q.C.                        District Manager and
                                              Ministry of Forests
S. B. Armstrong and                    Counsel for the Appellant,
J. M. Marks                         Canadian Forest Products Ltd.
C. Allan Donovan                     Counsel for the Respondents,
                                       Chief Bernie Metecheah and
                                       Halfway River First Nation
Place and Date of Hearing             Vancouver, British Columbia
                                  19, 20, 21 and 22 January, 1999
Place and Date of Judgment            Vancouver, British Columbia
                                                  12 August, 1999
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                          Page: 2
Written Reasons by: (with Index)
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
The Honourable Mr. Justice Finch
Concurred in by:
The Honourable Madam Justice Huddart   (P. 80, para. 170)
Dissenting Reasons by:
The Honourable Madam Justice Southin   (P. 93, para. 194)
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 3
                       TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                  Paragraph
I         Introduction                                          1
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
II        Background                                            9
III       The Legislative Scheme                               23
IV        The Decision of the District Manager                 37
V         The Decision of the Chambers Judge                   39
          A.   Fettering                                       40
          B.   Bias                                            41
          C.   The District Manager's "Errors of Fact"         43
          D.   Notice                                          44
          E.   Infringement of Treaty 8 Right to Hunt          45
          F.   Justification of Infringement                   49
VI        Issues                                               50
VII       Form of Proceedings                                  51
VIII      Standard of Review to be Applied to the
          Decision of the Chambers Judge concerning
          Fettering, Bias, Notice and Hearing                  58
IX        Whether the Chambers Judge Erred in Deciding
          Those Issues                                         61
          A.   Fettering                                       61
          B.   Reasonable Apprehension of Bias                 67
          C.   Adequacy of Notice                              76
          D.   The Right to be Heard                           81
          E.   Conclusion on Administrative Law Issues         83
X         Standard of Review Applicable to the
          District Manager's Decision                          84
XI        Treaty 8                                             88
          A.   Principles of Treaty Interpretation             88
          B.   The Parties' Position                           93
               1.   The Appellants' Position                   93
               2.   The Petitioners' Position                 101
          C.   The Admissibility of Extrinsic Evidence        105
          D.   What Extrinsic Evidence is Admissible          110
          E.   R. v. Sparrow and its Application              121
          F.   Interpretation of Treaty 8 and
               Infringement of the Right to Hunt              131
XII       Justification                                       145
          A.   Importance of the Legislative Objective        149
          B.   Minimal Impairment                             152
          C.   Whether the Effects of Infringement
               Outweigh the Benefits to be Derived
               from the Government Action                     157
          D.   Adequate Meaningful Consultation               158
XIII      Remedy                                              168
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 4
Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Mr. Justice Finch:
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
                                I
Introduction
[1]   The Ministry of Forests ("the Ministry"), its District
Manager at Fort St. John, David Lawson, ("the District
Manager") and Canadian Forest Products Limited ("Canfor")
appeal the order of the Supreme Court of British Columbia
pronounced 24 June, 1997, which quashed the decision of the
District Manager on 13 September, 1996, approving Canfor's
application for Cutting Permit 212.   Canfor holds the timber
harvesting licence for the wilderness area in which C.P.212
would permit logging. It is Crown land, adjacent to the reserve
land granted to the Halfway River First Nation.   The Halfway
Nation are descendants of the Beaver People who were
signatories to Treaty 8 in 1900.
[2]   The part of Treaty 8 that preserved the signatories right
to hunt says:
      And Her Majesty the Queen HEREBY AGREES with the said
      Indians that they shall have the right to pursue
      their usual vocations of hunting, trapping and
      fishing throughout the tract surrendered as
      heretofore described, subject to such regulations as
      may from time to time be made by the Government of
      the country, acting under the authority of Her
      Majesty, and saving and excepting such tracts as may
      be required or taken up from time to time for
      settlement, mining, lumbering, trading or other
      purposes.
                                              (my emphasis)
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 5
[3]   The petitioners claimed under the Treaty the traditional
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
right to hunt on the Crown land adjacent to their reserve,
which they refer to as the "Tusdzuh" area, including the areas
covered by C.P.212.   In addition, they have an outstanding
Treaty Land Entitlement Claim (T.L.E.C.) against the federal
Crown, and they say lands recoverable in that claim may be
located in the Tusdzuh.
[4]   Among many other arguments advanced the petitioners said
that issuance of the permit, and the logging it will allow,
infringes their hunting rights under the Treaty, and that such
infringement cannot be justified by the Crown.   The petitioners
also claimed that C.P.212 was granted by the District Manager
in breach of his administrative law duty of fairness, in that
he fettered his discretion by applying government policy,
prejudged Canfor's right to have the permit issued, failed to
give adequate notice of his intention to decide the question,
and failed to provide an adequate opportunity for them to be
heard.   The petitioners also said the District Manager reached
a patently unreasonable decision in deciding factual issues on
an incomplete evidentiary base.
[5]   The learned chambers judge accepted all these submissions
and held therefore that C.P.212 should be quashed.   Other
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 6
submissions were rejected.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[6]   On this appeal, the appellants say the learned chambers
judge erred on all counts.   They say that, properly construed,
the plaintiffs' right under Treaty 8 to hunt is subject to the
Crown's right to "require", or "take up" lands from time to
time for, among other purposes, "lumbering"; and that the
issuance of C.P.212 therefore did not breach or infringe the
petitioners' treaty rights to hunt.   Alternatively, the
petitioners say that if the treaty right to hunt was breached,
that breach was justified within the test laid down in R. v.
Sparrow,[1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, 3 C.N.L.R. 160, 4 W.W.R. 410.
[7]   As to the administrative law issues, the appellants say
the learned chambers judge erred in finding that the District
Manager had fettered his discretion, that his decision gave
rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias, and that he failed
to give adequate notice or opportunity to be heard.   They also
say the learned chambers judge erred in holding the District
Manager's decision to be patently unreasonable.
[8]   For the reasons that follow, I have concluded that the
only lack of procedural fairness in the decision-making process
of the District Manager was the failure to provide to the
petitioners an opportunity to be heard.   In my respectful view,
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 7
the learned chambers judge erred in holding that there was a
lack of procedural fairness on the other three grounds that
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
were raised.   I have also concluded that the issuance of the
cutting permit infringed the petitioners' treaty right to hunt,
that the Crown has failed to show that infringement was
justified, and that the learned chambers judge did not err in
quashing the District Manager's approval of Canfor's permit
application.
                                II
Background
[9]   Treaty 8 is one of 11 numbered treaties made between the
federal government and various Indian bands between 1871 and
1923.   B.C. joined confederation in 1871, but the provincial
government was not represented in these treaty negotiations.
Treaty 8 was negotiated in 1899, and was adhered to in that
year by a number of bands who lived in what are now Alberta,
Saskatchewan and the Northwest Territories.    The first
adherents, a band of Cree Indians, signed the treaty at Lesser
Slave Lake in June, 1899.    The Hudson Hope Beaver people, from
whom the petitioners are descended, adhered to the treaty at
Fort St. John in 1900.    At that time there were 46 Beaver
people living in the vicinity of Fort St. John.    The Hudson
Hope people are now spread between the Halfway River Nation and
the West Moberley Band.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 8
[10] On this appeal, counsel for the Ministry of Forests told
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
the Court that the British Columbia government acknowledged
that it was bound by the provisions of Treaty 8 concerning the
petitioners' rights to hunt and fish, but made no similar
concession in respect of the petitioners' right to lands under
the treaty.
[11] The full provisions of the treaty are set out in the
reasons of my colleague, Madam Justice Southin.   The Indians
could neither read nor write English, and the terms of the
treaty were interpreted to them orally.   There is a question in
this case as to what extrinsic evidence, if any, is admissible
in interpreting the treaty.   The commissioners who acted on
behalf of the federal government made a report concerning their
discussions and negotiations with the original adherents to the
treaty in 1899.   There is no similar record of what was said to
the Beaver people of Fort St. John in 1900.   The appellant
Minister says the extrinsic evidence of what occurred in 1899,
and which was admitted and considered in R. v. Badger, [1996] 1
S.C.R. 771, is not admissible for the purposes of construing
the treaty adhered to by the petitioners' ancestors in 1900.
[12] In 1900 title to Crown land was vested in the provincial
Crown by virtue of the terms of union between British Columbia
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                          Page: 9
and Canada in 1871.   Treaty 8 provides for reserve lands to be
set aside for the Indians, to the extent of one square mile for
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
each family of five, or 160 acres per individual.    The
"selection" of such reserves was to be made in the manner
provided for in the treaty.
[13] On 15 May, 1907 the provincial government transferred
administration and control of lands in the Peace River block to
the federal government by Executive Order-in-Council.      The
transfer covered about 3.5 million acres of land, selected as
agreed in 1884.   By virtue of s.91(24) of the Constitution Act,
1867, the federal government already had all jurisdiction to
deal with "Indians and land reserved for Indians".
[14] The reserve lands of the Halfway River Nation were not
finally surveyed and located until 1914.   The reserve is
located on the north bank of the Halfway River, about 100 miles
west of the city of Fort St. John.   The reserve comprises about
9,880 acres.
[15] The lands to the south and west of the Halfway River
reserve were, in 1900 and 1914, unsettled and undeveloped
wilderness.    The Halfway River Nation referred to this area as
the Tusdzuh.   It is an area that the petitioners and their
ancestors have used for hunting, fishing, trapping and the
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 10
gathering of food and medicinal plants.   The area was plentiful
with game, and conveniently located for the purposes of the
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Halfway Nation.   The petitioners or their forebears built
cabins, corrals and meat drying racks in the area for use in
conjunction with their hunting activities.   The time of
building, and the precise location of these structures, is not
disclosed in the evidence.
[16] In 1930 the federal government transferred administration
and control of the lands in the Peace River block back to the
provincial government by the Railway Belt Retransfer Agreement
Act, S.B.C. 1930, c.60.   Also in 1930, the Constitution Act,
1930 was enacted by the parliament of the United Kingdom giving
effect to, inter alia, the agreement between the federal and
B.C. provincial governments by which the retransfer of lands,
including the Peace River block, took place.   There was an
exception from the retransfer of the Indian reserve lands
located in the Peace River block.
[17] It is significant for the purposes of this case, and to
understanding earlier jurisprudence interpreting Treaty 8 and
other of the numbered treaties, that B.C. is not affected by
the Natural Resources Transfer Act, 1930 (Constitution Act,
1930 Schedule II), which was an important consideration in such
cases as R. v. Badger, supra and R. v. Horse, [1988] 1 S.C.R.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 11
187.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[18] In 1982, the Constitution Act, 1982 was enacted.     Section
35 of the Act provides:
       35. (1) The existing aboriginal and treaty rights
       of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby
       recognized and affirmed.
[19] About 15 years ago, at a date not disclosed in the
evidence, the Halfway River Nation entered into negotiations
with both the federal and provincial governments to allow the
expansion of its reserve lands.   They subsequently advanced a
Treaty Land Entitlement Claim (TLEC) against the Crown in Right
of Canada asserting a shortfall of over 2,000 acres in the
reserve lands allocated to them in 1914.   In fact, the Nation
has made a demand for over 35,000 acres of additional land, the
basis for which claim was not made clear in the submissions of
counsel.   Whatever the area entitlement of the petitioners to
further reserve lands may be, there is an unresolved issue as
to their location.   The petitioners claim that the entitlement
may be located, in whole or in part, in the Tusdzuh, the
wilderness area to the south of their present reserve lands.
[20] There are now said to be 184 men, women and children in
the Halfway River Nation.   They are a poor people,
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 12
economically, and have in general not adapted themselves to the
agricultural lifestyle contemplated in those parts of Treaty 8
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
granting each family of five one square mile of land, or each
individual 160 acres of land, as well as livestock, farm
implements and machinery, and such seed as was suited to the
locality of the Band.    They have instead pursued their
traditional means of support and sustenance, of which moose
hunting is an important element.    75% of the members of the
Halfway River Nation live on social assistance.
[21] The lands referred to by the petitioners as the Tusdzuh
are vast areas in which, until fairly recent times, there has
been limited industrial use or development.    There has been
some mining since the early 1900s and, more recently, some oil
and gas exploration.    A network of seismic lines was cut for
that purpose.   The evidence does not disclose when the first
timber harvesting licence was granted.    Canfor obtained one
part of its current timber harvesting licence in 1983, and a
second part in 1989.    These licences were amalgamated into
Forest Licence No. A181154.
[22] In 1991, Canfor first identified the areas covered by
C.P.212 in its five year Forest Development Plan for 1991-96.
Chief Metecheah wrote to the Minister of Forests on 20 January,
1992 requesting a meeting to discuss the development of lands
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 13
in the Tusdzuh.   On 30 June, 1992, Canfor wrote to the Treaty 8
Tribal Association (of which the Halfway River Nation is a
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
member) advising of the proposed harvesting.   From that time up
to the present litigation there have been both correspondence
and telephone communications between the parties to these
proceedings: these are more specifically detailed in the
reasons for judgment of the learned chambers judge, and in
Appendix A to her reasons, setting out a "chronology of notices
and consultation".   Particular reference to some of these
communications will be made later in these reasons, as may
appear necessary.
                                III
The Legislative Scheme
[23] The authority of the District Manager to issue a cutting a
permit derives from the    Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 140, as
am. S.B.C. 1980, c. 14 (the Act), the Forest Practices Code of
British Columbia Act, S.B.C. 1994, c. 41 (the Code, now
R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 159) and subsequent regulations, and the
Ministry of Forests Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 272, as am. S.B.C.
1980, c. 14.   That latter statute amended various aspects of
the Forest Act, the Ministry of Forests Act, and the Range Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 355.    The 1980 amendment to s. 158(2) of the
Forest Act provides:
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 14
     158 (2) Without limiting ss. (1), the Lieutenant Governor
     in Council may make regulations respecting ...
     (d.1) the establishment of an area of the Province as a
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     forest district, the abolition and variation in boundaries
     and name of a forest district and the consolidation of 2
     or more forest districts; ...
Section 2(1) of the Ministry of Forests Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c.
272 (now R.S.B.C. 1996, c.300) was amended to state:
     2 (1) The following persons may be appointed under the
     Public Service Act: ...
     (d) a district manager for a forest district established
     under the Forest Act and the part of a range district
     established under the Range Act that covers the same area
     as the forest district; ...
[24] That section, in combination with the Public Service Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c.343, authorized the Lieutenant Governor in
Council to appoint district managers for forest districts
established under the Forest Act.    Section 9 of the 1979 Forest
Act (now section 11) specified that no rights to harvest Crown
timber could be granted on behalf of the government except in
accordance with the Act.   Section 10 (now section 12) specified
that a District Manager, a regional manager or the minister may
enter into agreements granting rights to harvest timber in the
form of licenses and/or permits subject to the provisions of
the Act and the Regulations.   In 1994, section 247 of the Code
amended section 10 of the Forest Act, subjecting the District
Manager's authority to enter into agreements granting rights to
harvest timber to the requirements of the Code.   Section 238 of
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 15
the Code states that every cutting permit in existence at the
time the Code came into force remains in existence, but ceases
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
to have effect two years after the date the section came into
force unless the District Manager determines that the
operational planning requirements of the cutting permit are
consistent with the requirements of the Code.    With the
exception of a few sections, the Code came into effect pursuant
to Reg. 165/95 on June 15, 1995.
[25] The relationship between the Forest Act and the Forest
Practices Code with respect to the District Manager’s authority
to issue a cutting permit pursuant to a forest licence
agreement is important.   The Code regulates the actual practice
of forestry as it occurs on the ground, whereas the Act governs
matters such as the formation of forest licence agreements and
the determination of the annual allowable cut.   The Code does
not replace the Act but supplements it, as contemplated by s.
10 of the Act (now s. 12) where the authority of officials
(including the District Manager) in the Ministry of Forests to
issue licenses is circumscribed by the Code insofar as the Code
requires that certain operational plans receive approval before
the granting of licenses or permits.   The process by which
those plans receive approval is set out in the Code and in the
Regulations enacted pursuant to the Code.   Sections 10 and 12
of the 1979 Act, as amended in 1980, provide:
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                          Page: 16
     10.   Subject to this Act and the Regulations, a district
           manager, a regional manager or the minister, on
           behalf of the Crown, may enter into an agreement
                                                                       1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
           granting rights to harvest Crown timber in the form
           of a
           (a) forest licence;
           (b) timber sale licence;
           (c) timber licence;
           (d) tree farm licence; ...
     12.   A forest licence ...
           (f) shall provide for cutting permits to be issued
           by the Crown to authorize the allowable annual cut to
           be harvested, within the limits provided in the
           licence, from specific areas of land in the public
           sustained yield unit or timber supply area described
           in the licence;
                              . . .
[26] The enactment of the Forest Practices Code further amended
these provisions, so as to render the formation of agreements
under section 10 of the Act subject to the provisions of the
Code (s. 247 of the Code).
[27] In addition, the preamble to the Code provides a broad set
of principles to guide the actions of forestry officials, and
by which the statute is to be interpreted.
[28] The preamble to the Forest Practices Code is as follows:
     WHEREAS British Columbians desire sustainable use of
     the forests they hold in trust for future
     generations;
     AND WHEREAS sustainable use includes
           (a)   managing forests to meet present needs
                 without compromising the needs of future
                 generations,
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 17
          (b)    providing stewardship of forests based on
                 an ethic of respect for the land,
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
          (c)    balancing productive, spiritual, ecological
                 and recreational values of forests to meet
                 the economic and cultural needs of peoples
                 and communities, including First Nations,
          (d)    conserving biological diversity, soil,
                 water, fish, wildlife, scenic diversity and
                 other forest resources, and
          (e)    restoring damaged ecologies;
     THEREFORE HER MAJESTY, by and with the advice and
     consent of the Legislative Assembly of the Province
     of British Columbia, enacts as follows:
[29] The Code is to be interpreted so as to achieve the
principles set out in the preamble:    see Koopman v. Ostergaard
(1995), 12 B.C.L.R. (3d) 154 (S.C.); Chetwynd Environmental
Society v. British Columbia (1995), 13 B.C.L.R. (3d) 338
(S.C.).   The preamble of the Code, therefore, is to receive a
broad and liberal construction so as to best ensure the
attainment of the Code's goals: International Forest Products
v. British Columbia (Ministry of Forests) (unreported. 19
March, 1997.    Forest Appeals Commission (Vigod, Chair), App.
No. 96/02(b)).
[30] In addition to receiving guidance from the preamble's
principles, the District Manager's authority to grant cutting
permits is subject to certain specific operational planning
requirements under the Code.    These generally take the form of
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 18
requiring the permit holder to demonstrate that the plans for
harvesting conform to certain environmental standards.    The
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
operational planning requirements are set out in Part 3 of the
Code, directing that the holder of an agreement under the
Forest Act must carry out certain impact assessments of the
proposed harvest area and integrate the findings of such an
assessment into forest development plans (ss. 10, 17-19),
logging plans (s. 11, 20-21), silviculture prescriptions and
plans (s. 12, 14, 22-23, 25), and access management, stand
management, and range use plans (ss. 13, 15-16, 24, 26-27).
There are numerous provisions that allow for the holder of an
agreement under the Forest Act to apply for exemptions from
these requirements (Part 3, Division 3).
[31] Finally, the District Manager's authority to grant cutting
permits pursuant to forest licence agreements entered into
under the Act is limited by many of the regulations enacted
pursuant to the Code.   Specifically, the Operational Planning
Regulations [B.C. Reg. 174/95] identify areas where the
District Manager must satisfy himself of the nature of the
various kinds of public consultations that have occurred and
need to occur.   According to sections 5–8 of the Operational
Planning Regulations the proponent of an operational plan or
forest development plan is required to ensure that the best
information available is used and that the District Manager
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 19
approves of it.
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[32] Under the Regulations, before a person submits, or a
District Manager puts into effect, a forest development plan,
they must publish notice of the plan to the public (s.2).     The
District Manager must provide an opportunity for review and
comment to an interested or affected person (s.4(4)), and must
consider all comments received (s.4(5)).
[33] Section 4(4) of the Regulations provides:
     An opportunity for review and comment provided to an
     interested or affected person under s-s.(1) will only
     be adequate for the purposes of that subsection if,
     in the opinion of the district manager, the
     opportunity is commensurate with the nature and
     extent of that person's interest in the area under
     the plan and any right that person may have to use
     the area under the plan.
[34] Finally, under s.6(1)(a) of the Regulations the District
Manager has a discretion to require that operational plans be
referred to any other resource agency, person, or other agency
he may specify.   I observe in passing that the District
Manager's discretion to determine the adequacy of the
opportunity to "review and comment" does not extend to that
consultation required by the jurisprudence concerning the
Crown's obligation to justify infringement of aboriginal or
treaty rights.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 20
[35] The proponent of a plan is under an obligation to use the
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
best information available (s.11(1)) and to use all information
known to the person (s.11(2)(b)).    These provisions confer a
very broad discretion.   It would appear, however, to be the
sort of discretion calling for expertise beyond that of a
professional forester.   Whether a set plan of logging is
acceptable to those members of the public who have a stake in
it appears to be a question of judgment that any properly
informed person would be as well able to answer as a forester.
[36] In summary then, the District Manager's powers to issue
cutting permits are found in s.10 of the 1979 Forest Act as
amended by s.247 of the Code in 1994, and those powers are
subject to the requirements of the Code.    The preamble to the
Code states the guiding principles for forest management which
include meeting "the economic and cultural needs of First
Nations".   Section 4(4) to the Regulations gives the District
Manager a discretion to determine the adequacy of consultation
with interested parties, as specified in s.4(1).
                               IV
The Decision of the District Manager
[37] After investigation, reviews and discussion, the District
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 21
Manager finally decided to issue C.P.212 on 13 September, 1996.
 His reasons for doing so are set out in a letter he wrote to
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Chief Metecheah on 3 October, 1996.   In summary, the District
Manager held:
     1.   Canfor's application for C.P.212 was consistent
          with Canfor's approved five year forest
          development plan;
     2.   C.P.212 was in substantial compliance with the
          requirements of the Forest Practices Code;
     3.   Canfor's harvesting operations would have
          minimal impacts on wildlife habitat suitability
          and capability for ungulates (moose and deer)
          and black bear in the area;
     4.   There would be minimal to no impact on fish
          habitat or fishing activities;
     5.   It was not the policy of the Provincial
          government to halt resource development pending
          resolution of a Treaty Land Entitlement Claim
          (TLEC) advanced by the petitioners against the
          federal Crown;
     6.   Canfor would be required to perform an
          Archeological Impact Assessment (AIA) in block 4
          of C.P.212 where an old First Nations pack trail
          was located;
     7.   The proposed harvesting plan included sufficient
          measures to mitigate any concerns as to the
          trapping of fur bearing animals in the area;
     8.   Canfor's plan would deactivate all roads
          seasonally, to make them impassable, and on
          completion of harvesting, would deactivate the
          roads permanently.
     9.   Canfor's proposed harvesting activities would
          not infringe the petitioners' Treaty 8 rights of
          hunting, fishing and trapping.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 22
[38] There does not appear to be any statutory requirement for
the giving of such reasons, either oral or written.   The
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
reasons are useful, however, because they record the factors
the District Manager took into account in reaching his
decision, and they lend an air of openness to the process he
followed.   On the other hand, the giving of reasons may suggest
a more judicial or quasi-judicial process than is required by
the legislative scheme.
                                V
The Decision of the Chambers Judge
[39] The Halfway River First Nation brought an application for
judicial review, seeking to quash the decision of the District
Manager to issue C.P.212.   That application was brought
pursuant to the Judicial Review Procedure Act, which provides
remedies for administrative actions in excess of statutory
powers.   Whether this was the proper form of proceedings to
bring is considered more fully below.   On that application,
Madam Justice Dorgan granted certiorari and quashed the
decision of the District Manager, citing reasons related to the
various issues involved, which are outlined below.
     A.     Fettering:
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 23
[40] The learned chambers judge held that the District Manager
had fettered his discretion.   She said at para.35:
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     [35] Notwithstanding these references which indicate
     a notion of weighing various interests, on the whole
     of the record I am satisfied that Lawson fettered his
     discretion by treating the government policy of not
     halting development as a given and by simply
     following the direction of the Minister of Forests
     not to halt development. This is particularly
     evident from p.4 of his Reasons for Decision which
     reads:
          ... in December 1995 the Minister of
          Forests advised both ourselves and the
          Halfway band that it is not the policy of
          the provincial government to halt resource
          development pending resolution of the
          Treaty Land Entitlement (TLE) claim and
          that we must honour legal obligations to
          both the Forest Industry as well as First
          Nations. This fact was again reiterated by
          Janna Kumi, Assistant Deputy Minister,
          Operations, upon her meeting with the
          Halfway Band in January 1996.
     B.   Bias
[41] The learned chambers judge held that there was no actual
bias in the District Manager's decision, but that there was a
reasonable apprehension of bias.   She said at paras.48-9:
     [48] However, a further statement by Lawson is of
     concern. In his letter to Chief Metecheah dated
     August 29, 1996 Lawson states:
          "I must inform you that if the application
          is in order and abides by all ministry
          regulations and the Forest Practices Code I
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 24
          have no compelling reasons not to approve
          their application."
     This statement strongly suggests that Lawson had
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     already concluded that there was no infringement of
     Treaty or Aboriginal Rights. His only remaining
     concerns about the application were with respect to
     compliance with MOF and Code requirements. He
     requests information on Aboriginal and Treaty Rights
     with respect to future Canfor activities but makes no
     reference to such rights vis-a-vis CP212. The only
     conclusion to be drawn from this letter is that
     Lawson had already decided that there was no
     infringement of Halfway's rights.
     [49] As well, it should be noted that at paragraph 18
     of the affidavit of David Menzies, he states:
          Approval to proceed with harvesting in
          Blocks 1, 2, 4, 5, 17 and 19 was granted by
          the District Manager on September 13, 1996
          (attached as Exhibit 8). The formal
          application letter was only sent after the
          Ministry of Forests confirmed that the
          application would be granted, consistent
          with the approval already granted for the
          Development Plan.
                                          [emphasis added]
     This evidence indicates that once the Development
     Plan was approved, all applications for cutting
     permits within it will likely be approved as well and
     is evidence which supports a finding of a reasonable
     apprehension of bias.
[42] She held that the petitioners had not waived their right
to rely on the allegation of apprehended bias.
     C.   The District Manager's "Errors of Fact"
[43] The learned chambers judge held that it was patently
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 25
unreasonable for the District Manager to conclude that there
was no infringement of the petitioner's hunting rights under
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Treaty 8.   In reaching this conclusion, she said in part at
paras. 63, 66 and 68:
     [63] In the present case, it cannot be said that
     there was no evidence supporting Lawson's finding
     that Aboriginal and Treaty Rights would not be
     infringed. Lawson had the CHOA report and
     information provided by BCE staff regarding the
     impact of harvesting on the traditional activities of
     hunting, trapping and fishing.
                             . . .
     [66] Given the limited evidence available to Lawson,
     the factual conclusions which he reached as to
     infringement of Treaty 8 or Aboriginal Rights is
     unreasonable. There was some evidence supporting his
     findings, however, Lawson had no information from
     Halfway. How can one reach any reasonable conclusion
     as to the impact on Halfway's rights without
     obtaining information from Halfway on their uses of
     the area in question? This problem was recognized in
     the CHOA report, which stated, at 33-34:
            In summary, the Cultural Heritage
            (Ethnographic) Overview presented here
            provides a useful starting point for
            assessing the extent of the Halfway River
            First Nation's use of the Tusdzah study
            area. It demonstrates the area was, and
            continues to be, utilized for hunting,
            fishing, trapping and plant collecting, and
            provides a ranking of the use potential for
            each of these activities. However, these
            data alone are not sufficient to
            understanding the issues surrounding
            infringement of Treaty and/or Aboriginal
            rights of the Halfway River Peoples. It is
            my opinion that additional cultural and
            ecological studies of the Tusdzah study
            area are required before this issue can be
            adequately addressed.
                               . . .
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 26
           However, as discussed above, there are
           numerous shortcomings with a study of this
           nature, from both a cultural and ecological
           perspective. In fact, I suggest that until
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
           more detailed information is obtained in
           both these areas, studies such as this will
           fail to adequately address the concerns and
           management needs of forest managers and
           First Nations.
                              . . .
     [68] Given the importance attached to Treaty and
     Aboriginal Rights, in the absence of significant
     information and in the face of assertions by Halfway
     as to their uses of CP212, it was patently
     unreasonable for Lawson to conclude that there was no
     infringement.
     D.    Notice
[44] The learned chambers judge held that the highest standard
of fairness should apply in the circumstances of this case, and
although the petitioners had some notice of Canfor's
application for C.P.212, that notice was inadequate because the
petitioners did not see Canfor's application in final form
until after the Cutting Permit had been approved by the
District Manager, and the petitioners had no specific notice
that the District Manager would make his decision on 13
September, 1996 or on any other date.   The history of the
notice given to the petitioners is set out in para.73 of her
reasons.
     E.    Infringement of Treaty 8 Right to Hunt
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 27
[45] The learned chambers judge held that there was a prima
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
facie infringement of the petitioners Treaty 8 right to hunt,
as recognized and affirmed by s.35(1) of the Constitution Act,
1982 which provides:
     35. (1) The existing aboriginal and treaty rights
     of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby
     recognized and affirmed.
[46] She held that infringement was to be determined in
accordance with the test laid down in R. v. Sparrow, supra.
She said in part at paras.91-93:
     [91] Pursuant to Treaty 8 the Beaver First Nation (of
     which Halfway is a member) agreed to surrender "all
     their rights, titles and privileges whatsoever" to
     the Tusdzuh area. Treaty 8 appears to have
     extinguished any non-Treaty Aboriginal Rights Halfway
     may have had prior to entering into the Treaty.
          See for example Ontario (Attorney General)
          v. Bear Island Foundation, [1991] 2 S.C.R.
          570 at 575; 83 D.L.R. (4th) 381.
     [92] In return for the surrender of land, the
     government agreed that the Natives would have the
     "right to pursue their usual vocations of hunting,
     trapping and fishing throughout the tract
     surrendered." In R. v. Noel, [1995] 4 C.N.L.R. 78 at
     88 (N.W.T. Terr. Ct.), Halifax J. stated:
          There is no doubt that Treaty No. 8
          provided a right to fish, hunt and trap to
          persons covered under that Treaty.
     [93] According to the Treaty, these rights were
     subject to "such regulations as may from time to time
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 28
     be made by the Government of the country, acting
     under the authority of Her Majesty, and saving and
     excepting such tracts as may be required or taken up
     from time to time for settlement, mining, lumbering,
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     trading or other purposes.
[47] She held, citing R. v. Badger, supra (at para.101):
     ... that any interference with the right to hunt,
     fish or trap constitutes a prima facie infringement
     of Treaty 8 rights.
[48] She considered the availability to Canfor of other areas
in which to log at para.108:
     [108]     While the onus is on the petitioners to
     establish infringement, it is worth noting that there
     is no persuasive evidence to suggest that other areas
     do not exist which Canfor could log in place of CP212
     to avoid interfering with aboriginal rights.
She said at para.114:
     [114]     The MOF and Canfor argue that Halfway has
     the rest of the Tusdzuh area in which to enjoy the
     preferred means of exercising its rights. This again
     ignores the holistic perspective of Halfway. Their
     preferred means are to exercise their rights to hunt,
     trap and fish in an unspoiled wilderness in close
     proximity to their reserve lands. In that sense, the
     approval of CP 212 denies Halfway the preferred means
     of exercising its rights.
     F.   Justification of Infringement
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 29
[49] The learned chambers judge held that the Crown's
infringement of the petitioners' Treaty 8 right to hunt was not
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
justified because it had failed in its fiduciary duty to engage
in adequate, reasonable consultation with the petitioners.     She
said, in part at paras. 140-142 and 158-159:
     [140]     In summary, then, the following meaningful
     opportunities to consult were provided:
          (a)   Fourteen letters from the MOF to Halfway
                during 1995 and 1996 requesting information
                and/or a meeting or offering consultation.
          (b)   Three meetings between Lawson and Halfway:
                 on November 27/28, 1995; and February 2
                and May 13, 1996.
          (c)   Five telephone calls between the MOF and
                Halfway in 1995 and 1996.
          (d)   An opportunity to provide feedback on the
                CHOA.
     [141]     The following reasonable opportunities to
     consult were denied to Halfway:
          (a)   Halfway was not invited to attend the
                meeting between MOF and Canfor employees at
                which the cutting permit was approved.
          (b)   The report "Potential Impacts to Fish &
                Wildlife Resources" was not provided to
                Halfway until August 26, 1996, despite that
                a draft copy was available January 4, 1996.
          (c)   There was no real opportunity to
                participate in the CHOA.
          (d)   Canfor's actual application for CP212 was
                not provided to Halfway until after the
                decision was made.
     [142]     While the MOF did make some efforts to
     inform itself, by requesting information from and
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 30
     meetings with Halfway, I have concluded these
     measures were inadequate. Briefing notes prepared by
     the MOF indicate that there was inadequate
     information with respect to potential infringement of
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     treaty and aboriginal rights.
                              . . .
     [158]     Finally, the present case is categorically
     different from Ryan in that in the present case the
     MOF failed to make all reasonable efforts to consult.
      In Ryan Macdonald J. stated, at 10, "I accept the
     submission that the M.O.F. more than satisfied any
     duty to consult which is upon it." While Halfway may
     not have been entirely reasonable, the fact remains
     that the MOF did not meet its fiduciary obligations.
                             . . .
     [159](1)   Halfway has a treaty right to hunt, fish
                and trap in the Tusdzuh area. There is
                some evidence to suggest that the
                harvesting in CP212 will infringe upon this
                right, and in my view this evidence
                establishes prima facie infringement. The
                MOF has failed to justify this infringement
                under the second stage of the Sparrow test.
                 Of particular significance is the fact
                that the MOF did not adequately consult
                with Halfway prior to approving Canfor's
                CP212 application.
          (2)   The MOF owes a fiduciary duty to Halfway.
                As part of this duty, the MOF must consult
                with the Band prior to making decisions
                which may affect treaty or aboriginal
                rights. The MOF failed to make all
                reasonable efforts to consult with Halfway,
                and in particular failed to fully inform
                itself respecting aboriginal and treaty
                rights in the Tusdzuh region and the impact
                the approval of CP212 would have on these
                rights. The MOF also failed to provide
                Halfway with information relevant to CP212
                approval.
                               VI
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 31
Issues
[50] The following issues are raised by this appeal:
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     1.   Whether judicial review of the District Manager's
          decision to issue a cutting permit is a proper
          proceeding in which to consider the alleged
          infringement of treaty rights;
     2.   The standard of review to be applied by this Court in
          reviewing the chambers judge's decisions as to
          fettering, reasonable apprehension of bias, adequacy
          of notice, and opportunity to be heard;
     3.   Whether the chambers judge erred in deciding that the
          District Manager had fettered his discretion, that
          there was a reasonable apprehension of bias, or that
          there was inadequate notice, or opportunity to be
          heard;
     4.   Whether the chambers judge applied the correct
          standard of review to the District Manager's decision
          that treaty rights had not been infringed, and that
          the cutting permit should issue;
     5.   What is the true interpretation of Treaty 8, and the
          effect of s.35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, and
          then, whether the petitioner's right to hunt under
          the Treaty has been infringed; and
     6.   If there is an infringement of treaty rights, whether
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                          Page: 32
          that infringement is justified.
                                                                       1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
                                VII
Form of Proceedings
[51] Madam Justice Southin takes the position that this Court
should not decide the question of treaty rights or infringement
on an application for judicial review, and that an action
properly constituted is necessary for that purpose.    With
respect I take a different view of that matter.
[52] Review of administrative decisions is traditionally
challenged by way of judicial review:    Judicial Review
Procedure Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 241, s.2(a).     The Halfway
River First Nation was a party in the consultation process
contemplated under the Forest Practices Code and by Ministerial
policy guidelines.    It brought a petition for certiorari,
seeking to quash the District Manager's decision.    Such
proceedings are usually decided on affidavit evidence.
[53] Where the issues raised on such an application are
sufficiently complex, and are closely tied to questions of
fact, a chambers judge has a discretion to order a trial of the
proceedings. Under Supreme Court Rule 52(11)(d), "the court may
order a trial of the proceeding, either generally or on an
issue, and order pleadings to be filed, and may give directions
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 33
for the conduct of the trial and of pre-trial proceedings, and
for the disposition of the application."    The court's powers
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
under this Rule can be invoked on the court's own motion or on
an application of a party.
[54] Here we are told by counsel for the Minister that he took
the position in the court below that the issue of Treaty rights
and their breach had not been properly raised in the petition,
and could not properly be decided on affidavit evidence, and
without pleadings.   The chambers judge does not mention these
matters in her reasons, and it is impossible to tell how
strenuously the point was argued.    In any event, counsel for
the Minister does not appear to have moved under Rule 52(11)(d)
to have the proceedings converted into a trial.
[55] In considering whether to issue C.P.212, the District
Manager must be taken to have been aware of his fiduciary duty
to the petitioners, as an agent of the Crown, of the right the
petitioners asserted under Treaty 8, and of the possibility
that issuance of the permit might constitute an infringement of
that right.   Of necessity his decision included a ruling on
legal and constitutional rights.    On these matters his decision
is owed no deference by the courts, and is to be judged on the
standard of correctness.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 34
[56] Those matters are nonetheless capable of disposition on
affidavit evidence on an application for judicial review.    And
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
the District Manager and the forest industry would be in an
impossible situation if, before deciding to issue a cutting
permit, the applicant was required to commence an action by
writ for resolution of any dispute over treaty rights, and the
District Manager was bound to wait for the disposition of such
an action (and the appeals) before deciding to issue a permit.
[57] The learned chambers judge had a discretion under Rule
52(11)(d) whether to have the proceedings converted into a
trial, and I am not at all persuaded that she erred in the
exercise of that discretion by proceeding as she did.   Counsel
for the minister did not make a motion under the Rule, and it
would be unfair to all concerned to refuse now to decide the
treaty issues dealt with by the chambers judge, and which the
District Manager could not avoid confronting.
                             VIII
Standard of Review to be Applied to the Decision of the
Chambers Judge Concerning Fettering, Bias, Notice and Hearing
[58] The learned chambers judge held that the process followed
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 35
by the District Manager offended the rules of procedural
fairness in four respects:   he fettered his decision by
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
applying government policy; he pre-judged the merits of
issuance of the cutting permit before hearing from the
petitioners; he failed to give the petitioners adequate notice
of his intention to decide whether to issue C.P.212; and he
failed to provide an opportunity to be heard.    These are all
matters of procedural fairness, and do not go to the substance
or merits of the District Manager's decision.    There is,
therefore, no element of curial deference owed to that decision
by either the chambers judge or by this Court.
[59] The chambers judge's decisions on fettering, apprehension
of bias, inadequacy of notice and opportunity to be heard are
all questions of mixed law and fact.   To the extent that her
decision involves questions of fact decided on affidavit and
other documentary evidence, this Court would intervene only if
the decision was clearly wrong, that is to say not reasonably
supported by the evidence:   see Placer Development Limited v.
Skyline Explorations Limited (1985), 67 B.C.L.R. 367 (C.A.) at
389; Colliers Macaulay Nichols Inc. v. Clark, [1989] B.C.J. No.
2445 (C.A.) at para.13; Orangeville Raceway Limited v. Wood
Gundy Inc. (1995), 6 B.C.L.R. (3d) 391 (C.A.) at 400; and
Rootman Estate v. British Columbia (Public Trustee), [1998]
B.C.J. No. 2823 (C.A.) at para.26.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 36
[60] To the extent that her decision involves questions of law
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
this Court would, of course, intervene if it were shown that
the judge misapprehended the law or applied the appropriate
legal principles incorrectly.
                                IX
Whether the Chambers Judge Erred in Deciding Those Issues
     A.   Fettering
[61] The learned chambers judge held (para.35) that the
District Manager fettered his discretion concerning issuance of
the cutting permit by "treating the government policy of not
halting development as a given and by simply following the
direction of the Minister of Forests not to halt development."
[62] The general rule concerning fettering is set out in Maple
Lodge Farms Ltd. v. Canada, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 2, which holds that
decision makers cannot limit the exercise of the discretion
imposed upon them by adopting a policy, and then refusing to
consider other factors that are legally relevant.   Other cases
to the same effect are Davidson v. Maple Ridge (District)
(1991), 60 B.C.L.R. (2d) 24 (C.A.) and T(C) v. Langley School
District No. 35 (1985), 65 B.C.L.R. 197 (C.A.).   Government
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 37
agencies and administrative bodies must, of necessity, adopt
policies to guide their operations.   And valid guidelines and
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
policies can be considered in the exercise of a discretion,
provided that the decision maker puts his or her mind to the
specific circumstances of the case rather than blindly
following the policy: see Maple Lodge Farm, supra at pages 6-8
and Clare v. Thompson (1983), 83 B.C.L.R. (2d) 263 (C.A.).     It
appears to me, with respect, that the learned chambers judge
applied correct legal principles in her consideration of
whether the District Manager fettered his discretion.
[63] The question then is whether she applied those principles
correctly in the circumstances of this case.   In my respectful
view she did not.   Government policy, as expressed by the
District Manager, was to not halt resource development pending
resolution of the TLECs.   In other words, such claims would not
be treated as an automatic bar to the issuance of cutting
permits.   Even though such a claim was pending in respect of a
potential logging area, the policy was to consider the
application for a cutting permit in accordance with the
requirements of the regulations, Act and Code.
[64] A TLEC does not, on its face, require the cessation of all
logging in the subject area.   Such a claim does not impose any
obligation on the District Manager, or on the Ministry
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 38
generally.   The claim is simply one factor for the District
Manager to consider with respect to the land's significance as
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
a traditional hunting area, and to potential land use.
[65] The government policy in respect of TLECs does not
preclude a District Manager from considering aboriginal hunting
rights, and the effect that logging might have upon them.     It
is apparent in this case that the District Manager gave a full
consideration to the information before him concerning those
hunting rights.   Cognisance by him of the government policy on
TLECs did not give rise to the automatic issuance of a cutting
permit without further consideration of other matters relevant
to that decision.
[66] I am therefore of the view that the learned chambers judge
erred in applying the legal principles concerning fettering to
the facts of this case.   While the existence of TLEC was a
factor for the District Manager to consider, the government
policy of not halting resource development while such a claim
was pending did not limit or impair the District Manager's
discretion, or its exercise.   Misapplication of the appropriate
legal principle is an error of law that this Court can and
should correct.
     B.   Reasonable Apprehension of Bias
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 39
[67] The basic legal test on this issue is whether reasonable
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
right-minded persons informed of the relevant facts, and
looking at the matter realistically and practically, would
consider that the District Manager had prejudged the question
of whether to issue C.P.212: see Committee for Justice and
Liberty v. Canada (National Energy Board) (1978), 1 S.C.R. 369
at 394-95, and Newfoundland Telephone Co. v. Newfoundland
(Board of Commissioners of Public Utilities) (1992), 1 S.C.R.
623.
[68] The matter is a little more complex in this case where the
District Manager's role includes both an investigative and an
adjudicative function.   The expression of a tentative or
preliminary opinion on what the evidence shows in the
investigative stage does not necessarily amount to a reasonable
apprehension of bias:    see Emcom Services Inc. v. British
Columbia (Council of Human Rights) (1991), 49 Admin.L.R. 220
(B.C.S.C.) and United Metallurgists of America Local 4589 v.
Bombardier-MLW Limited, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 905.
[69] In a case such as this the District Manager has a
continuing and progressive role to play in making the numerous
enquiries required of him by the Regulations, Act and Code, and
in communicating with the applicant and others who have a stake
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 40
in his decision.    It is to be expected that his conclusions
would develop over time as more information was obtained, and
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
as interested parties made their positions known.    His
"decision letter" was written to Chief Metecheah on 3 October,
1996, but it is clear that the components of that decision were
the result of previous investigations and deliberations.
[70] In these circumstances I think one should be very cautious
about inferring prejudgment or the appearance of bias to the
District Manager.
[71] The learned chambers judge's conclusion that there was a
reasonable apprehension of bias is based primarily on the
statement the District Manager made in his letter of 29 August,
1996 to Chief Metecheah, that if the appellants' application
complied with the Ministry's regulations and the Code he had
"no compelling reasons" not to approve their application.
[72] Applying the legal test set out above, and having regard
to the nature of the District Manager's investigative and
adjudicative roles, it would, in my view, be unreasonable to
infer from that letter that the District Manager had closed his
mind to anything further the petitioners might wish to put
forward.   A fair reading of his statement is that he had formed
a tentative view on the information then available that the
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 41
permit should issue, but that the final decision had not been
made, and he was prepared to refuse issuance of the permit if
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
there was a good reason to do so.
[73] Nor in my view does the statement from David Menzies'
affidavit, quoted at para.49 of the chambers judge's reasons,
support an inference of bias reasonably apprehended.
Administrative procedures followed by the District Manager in
confirming approval of the appellants' application, before the
formal application was received, are consistent with the
continuing nature of the District Manager's contact and
dialogue with the applicants.
[74] It may be that the District Manager held a mistaken view
of the law concerning the Crown's duty to satisfy itself that
there was no infringement of the aboriginal right to hunt, and
that the onus did not lie upon the petitioners to assert and
prove that right or infringement.    But in my view a
misapprehension of the law by an administrative officer does
not necessarily demonstrate a failure by him to keep an open
mind, or an unwillingness to decide the issues on the merits as
he saw them.   Even the most open minds may sometimes fall into
legal error.
[75] In my respectful view, the learned chambers judge erred in
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 42
holding that the District Manager's conduct gave rise to a
reasonable apprehension of bias.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     C.   Adequacy of Notice
[76] The learned chambers judge held that the petitioners did
not have adequate notice that the District Manager would make
his decision on 13 September, 1996 (para.78 of her reasons).
With respect, I think the learned chambers judge more closely
equated the decision making process in this case with a purely
adjudicative process than is warranted by the legislative
scheme.
[77] As indicated above, this is not a case where a formal
hearing on a fixed date was held or required.   The District
Manager's job required him to develop information over time,
and it was properly within his role as an administrator to make
tentative decisions as he went along, up to the time when he
was finally satisfied that a cutting permit should or should
not issue in accordance with the requirements of the
Regulations, Act and Code.
[78] In para.73 of her reasons the learned chambers judge set
out in detail the means by which the petitioners were made
aware of Canfor's logging plans for the area covered by
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 43
C.P.212.   The first notice, on the chambers judge's findings of
fact, occurred in 1991.    On 8 November, 1995 the District
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Manager sent the petitioner a copy of Canfor's application for
C.P.212, and on 5 March, 1996 the District Manager wrote to the
petitioners' lawyer to advise that "a decision regarding
C.P.212 would be made within the next couple of weeks".    In
fact, the decision was not made for another six months.
[79] On 13 May, 1996 the District Manager provided the
petitioners with a map of Canfor's proposed harvesting
activities, including blocks in C.P.212.    The map was colour-
coded and clearly identified the cut blocks under consideration
by the District Manager.    The learned chambers judge described
the meeting at which this map was presented to the petitioners
as "the only true advance notice" of Canfor's plans, but she
held it to be defective as notice because it did not give the
date on which his decision would be made.
[80] In my respectful view the learned chambers judge was
plainly wrong to conclude that adequate notice had not been
given in this case.   Only if it could be said that notice of a
fixed date for decision was required by law could her
conclusion be justified.    For the reasons expressed above,
notice of such a fixed date was not required either by the
statute, or by the requirements of procedural fairness.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 44
Imposing a requirement for such a fixed date would be
inconsistent with the administrative regime under which the
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
District Manager operated, and would unnecessarily restrict the
flexibility that such a regime contemplates.   The petitioners
were well aware of Canfor's plans to log in the area covered by
C.P.212 and had time to submit evidence and to make
representations.   The notice was adequate in the context of the
legislative scheme, and the nature of the District Manager's
duties.
     D.    The Right to be Heard
[81] The learned chambers judge dealt with this issue at paras.
69-72.    She held that the District Manager had not met the high
standards of fairness in ensuring that the petitioners had an
effective opportunity to be heard.   She said the right to be
heard was very similar to the consultation requirement
encompassed by the Ministry's fiduciary duty to the
petitioners.
[82] Under the legislative scheme described above, there is no
requirement for the District Manager to hold a formal
"hearing", and in fact none was.   However, the legislation and
the Regulations do require consideration of First Nations'
economic and cultural needs, and imply a positive duty on the
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 45
District Manager to consult and ascertain the petitioners'
position, as part of an administrative process that is
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
procedurally fair.    As the District Manager did not do this it
is my view that the learned chambers judge was correct in
holding there to have been a breach of the duty of procedural
fairness.
     E.     Conclusion on Administrative Law Issues
[83] In my respectful view, there was a failure to provide the
petitioners an adequate opportunity to be heard.      Otherwise,
there was no lack of procedural fairness on any of the other
grounds asserted by the petitioners, and found by the learned
chambers judge.
                                 X
The Standard of Review Applicable to the District Manager's
Decision
[84] The learned chambers judge treated the District Manager's
decision as to treaty rights, and breach of same, as a question
of fact (see para.37 above, quoting the chambers judge's
reasons at paras. 63, 66 and 68).    She appears to have
concluded, or assumed, that it was within the statutory powers
of the District Manager to decide such matters, and she
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 46
therefore asked whether his decisions on those matters were
patently unreasonable.   She concluded that the District
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Manager's decisions on those matters were patently unreasonable
(see her conclusion No. 5 at para.158), and she therefore held
that she was justified in substituting her view on those
matters for those of the District Manager.
[85] With respect, interpreting the treaty, deciding on the
scope and interplay of the rights granted by it to both the
petitioners and the Crown, and determining whether the
petitioners' rights under the treaty were infringed, are all
questions of law, although the last question may be one of
mixed fact and law.   Even though he has a fiduciary duty, the
District Manager had no special expertise in deciding any of
these issues, and as I understand the legislation, he has no
authority to decide questions of general law such as these.     To
the extent that his decisions involve legal components, in the
absence of any preclusive clause, they are reviewable on the
standard of correctness:   see Pezim v. British Columbia
(Superintendent of Brokers), [1994] 2 S.C.R. 557 at para.63;
Zurich Insurance Company v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission),
[1992] 2 S.C.R. 321; Canada (Attorney General) v. Mossop,
[1993] 1 S.C.R. 554; and University of British Columbia v.
Berg, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 353.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 47
[86] Moreover, as an agent of the Crown, bound by a fiduciary
duty to the petitioners arising from the treaty in issue, the
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
District Manager could not be seen as an impartial arbitrator
in resolving issues arising under that treaty.   To accord his
decision on such questions the deference afforded by the
"patently unreasonable" standard would, in effect, allow him to
be the judge in his own cause.
[87] As I consider these issues, characterized in the chambers
judge's reasons as aboriginal issues, to be questions of law,
the test applied to the District Manager's decision is that of
correctness.   Similarly, of course, the standard of correctness
applies to her conclusions.   In other words, the question for
us is whether she erred in law.
                                 XI
Treaty 8
     A.    Principles of Treaty Interpretation
[88] The principles applicable in the interpretation of
treaties between the Crown and First Nations have been
discussed and expounded in a number of cases:    see Calder v.
Attorney General of British Columbia, [1973] S.C.R. 313 at
p.404; R. v. Sutherland, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 451; R. v. Taylor
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 48
(1981), 34 O.R. (2d) 360 (Ont.C.A.); R. v. Bartleman (1984), 55
B.C.L.R. 78 (C.A.); Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
29; Simon v. R., [1985] 2 S.C.R. 387; R. v. Horse, supra
Saanichton Marina Ltd. et al v. Tsawout Indian Band (1989), 36
B.C.L.R. (2d) 79 (C.A.); Mitchell v. Peguis Indian Band, [1990]
2 S.C.R. 85; R. v. Sioui, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1025; R. v. Sparrow,
supra; and R. v. Badger, supra.
[89] In Saanichton v. Tsawout, supra, Mr. Justice Hinkson
conveniently summarized the then principles of interpretation
at pp. 84-85:
     (b)   Interpretation of Indian treaties - general
           principles
          In approaching the interpretation of Indian
     treaties the courts in Canada have developed certain
     principles which have been enunciated as follows:
           (a) The treaty should be given a fair, large
           and liberal construction in favour of the
           Indians;
           (b) Treaties must be construed not according to
           the technical meaning of their words, but in the
           sense that they would naturally be understood by
           the Indians;
           (c) As the Honour of the Crown is always
           involved, no appearance of "sharp dealing"
           should be sanctioned;
           (d) Any ambiguity in wording should be
           interpreted as against the drafters and should
           not be interpreted to the prejudice of the
           Indians if another construction is reasonably
           possible;
           (e) Evidence by conduct or otherwise as to how
           the parties understood the treaty is of
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 49
          assistance in giving it content.
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[90] Paragraph (d) in that list should now be modified to
include the statement of Mr. Justice Cory in R. v. Badger,
supra at 794:
     Third, any ambiguities or doubtful expressions in the
     wording of the treaty or document must be resolved in
     favour of the Indians. A corollary to this principle
     is that any limitations which restrict the rights of
     Indians under treaties must be narrowly construed.
[91] And to para.(e) one might add the following, from R. v.
Sioui, supra, at 1035, per Lamer, J. (as he then was):
     In particular, [Courts] must take into account the
     historical context and perception each party might
     have as to the nature of the undertaking contained in
     the document under consideration ....
[92] Those are the principles which I consider applicable in
the circumstances of this case.
     B.   The Parties' Positions
          1.    The Appellants' Position
[93] The positions of the Ministry of Forests and of Canfor are
very similar, if not identical, and I consider them together.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 50
[94] Both the Minister and Canfor say that the Indian right to
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
hunt preserved in paragraph 9 of Treaty 8 (quoted above at
para.2 of these reasons) is expressly made subject to two
independent rights of the Crown which are of equal status to
the Indian's rights.    Those two Crown rights are the government
power to regulate hunting etc. and the government right to
"require" or "take up" parts of the Treaty lands for, inter
alia, "lumbering".   The appellants say that the Crown's right
to require or take up lands for one of the listed purposes
limits or qualifies the petitioners' right to hunt.   The
appellants say the Crown's right to acquire or take up land is
clearly expressed, and is not ambiguous.
[95] The appellants say that no extrinsic evidence is necessary
or admissible to alter the terms of the treaty by adding to or
subtracting from its express terms.
[96] The appellants say the granting of C.P.212 was an exercise
by the Crown of its express right to require or take up land,
and there is therefore no infringement of the petitioners'
treaty right to hunt.
[97] The appellants say that the learned chambers judge erred
when she held that any interference with the petitioners' right
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 51
to hunt was a breach of Treaty 8, and say further that she
erred in basing her decision on the petitioners' "holistic
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
perspective" and in holding that they had the right to exercise
their "preferred means" of hunting in an "unspoiled
wilderness".   The Minister says such conclusions are
embarrassing as they do not reflect the historical realities of
what had occurred in the Tusdzuh (mining and oil and gas
exploration) before the granting of C.P.212.
[98] The appellants say that s.35 of the Constitution Act, 1982
gives the petitioners no better position than they held before
1982, because their right to hunt in the treaty lands was, and
remains, a defeasible right subject to derogation by the
Crown's exercise of its rights.   The power to require and take
up lands remains unimpaired by s.35.
[99] The appellants maintain that "taken up" includes
designation of land by the Crown in a cutting permit, and that
visible signs of occupation, or incompatible land use (see R.
v. Badger, supra, at paragraphs 53, 54, and 66-68) are not
necessary as indicia.   The appellants say those considerations
that are relevant where an Indian is charged with an offence as
in Badger, are not relevant here where such an offence is not
alleged, and the Crown is merely exercising its Treaty right.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 52
[100]     So the appellants say that as a result of the
"geographical limitation" in Treaty 8 the Crown is entitled to
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
take up Treaty lands for "settlement, mining, lumbering, or
other purposes" without violating any promise made by the Crown
to the Indians.    As there has been no infringement of Indian
treaty rights, no "justification" analysis is required.
          2.      The Petitioners' Position
[101]     The petitioners say that the Crown's (and Canfor's)
approach to Treaty 8 would give the Crown "the unlimited and
unfettered right to take up any land or all lands as it sees
fit and does not have to justify its decision in any way".    It
says this approach would allow the Crown to ignore the impact
of such conduct on the rights of aboriginal signatories and
would render meaningless the 1982 constitutionalization of
Treaty rights.    The Crown's approach, say the petitioners, is
therefore unreasonable and manifestly wrong.    To give the
Treaty such an interpretation would not uphold the honour and
integrity of the Crown.
[102]     The petitioners say that the government power to
require or take up land is not a separate right in itself.    It
is rather a limitation on the petitioners' right to hunt, etc.
 The petitioners say s.35 guaranteed the aboriginal rights to
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                          Page: 53
hunt and fish.    The Crown's right of defeasance is not
mentioned in s.35, and is therefore not subject to a similar
                                                                       1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
guarantee.
[103]        Prior to 1982, before the right to hunt was
guaranteed by s.35, the Crown could have exercised its right of
defeasance, and so overridden or limited the right to hunt.
But since the enactment of s.35 the Crown's right is not so
unlimited.    Now the Crown can only exercise its right after
consultation with the Indians.    The Treaty creates competing,
or conflicting rights - the Indian right to hunt on the one
hand, and the Crown's right to take up such hunting grounds for
the listed purposes on the other.    Such competing rights cannot
be exercised in disregard of one another.    If exercise of the
Crown right will impair or infringe the aboriginal right, then
such infringement must be justified on the analysis set out in
Sparrow, supra (a non-Treaty case).
[104]        The petitioners say the meaning of the Treaty proviso
allowing the Crown to require or take up lands is ambiguous and
can be read in more than one way.    It should therefore be read
in the context of the Crown's oral promises at the time of
Treaty negotiations.    Extrinsic evidence, including the
representations made by the Crown's negotiators to the
signatories in 1899, as well as in 1900, is admissible for the
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 54
purposes of construing the Treaty.   The petitioners say the
Treaty should be read in a broad, open fashion, and construed
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
in a liberal way in favour of the Indians.   All subsequent
adhesions refer back to the Treaty made at Lesser Slave Lake
with the Cree people in 1899, and the oral promises made there
are essential to a true understanding of the Treaty made with
the petitioners' forebears.
     C.   The Admissibility of Extrinsic Evidence
[105]     In support of its argument against the admissibility
of extrinsic evidence, The Ministry of Forests relies on R. v.
Horse, supra, where Mr. Justice Estey, writing for the court,
said at S.C.R. 201:
          I have some reservations about the use of this
     material as an aid to interpreting the terms of
     Treaty No. 6. In my view the terms are not
     ambiguous. The normal rule with respect to
     interpretation of contractual documents is that
     extrinsic evidence is not to be used in the absence
     of ambiguity; nor can it be invoked where the result
     would be to alter the terms of a document by adding
     to or subtracting from the written agreement.
And further at p.203:
          In my opinion there is no ambiguity which would
     bring in extraneous interpretative material.
     Nevertheless I am prepared to consider the Morris
     text, proffered by the appellants, as a useful guide
     to the interpretation of Treaty No. 6. At the very
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 55
     least, the text as a whole enables one to view the
     treaty at issue here in its overall historical
     context.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[106]     Those comments were made in a case involving Treaty
6, which has an identical "geographical limitation" to that
contained in Treaty 8.   Further, Horse was concerned with the
interpretation of s.12 of the Saskatchewan Natural Resources
Transfer Agreement, which required interpretation of the words
"unoccupied Crown land" and "right of access", language not at
issue in this case.   Counsel for the Ministry also referred us
to R. v. Sioui, supra and R. v. Badger, supra.   In my
respectful view, the conventional statement of the rule
governing admissibility of extrinsic evidence enunciated in R.
v. Horse has been somewhat relaxed by subsequent decisions.    In
R. v. Sioui, supra, after referring to R. v. Horse at p.1049,
Mr. Justice Lamer (as he then was) said at p.1068:
          The historical context, which has been used to
     demonstrate the existence of the treaty, may equally
     assist us in interpreting the extent of the rights
     contained in it. As MacKinnon J.A. said in Taylor
     and Williams, supra, at p.232:
               Cases on Indian or aboriginal rights
          can never be determined in a vacuum. It is
          of importance to consider the history and
          oral traditions of the tribes concerned,
          and the surrounding circumstances at the
          time of the treaty, relied on by both
          parties, in determining the treaty's
          effect.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 56
[107]     And in R. v. Badger, supra, Mr. Justice Cory for the
majority held at pp.798-9:
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
          Third, the applicable interpretative principles
     must be borne in mind. Treaties and statutes
     relating to Indians should be liberally construed and
     any uncertainties, ambiguities or doubtful
     expressions should be resolved in favour of the
     Indians. In addition, when considering a treaty, a
     court must take into account the context in which the
     treaties were negotiated, concluded and committed to
     writing. The treaties, as written documents,
     recorded an agreement that had already been reached
     orally and they did not always record the full extent
     of the oral agreement: see Alexander Morris, The
     Treaties of Canada with the Indians of Manitoba and
     the North-West Territories (1880), at pp.338-
     42;Sioui, supra, at p.1068; Report of the Aboriginal
     Justice Inquiry of Manitoba (1991); Jean Fiesen,
     Grant me Wherewith to Make my Living (1985). The
     treaties were drafted in English by representatives
     of the Canadian government who, it should be assumed,
     were familiar with common law doctrines. Yet, the
     treaties were not translated in written form into the
     languages (here Cree and Dene) of the various Indian
     nations who were signatories. Even if they had been,
     it is unlikely that the Indians, who had a history of
     communicating only orally, would have understood them
     any differently. As a result, it is well settled
     that the words in the treaty must not be interpreted
     in their strict technical sense nor subjected to
     rigid modern rules of construction. Rather, they
     must be interpreted in the sense that they would
     naturally have been understood by the Indians at the
     time of the signing. This applies, as well, to those
     words in a treaty which impose a limitation on the
     right which has been granted. See Nowegijick, supra,
     at p.36; Sioui, supra, at pp. 1035-36 and 1044;
     Sparrow, supra, at p.1107; and Mitchell, supra, where
     La Forest J. noted the significant difference that
     exists between the interpretation of treaties and
     statutes which pertain to Indians.
[108]     I observe in passing that R. v. Badger, like R. v.
Horse also involved interpretation of s.12 of the Natural
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 57
Resources Transfer Agreement, 1930.   But I understand the
ruling concerning the admissibility of extrinsic evidence to be
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
equally applicable in a case such as this one, where that
agreement is not in issue.
[109]     In this case, the learned chambers judge held that
extrinsic evidence was admissible to explain the "context" in
which the Treaty was signed (at paras. 96-98 of her reasons).
In my respectful view in so doing she did not err in principle.
 The passage quoted above from the judgment of Mr. Justice Cory
in Badger at pp.798-9 is particularly apt in this case.      The
Treaty, written in English, purports to reflect the mutual
understanding of the Crown and all aboriginal signatories.     The
understanding of the aboriginal peoples cannot be deduced from
the language of the Treaty alone, because its meaning to the
aboriginal signatories could only have been expressed to them
orally by interpretation into their languages, and by whatever
oral explanations were necessary to ensure their understanding.
     D.   What Extrinsic Evidence is Admissible
[110]     The Crown says, without admitting any ambiguity in
the Treaty, that even if extrinsic evidence is admissible for
the purpose of giving historical context, evidence of the
Commissioner's Report on negotiations in 1899 is not admissible
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 58
in this case, because there is no evidence that what was said
by the government negotiators at Lesser Slave Lake, and
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
elsewhere in 1899, was also said at Fort St. John in 1900, when
the Beaver people signed.   In particular, the Crown says that
the passage of the Commissioner's Report referred to by Mr.
Justice Cory in Badger, and by the learned chambers judge in
this case, is not evidence of what was said to the Beaver
people at Fort St. John.    In the Crown's submission, only the
report of the Commissioners made in 1900 is admissible.
[111]     What the Commissioners report of 1889 said, as quoted
in part by the learned chambers judge at para.98 of her
reasons, is this:
     There was expressed at every point the fear that the
     making of the treaty would be followed by the
     curtailment of the hunting and fishing privileges,
     ... We pointed out ... that the same means of earning
     a livelihood would continue after the treaty as
     existed before it ...
          Our chief difficulty was the apprehension that
     the hunting and fishing privileges were to be
     curtailed. The provision in the treaty under which
     ammunition and twine is to be furnished went far in
     the direction of quieting the fears of the Indians,
     for they admitted that it would be unreasonable to
     furnish the means of hunting and fishing if laws were
     to be enacted which would make hunting and fishing so
     restricted as to render it impossible to make a
     livelihood by such pursuits. But over and above the
     provision, we had to solemnly assure them that only
     such laws as to hunting and fishing as were in the
     interest of the Indians and were found necessary in
     order to protect the fish and fur-bearing animals
     would be made, and that they would be as free to hunt
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 59
     and fish after the treaty as they would be if they
     never entered into it.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[112]     In my respectful view, the position of the Crown on
this issue is not tenable.   The adhesion signed by the
representatives of the Beaver people at Fort St. John in 1900
contains this:
          The Beaver Indians of the Upper Peace River and
     the country thereabouts, having met at Fort St. John,
     on this thirtieth day of May, in this present year
     1900, Her Majesty's Commissioner, James Ansdell
     Macrae, Esquire, and having had explained to them the
     terms of the treaty unto which the Chief and Headmen
     of the Indians of Lesser Slave Lake and adjacent
     country set their hands on the twenty-first day of
     June, in the year 1899, do join in the cession made
     by the said Treaty, and agree to adhere to the terms
     thereof in consideration of the undertakings made
     therein.
                                             (my emphasis)
[113]     The terms of the Treaty signed by the Indians at
Lesser Slave Lake had been explained to them orally, as
indicated in the Commissioner's report in 1899, and it is
therefore, in my view, a reasonable inference from the terms of
the Beavers' adhesion in 1900 that the terms of the Treaty were
explained to them in similar, if not identical, terms.
[114]     Moreover, it would not be consistent with the honour
and integrity of the Crown to accept that the Treaty was
interpreted and explained to the Indians at Lesser Slave Lake
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 60
in one way, but interpreted and explained to the Beaver at Fort
St. John in another less favourable and more limited way.    To
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
accept the proposition put forward by the Ministry would be to
acknowledge that the same Treaty language is to be given
different meanings in respect of different signatories.     Only
the clearest evidence could persuade me to such a conclusion,
and such evidence is not present in this case.
[115]     The Ministry of Forests further objects to the
admission of the affidavit evidence of Father Gabriel Breynat,
an interpreter present at the signing of Treaty 8 in 1899 at
Fort Chippewan, and Fond du Lac.   This affidavit was sworn in
1937 at Ottawa, Ontario.   The Ministry says the document is
irrelevant, and in addition has not been properly proven as an
ancient document.
[116]     The objection as to relevance is similar to the
Crown's objection to the Commissioner's Report of 1899, as
relating to events at a different time and place, and with a
different Indian people.   I would not give effect to the
objection based on relevance for the reasons expressed above.
[117]     Turning to the question of proof, the general rule in
Canada governing the admissibility of ancient documents (a
document more than thirty years old) is that any document
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 61
"which is produced from proper custody, is presumed in the
absence of circumstances of suspicion, to have been duly
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
signed, sealed, attested, delivered, or published according to
its purport":   Sopinka, Lederman and Bryant, The Law of
Evidence in Canada, (Toronto: Butterworths, 1992) at 955.     If
there are suspicious circumstances surrounding the origins of
the document, the court will either require proof of the
execution of it as being in a similar manner as the execution
of a similar document of a more recent date.   Further,
documents are considered to have been in "proper custody" when
they have been kept by someone in a place where the documents
might reasonably and naturally be expected to be found:
Sopinka et al, supra at 956, citing Doe d. Jacobs v. Phillips
(1845), 8 Q.B. 158, 115 E.R. 835, and Thompson v. Bennett
(1872), 22 U.C.C.P. 393 (C.A.).
[118]     The affidavit of Father Breynat appears on its face
to have been executed in a manner consistent with the execution
of modern affidavits.   The copy produced is not entitled in any
particular cause or matter, and one cannot tell from the
document itself the purpose for which it was sworn.   I would
not say that this gives rise to suspicions concerning its
origins, but rather that there is an unanswered question as to
why it was sworn.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 62
[119]        The affidavit of Father Breynat was adduced in these
proceedings as an exhibit to the affidavit of Michael Pflueger.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
 He is Alberta counsel representing the Halfway River First
Nation in its Treaty Land Entitlement Claim.     His affidavit
does not disclose in whose custody Father Breynat's affidavit
has been kept.     There is a notation at the top of page 1 of
Father Breynat's affidavit, clearly not part of the original,
which says "Anthropology UA", which I take to be a reference to
the Anthropology Department at the University of Alberta.
However, there is nothing to indicate whether the University
was the custodian of the document.     Mr. Pflueger deposes that
the affidavit of Father Breynat is part of "the standard treaty
package that is submitted with Treaty Land Entitlement Claims".
[120]        On the evidence as it stands, I do not think there is
any indication of suspicious circumstances surrounding the
document's origins.     However, I think the evidence falls short
of proving that the document was produced from "proper
custody".     Wigmore, Evidence in Trials at Common Law vol. 7
(Boston: Middlebound & Company, 1978) explains why evidence as
to custody of such a document is important:
        A forger usually cannot secure the placing of a
        document in such custody; and hence the naturalness
        of its custody, being relevant circumstantially, is
        required in combination with the document's age.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 63
I think therefore that Father Breynat's affidavit is
inadmissible as not having been properly proven.     The learned
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
chambers judge did not refer to this affidavit, so she cannot
be said to have made any error on that account.
        E.   R. v. Sparrow and its Application
[121]        In R. v. Sparrow, supra, the Supreme Court of Canada
considered the effect of s.35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982
on the status of aboriginal rights, and set out a framework for
deciding whether aboriginal rights had been interfered with,
and if so, whether such interference could be justified.       In
Sparrow a native fisher was charged with an offence under the
Fisheries Act, R.S.C. 1970, CF-14.     In his defence, he admitted
the constituent elements of the charge, but argued that he was
exercising an existing aboriginal right to fish, and that the
statutory and regulatory restrictions imposed were inconsistent
with s.35.
[122]        The court held that the words in s.35 "existing
aboriginal rights" must be interpreted flexibly, so as to
permit their evolution over time, and that "an approach to the
constitutional guarantee embodied in s.35(1) that would
incorporate 'frozen rights' must be rejected."     It held that
the Crown had failed to discharge the onus of proving that the
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 64
aboriginal right to fish had been extinguished, and it held
that the scope of the right to fish for food was not confined
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
to mere subsistence, but included as well fishing for social
and ceremonial purposes.
[123]       The court also considered the meaning of the words
"recognized and affirmed" in s.35.   It held that a generous,
liberal interpretation of those words was required.   It held
the relationship between government and aboriginal peoples was
trustlike, rather than adversarial, and that the words
"recognized and affirmed" incorporated a fiduciary
relationship, and so imported some restraint on the exercise of
sovereign power.   Federal legislative powers continue to exist,
but those powers "must be reconciled with the federal duty",
and that reconciliation could best be achieved by requiring
"justification" of any government regulation that infringed or
denied aboriginal rights.   Section 35 was therefore "a strong
check on legislative power".   The court emphasized the
importance of "context" and the "case by case approach to
s.35(1)".
[124]       The court then set out the test for prima facie
interference with an existing aboriginal right.   First, does
the impugned legislation have the effect of interfering with an
existing aboriginal right, having regard for the character or
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 65
incidence of the right in issue?    Infringement may be found
where the statutory limitations on the right are unreasonable,
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
impose undue hardship, or deny the aboriginal the preferred
means of exercising the right.    The question is whether either
the purpose or effect of the statutory regulation unnecessarily
infringes the aboriginal interest.
[125]     The court then considered the question, if a prima
facie infringement be found, of how the Crown could show that
the infringement was justified.    The justification analysis
involved asking whether there is a valid legislative objective.
In the context of Sparrow, conservation and resource management
were considered to be valid legislative objectives.    The Crown
has a heavy burden on the justification issue because its
honour is at stake.   Justification also requires considering
whether the aboriginal interest at stake has been infringed,
"as little as possible", whether in cases of expropriation fair
compensation is available, and whether the aboriginal group has
been consulted with respect to conservation, or at least
informed of the proposed regulatory scheme.    This list of
factors was said not to be exhaustive.
[126]     There are several features in the present case that
differ from Sparrow, and the extent to which those differences
may qualify or limit Sparrow's application to this case will
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 66
have to be considered.    First, there is the fact that the right
to hunt in this case is based on Treaty 8.    There was no treaty
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
in Sparrow.    Second, Sparrow is another case involving the
allegation of an offence against a native person, in answer to
which charge he has relied upon his aboriginal right.     In this
case there is no offence alleged.    It is the provincial Crown
which asserts a positive right under Treaty 8 to require or to
take up land as the basis for its legislative scheme in respect
of forestry.    Third, in Sparrow the attack was made on the
constitutional validity of federal legislation, the Fisheries
Act.    In this case the petitioners do not allege that any
legislation is unconstitutional.    The amended petition alleges
that the decision of the District Manager in issuing C.P.212
was in breach of constitutional or administrative law duties.
The attack is therefore on executive or administrative conduct
rather than on any legislative enactment.    Fourth, and finally,
it is provincial legislation that authorizes the impugned
conduct.    In Sparrow, the attack was on federal legislation.
[127]       The fact that a treaty underlies the aboriginal right
to hunt in this case does not, to my mind, render inapplicable
the s.35(1) analysis engaged in by the court in Sparrow.
Section 35(1) gives constitutional status to both aboriginal
and treaty rights.    As indicated above, treaties with
aboriginal peoples have always engaged the honour and integrity
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 67
of the Crown.   The fiduciary duties of the Crown are, if
anything, more obvious where it has reduced its solemn promises
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
to writing.
[128]      As noted above in discussing some of the other cases,
there is in this case no allegation of an offence by an
aboriginal person.   The Crown asserts its positive rights under
the Treaty as the basis for its forestry program.   In Sparrow,
the federal Crown relied on its enumerated powers in s.91 of
the Constitution Act, 1867 (the BNA Act) as the basis for its
legislative and regulatory scheme in respect of fisheries.
Here, even if one accepts that the Crown's right to require or
take up land under Treaty 8 has achieved constitutional status
under s.35(1) (a position which the petitioners stoutly
reject), its authority to act could be no higher than the
constitutional powers the federal Crown sought to exercise in
Sparrow.
[129]      In my view the fact that the Crown asserts its rights
under Treaty 8 can place it in no better position vis-a-vis a
competing or conflicting aboriginal treaty right than the
position the Crown enjoys in exercising the powers granted in
either s.91 or 92 of the Constitution Act, 1867.
[130]      There is also a distinction between the alleged
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 68
unconstitutionality of legislation in Sparrow, and the attack
here on the conduct of a government official; and the fact that
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
the conduct was authorized under provincial legislation,
whereas in Sparrow a federal statute was impugned.     Here the
petitioners do not challenge the validity of the provincial
legislation concerning forestry.     They seek to prohibit any
activity in connection with C.P. 212 until the Ministry has
fulfilled its "fiduciary and constitutional" duty to consult
with the petitioners.
        F.   Interpretation of Treaty 8 and Infringement of the
             Right to Hunt
[131]        The appellants say the learned chambers judge erred
in holding, at para.101, that: "...That any interference with
the right to hunt, fish or trap constitutes a prima facie
infringement of Treaty 8 rights" and further erred in holding
(at para.114) that the issue was to be considered from the
petitioners' "holistic perspective", and that the approval of
C.P.212 denied the petitioners "their preferred means... to
hunt... in an unspoiled wilderness in close proximity to their
reserve lands."    The appellants assert the Crown's independent
right under the Treaty to require or take up lands as described
above in these reasons.
[132]        I begin by observing that earlier cases involving the
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 69
interpretation of the proviso in Treaty 8 (e.g. R. v. Badger,
supra) or similar language in other treaties (e.g. R. v. Horse,
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
supra) are of limited assistance for two reasons.   First, they
are cases involving a charge against an Indian for breach of a
provincial statute, in answer to which the accused relied upon
the treaty right to hunt.   Second, they are cases involving the
interpretation of s.12 of the Natural Resources Transfer
Agreement, in addition to the language of the treaty granting
the right to hunt.   The only case we were cited involving the
interpretation of Treaty 8, and in which the Natural Resources
Transfer Agreement was not a factor, is R. v. Noel, [1995] 4
C.N.L.R. 78, a decision of the Northwest Territories
Territorial Court.   As with the other cases, Noel was a charge
against a native for breach of legislation in answer to which
he relied on his Treaty 8 right to hunt.
[133]     A second observation I would make is that prior to
the enactment of s.35 of the Constitution Act, 1982,
parliamentary sovereignty was not limited or restricted by
treaties with aboriginal peoples, and the federal government
had the power to vary or repeal treaty rights by act of
parliament:   see R. v. Sikyea, [1964] S.C.R. 642, and Daniels
v. White, [1968] S.C.R. 517 where the Migratory Birds
Convention Act was held to supersede Indian treaty rights.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 70
[134]      The third observation I would make is that the
Indians' right to hunt granted to the signatories of Treaty 8,
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
and the Crown's right to regulate, and to require or take up
lands, cannot be given meaning without reference to one
another.   They are competing, or conflicting rights as has been
recently affirmed in R. v. Sundown, [1999] S.C.J. No. 13 at
paras. 42 and 43.   The Indians' right to hunt is subject to the
"geographical limitation", and the Crown's right to take up
land cannot be read as absolute or unrestricted, for to do so
(as even the Crown concedes) would render the right to hunt
meaningless.   Such a position cannot be asserted in conformity
with the Crown's honour and integrity.   So even before the
enactment of s.35 in 1982, a balancing of the competing rights
of the parties to the Treaty was necessary.
[135]      Fourth, the enactment of s.35 in 1982 has improved
the position of the petitioners.   Their right to hunt, and
other treaty rights, now have constitutional status.   They are
therefore protected by the supreme law of Canada, and those
rights cannot be infringed or restricted other than in
conformity with constitutional norms.
[136]      I am therefore of the view that it is unrealistic to
regard the Crown's right to take up land as a separate or
independent right, rather than as a limitation or restriction
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 71
on the Indians' right to hunt.   In either case, however, the
Crown's right qualifies the Indians' rights and cannot
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
therefore be exercised without affecting those rights.
[137]     The effect of the decision to issue C.P.212, and the
reasonableness of the District Manager's decision, must be
viewed in the context of the competing rights created by Treaty
8, namely the Indians' right to hunt, and the government's
right to take up land for lumbering.   The petitioners' interest
in the logging activity proposed in the Tusdzuh was known from
the outset, and it was recognized by both appellants.     In his
letter of 3 October, 1996, the District Manager recognized the
petitioners' assertion of a Treaty Land Entitlement Claim
(TLEC) in the area where C.P.212 was located, as well as the
effect logging might have on wildlife habitat and hunting
activities.   His view was that Canfor's proposed logging plan
would have "minimal impact" on those matters, and that the plan
included elements that would "mitigate" the impact of logging.
[138]     In my view the District Manager effectively
acknowledged that C.P.212 would affect the petitioners' hunting
rights in some way.   Given the fiduciary nature of the
relationship between government and Indians, and the
constitutional protection afforded by s.35 over the treaty
right to hunt, it seems to me that the interference
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 72
contemplated by C.P.212 amounts to an infringement of the
petitioners' right to hunt.   The granting of C.P.212 was the de
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
facto assertion of the government's right to take up land, a
right that by its very nature limited or interfered with the
right to hunt.
[139]     I do not think the learned chambers judge erred in
holding that any interference with the right to hunt was a
prima facie infringement of the petitioners' Treaty 8 right to
hunt.
[140]     In my respectful view, the learned chambers judge
overstated the petitioners' position in holding that they were
entitled to exercise their "preferred means of hunting" by
doing so in an "unspoiled wilderness".    The Tusdzuh was not
unspoiled wilderness in 1996 when the District Manager approved
C.P.212, nor was it unspoiled wilderness in 1982 when treaty
rights received constitutional protection.    This was a
wilderness criss-crossed with seismic lines, where oil and gas
exploration and mining had taken place.
[141]     Nor do I think "preferred means" should be taken to
refer to an area, or the nature of the area, where hunting or
fishing rights might be exercised.   Those words more correctly
refer to the methods or modes of hunting or fishing employed.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 73
[142]     But despite these disagreements with the reasons of
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
the learned chambers judge, I do not think she erred in
concluding that approval of C.P.212 constituted a prima facie
infringement of the Treaty 8 right to hunt because the proposed
activity would limit or impair in some degree the exercise of
that right.
[143]     The appellants contend that in reaching that
conclusion the learned chambers judge substituted her finding
of fact for that of the District Manager.    But the
interpretation of Treaty rights, and a decision as to whether
they have been breached, are not within any jurisdiction
conferred on the District Manager by the Forest Act, Forest
Practices Code or relevant regulations.     They are questions of
law and even the District Manager acknowledges that the
proposed harvesting would have some effect on hunting.    He said
(at p.3 of the letter of 3 October, 1996) that:
     ...the proposed harvest areas would have minimal
     impacts on wildlife habitat suitability and
     capability for ungulates and black bear...
[144]     I respectfully agree with the learned chambers judge
that any interference with the right to hunt is a prima facie
infringement of the Indians' treaty right as protected by s.35
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 74
of the Constitution Act, 1982.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
                                 XII
Justification
[145]        The analysis required in deciding whether
infringement of a treaty right is justified is referred to
above briefly in paragraph 83.    Although Sparrow was not a
treaty case, in my view the same approach is warranted here as
in cases of aboriginal rights, as both treaty and aboriginal
rights have constitutional protection under s.35(1) of the
Constitution Act, 1982.
[146]        Justification requires consideration of the following
questions (said in Sparrow not to be an exhaustive or exclusive
list):
        1.   Whether the legislative or administrative objective
             is of sufficient importance to warrant infringement;
        2.   Whether the legislative or administrative conduct
             infringes the treaty right as little as possible;
        3.   Whether the effects of infringement outweigh the
             benefits derived from the government action; and
        4.   Whether adequate meaningful consultation has taken
             place.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 75
[147]      Overriding all these issues is whether the honour and
integrity of the Crown has been upheld in its treatment of the
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
petitioners' rights.
[148]      I will consider those issues in turn.
     A.    Importance of the Legislative Objective
[149]      The learned chambers judge does not appear to have
addressed this question, nor does the petitioner appear to have
led any evidence to suggest that the objectives of the Forest
Act and Code are not of sufficient importance to warrant
infringement of the petitioners right to hunt.
[150]      It would, in my view, be unduly limited, and
therefore wrong, to consider the objective in issuing a cutting
permit only from the perspective of Canfor's presumed goal to
have a productive forest business with attendant economic
benefits, or from the perspective of the Provincial Government
to have a viable forest industry and a vibrant Provincial
economy.   The objectives of the forestry legislation go far
beyond economics.   The preamble to the Code (see para.28 above)
refers to British Columbians' desire for sustainable use of the
forests they hold in trust for future generations, and to the
varied and sometimes competing objectives encompassed within
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 76
the words "sustainable use".
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[151]        In Sparrow the legislative objective was found to be
conservation of the fishery, and the Court held that to be a
sufficiently important objective to warrant infringement of the
aboriginal right to fish for food.     Viewing the legislative
scheme in respect of forestry as a whole, and by a parity of
reasoning with Sparrow, in my view the legislative objectives
of the Forest Act and Code are sufficiently important to
warrant infringement of the petitioners' treaty right to hunt
in the affected area.     Those objectives include conservation,
and the economic and cultural needs of all peoples and
communities in the Province.
        B.   Minimal Impairment
[152]        As with the first issue, the learned chambers judge
does not appear to have addressed directly the question of
minimal infringement.    When dealing with the issue of
infringement of the right to hunt, she did say (at para.108)
that "there is no persuasive evidence to suggest that other
areas do not exist which Canfor could log in place of C.P.212
to avoid interfering with aboriginal rights".
[153]        But the learned chambers judge stopped short of
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 77
saying that minimal interference means no interference, and
correctly so, for the law does not impose such a stringent
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
standard.   In R. v. Nikal, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 1013 at 1065, the
Court held that "[s]o long as the infringement was one which in
the context of the circumstances presented could reasonably be
considered to be as minimal as possible then it will meet the
test".
[154]       The onus for showing minimal impairment rests on the
Crown.   See Semiahmoo Indian Band v. Canada (1997), 148 D.L.R.
(4th) 523, [1998] 1 C.N.L.R. 250 at 268 (F.C.A.).
[155]       In this context, the findings of the District Manager
are significant.   He found (see para.32 above) that Canfor's
proposed operations would have minimal impacts on wildlife
habitat suitability and capability for moose, deer and bear,
that there would be minimal to no impact on fish habitat or
fishing activities, and that the proposed harvesting plan
included sufficient measures to mitigate any concerns as to the
trapping of fur bearing animals in the area.
[156]       In my respectful view, these findings, which are
within the scope of the District Manager's authority to make,
are sufficient to meet the tests for minimal impairment or
infringement of the right to hunt.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 78
     C.    Whether the Effects of Infringement Outweigh the
           Benefits to be Derived from the Government Action
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[157]       Again, this issue was not addressed by the chambers
judge.    Given the minimal effects on hunting that the proposed
logging would have, as found by the District Manager, and in
the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it is in my view a
fair inference that the benefits to be derived from
implementation of the legislative scheme, and the issuance of
cutting permits in accordance with its requirements, would
outweigh any detriment to the petitioners caused by the
infringement of the right to hunt.
     D.    Adequate Meaningful Consultation
[158]       The learned chambers judge found that there had been
inadequate consultation with the petitioners, and it is upon
this ground that she found the Crown had failed in its attempts
to justify the infringement of the petitioners' right to hunt.
[159]       It is perhaps worth mentioning here the difference
between adequate notice as a requirement of procedural fairness
(considered above at paras.66-70) and adequate consultation,
which is a substantive requirement under the test for
justification.   The fact that adequate notice of an intended
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 79
decision may have been given, does not mean that the
requirement for adequate consultation has also been met.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[160]       The Crown's duty to consult imposes on it a positive
obligation to reasonably ensure that aboriginal peoples are
provided with all necessary information in a timely way so that
they have an opportunity to express their interests and
concerns, and to ensure that their representations are
seriously considered and, wherever possible, demonstrably
integrated into the proposed plan of action:    see R. v. Sampson
(1995), 16 B.C.L.R. (3d) 226 at 251 (C.A.); R. v. Noel, [1995]
4 C.N.L.R. 78 (Y.T.T.C.) at 94-95; R. v. Jack (1995), 16
B.C.L.R. (3d) 201 at 222-223 (C.A.); Eastmain Band v. Robinson
(1992), 99 D.L.R. (4th) 16 at 27 (F.C.A.); and R. v. Nikal,
supra.
[161]       There is a reciprocal duty on aboriginal peoples to
express their interests and concerns once they have had an
opportunity to consider the information provided by the Crown,
and to consult in good faith by whatever means are available to
them.    They cannot frustrate the consultation process by
refusing to meet or participate, or by imposing unreasonable
conditions:    see Ryan et al v. Fort St. James Forest District
(District Manager) (25 January, 1994) Smithers No. 7855,
affirmed (1994), 40 B.C.A.C. 91.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 80
[162]     The chambers judge's findings as to what steps were
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
taken by way of consultation are matters of fact that cannot be
impugned unless there is no evidence to support them.   In my
view there is such evidence and we must accept the facts as
found by her.
[163]     It remains to consider the adequacy or inadequacy of
the Crown's efforts in that behalf.
[164]     The learned chambers judge found (at para.141) that:
          The following reasonable opportunities to
     consult were denied to Halfway:
          (a)   Halfway was not invited to attend the
                meeting between MOF and Canfor employees at
                which the cutting permit was approved.
          (b)   The report "Potential Impacts to Fish &
                Wildlife Resources' was not provided to
                Halfway until August 26, 1996, despite that
                a draft copy was available January 4, 1996.
          (c)   There was no real opportunity to
                participate in the CHOA.
          (d)   Canfor's actual application for CP212 was
                not provided to Halfway until after the
                decision was made.
[165]     These findings, particularly (b) and (c) support the
conclusion that the Crown did not meet the first and second
parts of the consultation test referred to, namely to provide
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 81
in a timely way information the aboriginal group would need in
order to inform itself on the effects of the proposed action,
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
and to ensure that the aboriginal group had an opportunity to
express their interests and concerns.
[166]     I respectfully agree with the learned chambers judge
that given the positive duty to inform resting on the Crown, it
is no answer for it to say that the petitioners did not take
affirmative steps in their own interests to be informed,
conduct that the learned chambers judge described as possibly
"not ... entirely reasonable".
[167]     As laid down in the cases on justification, the Crown
must satisfy all aspects of the test if it is to succeed.
Thus, even though there was a sufficiently important
legislative objective, the petitioners rights were infringed as
little as possible, and the effects of the infringement are
outweighed by the benefits to be derived from the government's
conduct, justification of the infringement has not been
established because the Crown failed in its duty to consult.
It would be inconsistent with the honour and integrity of the
Crown to find justification where the Crown has not met that
duty.
                             XIII
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 82
Remedy
[168]     The learned chambers judge granted "an order quashing
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
the decision made September 13, 1996 which approved the
application for CP.212".
[169]     I would dismiss the appeal from that order for the
reasons given above.
                              "The Honourable Mr. Justice Finch"
Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Madam Justice Huddart:
[170]     My approach to the issues on this appeal varies
somewhat from those of my colleagues, whose reasons I have had
the opportunity to read in draft.    While I agree entirely with
Mr. Justice Finch with regard to the administrative law issues,
like Madam Justice Southin I part company with him on his
application of the principles from Sparrow, supra, to the
circumstances of this case.
[171]     The larger question may be whether the province's
forest management scheme permits the accommodation of treaty
and aboriginal rights with the perceived rights of licensees.
However, the constitutionality of the legislative scheme
governing the management of the province's forests is not in
issue on this appeal.   So we must accept, for the purposes of
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 83
our analysis in this case, that the legislature and executive
have provided an acceptable method of "recognizing and
affirming" treaty and aboriginal rights of first nations in
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
making the decisions required by that management scheme.    The
scheme obviously contemplates situations where shared use would
be made of the territory in question.    Shared use was also
envisaged by the treaty makers on both sides of Treaty 8.      That
is evident from the evidence in this case and from the
discussion in Badger, supra, about the same Treaty 8.     Thus
accepting the adequacy of the legislative scheme to accommodate
treaty and aboriginal rights is not necessarily offensive to
the interests of the Halfway River First Nation.
[172]     I agree with Mr. Justice Finch that the District
Manager's decision must be reviewed "in the context of the
competing rights created by Treaty 8".    On the facts as the
District Manager found them, however, this is not a case of
"visible incompatible uses" such as would give rise to the
"geographical limitation" on the right to hunt as Cory J.
discussed it in Badger, supra.
[173]     I do not think the District Manager for a moment
thought he was "taking up" or "requiring" any part of the
Halfway traditional hunting grounds so as to exclude Halfway's
right to hunt or to extinguish the hunting right over a
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 84
particular area, whatever the Crown may now assert in support
of his decision to issue a cutting permit. At most the Crown
can be seen as allowing the temporary use of some land for a
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
specific purpose, compatible with the continued long-term use
of the land for Halfway’s traditional hunting activities.    The
Crown was asserting a shared use, not a taking up of land for
an incompatible use.    There was evidence before the District
Manager to support a finding that the treaty right to hunt and
Canfor's tree harvesting were compatible uses.    That finding
must underpin his conclusion that CP212 would not infringe the
treaty right to hunt.
[174]     Nor do I agree with Canfor's argument that the test
formulated by Cory J. in Badger is not applicable to a
lumbering use.   Justice Cory is clear that, “whether or not
land has been taken up or occupied is a question of fact that
must be resolved on a case-by-case basis” i.e. whether a
proposed use is incompatible with the treaty right is a
question of fact.   The same can be said of "required or taken
up ... for the purpose of ... lumbering", although I would
compare lumbering more with the wilderness park use in R. v.
Sioui [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1025 and R. v. Sundown [1999] S.C.J. No.
13, than with settlement, or the use for a game preserve in Rex
v. Smith (1935), 2 W.W.R. 433 (Sask. C.A.) or a public road
corridor in R. v. Mousseau [1980] 2 S.C.R. 89.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 85
[175]       The District Manager's task was to allocate the use
of the land in the Timber Supply Area among competing, perhaps
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
conflicting, but ultimately compatible uses among which the
land could be shared; not unlike the sharing of herring spawn
in R. v. Gladstone [1996] 2 S.C.R. 723.
[176]       Nevertheless, a shared use decision may be
scrutinized to ensure compliance with the various obligations
on the District Manager, including his obligation to "act
constitutionally", as I recall Crown counsel putting it in oral
argument.   Counsel agreed Sparrow provided the guidelines for
that scrutinization on judicial review if a treaty right was
engaged and I will expand further on that analysis below.
[177]       Just as the impact of a statute or regulation may be
scrutinized to ensure recognition and affirmation of treaty
rights of aboriginal peoples, so may the impact of a decision
made under such a statute or regulation by an employee of the
Crown.   The District Manager can no more follow a provision of
a statute, regulation, or policy of the Ministry of Forestry in
such a way as to offend the Constitution than he could to
offend the Criminal Code or the Offence Act.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 86
[178]     I share Mr. Justice Finch's view that the District
Manager was under a positive obligation to the Halfway River
First Nation to recognize and affirm its treaty right to hunt
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
in determining whether to grant Cutting Permit 212 to Canfor.
This constitutional obligation required him to interpret the
Forest Act and the Forest Practices Code so that he might apply
government forest policy with respect for Halfway's rights.
Moreover, the District Manager was also required to determine
the nature and extent of the treaty right to hunt so as to
honour the Crown's fiduciary obligation to the first nation:
Delgamuukw v. B.C.[1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010 at 1112-1113 per Lamer
C.J.C.; and see the discussion by Williams C.J.S.C. in
Cheslatta Carrier Nation v. B.C. (1998), 53 B.C.L.R. 1 at 14-
15.
[179]      Mr. Justice Finch points out that the District
Manager's failure to consult adequately precluded justification
under the second stage of the Sparrow analysis of the
infringement of the Halfway treaty right to hunt he considered
was constituted by CP212.   In my view this deficiency in the
decision-making process is a breach of the Crown’s fiduciary
responsibilities that makes this Court’s application of the
Sparrow analysis premature.
[180]     Because only the first nation will have information
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                          Page: 87
about the scope of their use of the land, and of the importance
of the use of the land to their culture and identity, if the
Sparrow guidelines are to organize the review of an
                                                                       1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
administrative decision it makes good sense to require the
first nation to establish the scope of the right at the first
opportunity, to the decision-maker himself during the
consultation he is required to undertake, so that he might
satisfy his obligation to act constitutionally.    It is only
upon ascertaining the full scope of the right that an
administrative decision maker can weigh that right against the
interests of the various proposed users and determine whether
the proposed uses are compatible. This characterization is
crucial to an assessment of whether a particular treaty or
aboriginal right has been, or will be infringed.    Thus,
particularly in the context of a judicial review where the
Court relies heavily upon the findings of the decision maker, a
consideration of whether consultation has been adequate must
precede any infringement/justification analysis using the
Sparrow guidelines.
[181]     It is implicit in Halfway’s submission that the
proposed lumbering use is incompatible with its rights or at
least would be found to be so if the District Manager had full
information and properly considered the scope of its treaty
right to hunt and of its aboriginal right to use the particular
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 88
tract in question for religious and spiritual purposes.
[182]      The requirement that a decision-maker under the
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Forest Act and the Forest Practices Code consult with a first
nation that may be affected by his decision does not mean the
first nation is absolved of any responsibility.   Once the
District Manager has set up an adequate opportunity to consult,
the first nation is required to co-operate fully with that
process and to offer the relevant information to aid in
determining the exact nature of the right in question.    The
first nation must take advantage of this opportunity as it
arises.   It cannot unreasonably refuse to participate as the
first nation was found to have done in Ryan et al v. Fort St.
James Forest District (District Manager) (25 January, 1994)
Smithers No. 7855, affirmed (1994), 40 B.C.A.C. 91.   In my
view, a first nation should not be permitted to provide
evidence on judicial review it has had an appropriate
opportunity to provide to the decision-maker, to support a
petition asserting a failure to respect a treaty right.
[183]      The District Manager’s failure to consult adequately
means that we cannot know what additional information might
have been available to him regarding the nature and extent of
the Treaty 8 right to hunt or of other aboriginal rights not
surrendered by the treaty.   Nor can we know how he might have
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 89
weighed that information with information he might have sought
regarding other possible cutting areas to meet Canfor's needs
while minimizing the effects on the Halfway River First
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Nation's treaty right to hunt.    Counsel adverted in argument to
Canfor having obtained permits to cut in other areas to replace
CP212 after the chambers judge made her order.    Finally, any
weighing of benefits is limited by the evidence, in this case
almost entirely put forward by Canfor.    Only when adequate
consultation has taken place and both parties have fulfilled
their respective consultation duties will the District Manager
be in a position to determine whether the uses are compatible
or a geographical limitation is being asserted, and the
consequences in either event to the application for a cutting
permit.
[184]     Halfway did not receive an appropriate opportunity to
establish the scope of its right.    Thus, the District Manager’s
decision must be set aside because it was made without the
information about Halfway’s rights he should have made
reasonable efforts to obtain.    The most that can be decided
definitively on judicial review in such circumstances is
whether the legislative objective was sufficiently important to
warrant infringement.    About that there has never been a
question in this case.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 90
[185]      This conclusion does not signify agreement with
Canfor’s submission that the interference by CP212 with
Halfway’s treaty right to hunt could not be elevated to an
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
infringement of a constitutional right.   There was evidence of
a diminution of the treaty right in this case for the valid
purpose of lumbering, a purpose recognized by the treaty itself
as a reason for government encroachment on the treaty right to
hunt.   There was evidence the proposed lumbering activity would
preclude hunting in an area considerably larger than the
particular cutting blocks during active logging for two years.
 While mitigating steps were to be taken, there was also
evidence of the detrimental effect of road construction on the
long-term use of the area by native hunters.   Common sense
suggests these effects might be sufficiently meaningful,
particularly when they are felt in an area near the first
nation's reserve, to require justification by the government of
its action, depending on the nature of the hunting right.     Had
the District Manager understood the extent of his obligation to
consult, he might have concluded the activities of Canfor
authorized by CP212 would result in a meaningful diminution of
the Treaty 8 right to hunt, just as he might have seen to the
mitigation of such effects or to compensation for them as part
of his analysis of how the proposed use and the treaty right
could be accommodated to each other.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 91
[186]     My difference with the reasoning of Mr. Justice Finch
flows from my view that the chambers judge was wrong when she
found that "any interference" with the right to hunt
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
constituted an "infringement" of the treaty right requiring
justification.   I cannot read either Sparrow or Badger to
support that view.   As my colleague notes at para. 124, in
Sparrow the court stated the question as "whether either the
purpose or effect of the statutory regulation unnecessarily
infringes the aboriginal interest."   In Badger, at 818, in his
discussion as to whether conservation regulations infringed the
treaty right to hunt, Cory J. indicated the impugned provisions
might not be permissible "if they erode an important aspect of
the Indian hunting rights." In Gladstone, supra, Lamer C.J.C.
indicated that a "meaningful diminution" of an aboriginal right
would be required to constitute an infringement.   Each of these
expressions of the test for an "infringement" imports a
judgment as to the degree and significance of the interference.
 To make that judgment requires information from which the
scope of the existing treaty or aboriginal right can be
determined, as well as information about the precise nature of
the interference.
[187]     Incidentally, as an aside, given the significance of
particular land to aboriginal culture and identity, I would not
preclude "preferred means" from being extended to include a
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 92
preferred tract of land.    Proof may be available that use of a
particular tract of land is fundamental to a first nation's
collective identity, as it is to many indigenous cultures.
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
While it may be that "preferred area" for hunting is not
relevant, "preferred area" for religious and spiritual purposes
is likely to be.   Such rights do not appear to have been
included in the treaty-making one way or the other.
[188]     If, after the requisite consultation has occurred,
the District Manager confirms the nature of his decision is one
involving compatible shared uses, modification of the Sparrow
guidelines for review of his allocation of the resources is
likely to be necessary.     I find support for such modification
in the following statement from Sparrow, at 1111 (per Dickson
C.J.C. and La Forest J.):
        ... We wish to emphasize the importance of
        context and a case-by-case approach to s.
        35(1). Given the generality of the text of the
        constitutional provision and especially in
        light of the complexities of aboriginal
        history, society and rights, the contours of a
        justificatory standard must be defined in the
        specific factual context of each case.
[189]     As is apparent from the discussion in Gladstone,
supra, it will be impossible to determine how the contours of
the justificatory standard should be modified without an
understanding of the existing treaty and aboriginal rights and
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 93
the precise nature of the competing use or uses proposed.
Lamer C.J.C. emphasized the distinction between a right with an
internal limit such as the right to fish for social, ceremonial
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
and food purposes in Sparrow and a right with an external,
market-driven limit such as the right to sell herring spawn
commercially at issue in Gladstone. As he noted, the scope of
the aboriginal right can determine whether or not exclusive
exercise of that right is warranted or how the doctrine of
priority will be applied in a government decision on resource
allocation.   In the circumstances of the case at hand the scope
of the Halfway nation’s hunting right is yet to be fully
determined.   Thus it is impossible to reach a conclusion as to
what justificatory standard would be applied to the issuance of
the cutting permit.
[190]     Where the decision maker has determined the proposed
uses are compatible with the aboriginal right, the question
becomes one of accommodation as opposed to one of exclusive
exercise of either the aboriginal right in question or the
Crown’s proposed use.    In Sioui, supra, the Court held it was
up to the Crown “to prove that its occupancy of the territory
cannot be accommodated to reasonable exercise of the Hurons’
rights,” if the Crown wanted to assert its occupancy of the
land in question was incompatible with the Hurons’ religious
customs or rites.     It may be that guidance can be found in this
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                         Page: 94
concept for the review of an administrative decision on the
allocation of resources among compatible uses.
                                                                      1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[191]     In summary, so as to fulfill the Crown's fiduciary
and constitutional duties to Halfway, the District Manager is
required to initiate a process of adequate and meaningful
consultation with Halfway to ascertain the nature and scope of
the treaty right at issue.    Having done so, and having
determined the effect of the proposed non-aboriginal use, he
then makes a determination as to whether the proposed use is
compatible with the treaty right.    If it is he must seek to
accommodate the uses to each other.    It will be that
accommodation the court reviews within the contours of a
justificatory standard yet to be determined.
[192]     If the District Manager determines the proposed use
is incompatible with the treaty right, he will be asserting a
geographical limitation on the treaty right.    In that event, I
agree with Mr. Justice Finch that his decision may be reviewed
under the Sparrow analysis.
[193]     It follows from these reasons that I too would affirm
the order of Dorgan J. setting aside the decision of the
District Forest Manager to grant CP212.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 95
                         "The Honourable Madam Justice Huddart"
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 96
Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Madam Justice Southin:
[194]      This is an appeal by the respondents below from this
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
judgment pronounced 24 June 1997:
           THIS COURT ORDERS that
           • the decision of the District Manager made
              September 13, 1996, approving the application
              for Cutting Permit 212 be quashed; and
           • costs be awarded to the Petitioner.
[195]      What led to this judgment was a petition for judicial
review brought in late 1996 for an order:
     [1.   Reviewing and setting aside the decision of the
           Ministry of Forests to allow forestry ]
           activities within Cutting Permit 212;
     2.    Declaring that the Ministry of Forests has a
           fiduciary and constitutional duty to adequately
           consult with the Halfway River First Nation and
           declaring that the level of consultation to date
           is insufficient;
     3.    Compelling the Ministry of Forests to consult
           with the Halfway River First Nation with respect
           to the full scope, nature and extent of the
           impact of proposed forestry activities on the
           exercise of the Treaty and Aboriginal rights of
           the Halfway River First Nation in accordance
           with the reasons and directions of this
           Honourable Court, and compelling the Ministry of
           Forests to provide funding to the Halfway River
           First Nation to support this consultation
           process;
     [There is no "4." in the amended petition.]
     5.    Remitting the matter to the Respondent Ministry
           of Forests to complete the consultation process
           and then reconsider and determine whether to
           consent to the proposed cutting activities, and
           to determine appropriate conditions and
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 97
          requirements to be imposed upon any such cutting
          activities;
     6.   Prohibiting the Ministry of Forests from making
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
          any decision with respect to forestry activity
          within Cutting Permit 212 until completing the
          consultation process ordered by this Honourable
          Court.
     7.   Retaining jurisdiction over matters dealt within
          this application such that any party may return
          to the Court, by motion, for determination of
          any issue relating to the consultation or the
          implementation of this Order.
     8.   Such other relief as this Honourable Court may
          deem meet; and
     9.   Costs on a solicitor client basis.
[196]     The central point was an assertion by the respondents
in this Court that rights preserved to them under s. 35 of the
Constitution Act, 1982 were infringed by that act of the
District Manager.
[197]     The learned judge below had before her not only this
petition for judicial review but also an application by the
respondent below, here the appellant, Canadian Forest Products
Ltd., more familiarly known in this Province as Canfor, for an
interlocutory injunction restraining the Chief and Halfway
River First Nation from interfering with the implementation of
the cutting permit.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                        Page: 98
[198]        The petition recites that in support of it will be
read the affidavits of Chief Bernie Metecheah, Chief George
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Desjarlais, Stewart Cameron, Peter Havlik, Judy Maas, and
Michael Pflueger.    These affidavits and their exhibits comprise
nearly 1,000 pages in the appeal book.
[199]        As both proceedings came on together, the learned
judge below had affidavits from both sides in both proceedings.
 In its action, Canfor filed the affidavits of James
Stephenson, Jill Marks and J. David Menzies, totalling 330
pages of the appeal book.    The Crown in this proceeding filed,
among others, two affidavits of Mr. Lawson, the District
Manager, bearing date the 20th December, 1996, and amounting to
432 pages.    There were some further shorter affidavits from
both sides.    Thus, the appeal book, excluding the reasons for
judgment, judgment and notice of appeal, is 2,376 pages.
[200]        These proceedings engaged the chambers judge in eight
days of hearing.
[201]        As I shall explain, I would allow the appeal on the
simple footing that the central issue in this case concerning
the existence or non-existence of rights in the Halfway River
First Nation under s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, ought
to have been dealt with by action.    For a precedent of an
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 99
action on a treaty, see Saanichton Marina Ltd. v. Claxton
(1988), 18 B.C.L.R. (2d) 217, aff'd. (1989), 36 B.C.L.R. (2d)
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
79, in which the learned trial judge, Mr. Justice Meredith,
most usefully included in his reasons for judgment the Tsawout
Indian Band statement of claim.
[202]     In revising these reasons, I have had the benefit of
the draft reasons of my colleagues.
[203]     If this were not the first case on the implications
for British Columbia of Treaty 8 and if these implications did
not go far beyond whether Canfor can or cannot log these cut
blocks, I would agree with Mr. Justice Finch that, as the
parties did not object to the mode of proceeding, it must be
taken to be satisfactory.   But, in my opinion, the courts do
have an obligation to ensure that a case the implications of
which extend beyond the parties ─ and the implications of this
case may extend not only to all the inhabitants of the Peace
River but also, because the Peace River country is not poor in
resources, to all the inhabitants of British Columbia ─ is
fully explored on proper evidence.    Furthermore, to my mind,
the so-called administrative law issues in this case are
nothing but distractions from the issues arising on the Treaty.
[204]     By s. 35(1), of the Constitution Act, 1982:
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 100
     35. (1) The existing aboriginal and treaty rights of
     the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby
     recognized and affirmed.
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[205]     Because Treaty No. 8 is central to this case and to
all other cases which may arise in the Peace River between
First Nations, on the one hand, and the Crown and the non-
aboriginal inhabitants on the other, I set it out in full:
                         TREATY No. 8
          ARTICLES OF A TREATY made and concluded at the
     several dates mentioned therein, in the year of Our
     Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine,
     between Her most Gracious Majesty the Queen of Great
     Britain and Ireland, by Her Commissioners the
     Honourable David Laird, of Winnipeg, Manitoba, Indian
     Commissioner for the said Province and the Northwest
     Territories; James Andrew Joseph McKenna, of Ottawa,
     Ontario, Esquire, and the Honourable James Hamilton
     Ross, of Regina, in the Northwest Territories, of the
     one part; and the Cree, Beaver, Chipewyan and other
     Indians, inhabitants of the territory within the
     limits hereinafter defined and described, by their
     Chiefs and Headmen, hereunto subscribed, of the other
     part:—
          WHEREAS, the Indians inhabiting the territory
     hereinafter defined have, pursuant to notice given by
     the Honourable Superintendent General of Indian
     Affairs in the year 1898, been convened to meet a
     Commission representing Her Majesty's Government of
     the Dominion of Canada at certain places in the said
     territory in this present year 1899, to deliberate
     upon certain matters of interest to Her Most Gracious
     Majesty, of the one part, and the said Indians of the
     other.
          AND WHEREAS, the said Indians have been notified
     and informed by Her Majesty's said Commission that it
     is Her desire to open for settlement, immigration,
     trade, travel, mining, lumbering, and such other
     purposes as to Her Majesty may seem meet, a tract of
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 101
     country bounded and described as hereinafter
     mentioned, and to obtain the consent thereto of Her
     Indian subjects inhabiting the said tract, and to
     make a treaty, and arrange with them, so that there
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     may be peace and good will between them and Her
     Majesty's other subjects, and that Her Indian people
     may know and be assured of what allowances they are
     to count upon and receive from Her Majesty's bounty
     and benevolence.
          AND WHEREAS, the Indians of the said tract, duly
     convened in council at the respective points named
     hereunder, and being requested by Her Majesty's
     Commissioners to name certain Chiefs and Headmen who
     should be authorized on their behalf to conduct such
     negotiations and sign any treaty to be founded
     thereon, and to become responsible to Her Majesty for
     the faithful performance by their respective bands of
     such obligations as shall be assumed by them, the
     said Indians have therefore acknowledged for that
     purpose the several Chiefs and Headmen who have
     subscribed hereto.
          AND WHEREAS, the said Commissioners have
     proceeded to negotiate a treaty with the Cree,
     Beaver, Chipewyan and other Indians, inhabiting the
     district hereinafter defined and described, and the
     same has been agreed upon and concluded by the
     respective bands at the dates mentioned hereunder,
     the said Indians DO HEREBY CEDE, RELEASE, SURRENDER
     AND YIELD UP to the Government of the Dominion of
     Canada, for Her Majesty the Queen and Her successors
     for ever, all their rights, titles and privileges
     whatsoever, to the lands included within the
     following limits, that is to say:—
          Commencing at the source of the main branch of
     the Red Deer River in Alberta, thence due west to the
     central range of the Rocky Mountains, thence
     northwesterly along the said range to the point where
     it intersects the 60th parallel of north latitude,
     thence east along said parallel to the point where it
     intersects Hay River, thence northeasterly down said
     river to the south shore of Great Slave Lake, thence
     along the said shore northeasterly (and including
     such rights to the islands in said lakes as the
     Indians mentioned in the treaty may possess), and
     thence easterly and northeasterly along the south
     shores of Christie's Bay and McLeod's Bay to old Fort
     Reliance near the mouth of Lockhart's River, thence
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 102
     southeasterly in a straight line to and including
     Black Lake, thence southwesterly up the stream from
     Cree Lake, thence including said lake southwesterly
     along the height of land between the Athabasca and
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     Churchill Rivers to where it intersects the northern
     boundary of Treaty Six, and along the said boundary
     easterly, northerly and southwesterly, to the place
     of commencement.
          AND ALSO the said Indian rights, titles and
     privileges whatsoever to all other lands wherever
     situated in the Northwest Territories, British
     Columbia, or in any other portion of the Dominion of
     Canada.
          TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the same to Her Majesty the
     Queen and Her successors for ever.
          And Her Majesty the Queen HEREBY AGREES with the
     said Indians that they shall have the right to pursue
     their usual vocations of hunting, trapping and fish-
     ing throughout the tract surrendered as heretofore
     described, subject to such regulations as may from
     time to time be made by the Government of the
     country, acting under the authority of Her Majesty,
     and saving and excepting such tracts as may be
     required or taken up from time to time for settle-
     ment, mining, lumbering, trading or other purposes.
          And Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees and
     undertakes to lay aside reserves for such bands as
     desire reserves, the same not to exceed in all one
     square mile for each family of five for such number
     of families as may elect to reside on reserves, or in
     that proportion for larger or smaller families; and
     for such families or individual Indians as may prefer
     to live apart from band reserves, Her Majesty
     undertakes to provide land in severalty to the extent
     of 160 acres to each Indian, the land to be conveyed
     with a proviso as to non-alienation without the
     consent of the Governor General in Council of Canada,
     the selection of such reserves, and lands in
     severalty, to be made in the manner following,
     namely, the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs
     shall depute and send a suitable person to determine
     and set apart such reserves and lands, after con-
     sulting with the Indians concerned as to the locality
     which may be found suitable and open for selection.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 103
          Provided, however, that Her Majesty reserves the
     right to deal with any settlers within the bounds of
     any lands reserved for any band as She may see fit;
     and also that the aforesaid reserves of land, or any
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     interest therein, may be sold or otherwise disposed
     of by Her Majesty's Government for the use and
     benefit of the said Indians entitled thereto, with
     their consent first had and obtained.
          It is further agreed between Her Majesty and Her
     said Indian subjects that such portions of the
     reserves and lands above indicated as may at any time
     be required for public works, buildings, railways, or
     roads of whatsoever nature may be appropriated for
     that purpose by Her Majesty's Government of the
     Dominion of Canada, due compensation being made to
     the Indians for the value of any improvements
     thereon, and an equivalent in land, money or other
     consideration for the area of the reserve so
     appropriated.
          And with a view to show the satisfaction of Her
     Majesty with the behaviour and good conduct of Her
     Indians, and in extinguishment of all their past
     claims, She hereby, through Her Commissioners, agrees
     to make each Chief a present of thirty-two dollars in
     cash, to each Headman twenty-two dollars, and to
     every other Indian of whatever age, of the families
     represented at the time and place of payment, twelve
     dollars.
          Her Majesty also agrees that next year, and
     annually afterwards for ever, She will cause to be
     paid to the said Indians in cash, at suitable places
     and dates, of which the said Indians shall be duly
     notified, to each Chief twenty-five dollars, each
     Headman, not to exceed four to a large Band and two
     to a small Band, fifteen dollars, and to every other
     Indian, of whatever age, five dollars, the same,
     unless there be some exceptional reason, to be paid
     only to heads of families for those belonging
     thereto.
          FURTHER, Her Majesty agrees that each Chief,
     after signing the treaty, shall receive a silver
     medal and a suitable flag, and next year, and every
     third year thereafter, each Chief and Headman shall
     receive a suitable suit of clothing.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 104
          FURTHER, Her Majesty agrees to pay the salaries
     of such teachers to instruct the children of said
     Indians as to Her Majesty's Government of Canada may
     seem advisable.
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
          FURTHER, Her Majesty agrees to supply each Chief
     of a Band that selects a reserve, for the use of that
     Band, ten axes, five hand-saws, five augers, one
     grindstone, and the necessary files and whetstones.
          FURTHER, Her Majesty agrees that each Band that
     elects to take a reserve and cultivate the soil,
     shall, as soon as convenient after such reserve is
     set aside and settled upon, and the Band has
     signified its choice and is prepared to break up the
     soil, receive two hoes, one spade, one scythe and two
     hay forks for every family so settled, and for every
     three families one plough and one harrow, and to the
     Chief, for the use of his Band, two horses or a yoke
     of oxen, and for each Band potatoes, barley, oats and
     wheat (if such seed be suited to the locality of the
     reserve), to plant the land actually broken up, and
     provisions for one month in the spring for several
     years while planting such seeds; and to every family
     one cow, and every Chief one bull, and one mowing-
     machine and one reaper for the use of his Band when
     it is ready for them; for such families as prefer to
     raise stock instead of cultivating the soil, every
     family of five persons, two cows, and every Chief two
     bulls and two mowing-machines when ready for their
     use, and a like proportion for smaller or larger
     families. The aforesaid articles, machines and
     cattle to be given one for all for the encouragement
     of agriculture and stock raising; and for such Bands
     as prefer to continue hunting and fishing, as much
     ammunition and twine for making nets annually as will
     amount in value to one dollar per head of the
     families so engaged in hunting and fishing.
          And the undersigned Cree, Beaver, Chipewyan and
     other Indian Chiefs and Headmen, on their own behalf
     and on behalf of all the Indians whom they represent,
     DO HEREBY SOLEMNLY PROMISE and engage to strictly
     observe this Treaty, and also to conduct and behave
     themselves as good and loyal subjects of Her Majesty
     the Queen.
          THEY PROMISE AND ENGAGE that they will, in all
     respects, obey and abide by the law; that they will
     maintain peace between each other, and between
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 105
     themselves and other tribes of Indians, and between
     themselves and others of Her Majesty's subjects,
     whether Indians, half-breeds or whites, this year
     inhabiting and hereafter to inhabit any part of the
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     said ceded territory; and that they will not molest
     the person or property of any inhabitant of such
     ceded tract, or of any other district or country, or
     interfere with or trouble any person passing or
     travelling through the said tract or any part
     thereof, and that they will assist the officers of
     Her Majesty in bringing to justice and punishment any
     Indian offending against the stipulations of this
     Treaty or infringing the law in force in the country
     so ceded.
                                          [Emphasis mine.]
[206]     The Beaver Indians, from whom the present respondents
are descended, adhered to the Treaty in 1900:
          The Beaver Indians of the Upper Peace River and
     the country thereabouts, having met at Fort St. John,
     on this thirtieth day of May, in this present year
     1900, Her Majesty's Commissioner, James Ansdell
     Macrae, Esquire, and having had explained to them the
     terms of the treaty unto which the Chief and Headmen
     of the Indians of Lesser Slave Lake and adjacent
     country set their hands on the twenty-first day of
     June, in the year 1899, do join in the cession made
     by the said treaty, and agree to adhere to the terms
     thereof, in consideration of the undertakings made
     therein.
          In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said
     Commissioner, and the following of the said Beaver
     Indians, have hereunto set their hands, at Fort St.
     John, on this the thirtieth day of May, in the year
     herein first above written.
                [Here followed the signatures.]
[207]     Canfor holds under the Crown a forest licence A18154
dated 28th June, 1993, which covers a very substantial area of
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 106
northeastern British Columbia between the Rocky Mountains and
120° west longitude, being there the boundary between this
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
Province and Alberta.   Under such a licence the District
Manager from time to time issues cutting permits.    The issuance
of such permits is governed not only by the terms of the
licence but also by the terms of the Forest Act.
[208]     For the purposes of these reasons for judgment I
accept:
1.   The Halfway River First Nation, which has its reserve on
     the Halfway River, claims under Treaty 8 the right to
     hunt, fish and trap, particularly to hunt moose, in the
     area covered by the cutting permit, the logging of which
     may impede their hunting for moose.
2.   The holder of a forest licence does not, under its
     licence, acquire any exclusive right of occupation of the
     lands encompassed in a cutting permit.
3.   Neither the Wildlife Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 488, nor any
     other statute of this Province forbids hunting on lands
     upon which logging is being carried on but it does
     prohibit the dangerous discharge of firearms.   It would be
     dangerous to discharge firearms where logging is being
     carried on and I do not think for one moment that any
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 107
     member of the Halfway River First Nation would do such a
     thing even if there were no statutory prohibition.
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
[209]     The respondents assert a breach of the Treaty in two
ways:
1.   When the reserve for the Halfway people was set up, which
     was said not to have happened until 1914, that is, some
     fourteen years after the Beaver had adhered to the Treaty,
     they received less than their entitlement under the
     Treaty.   In its claim to the Federal Government, submitted
     in 1995 under the Federal Land Claims Process, the Halfway
     River First Nation calculated the shortfall thus:
     15.1 The following is a summary of the key population
          figures indicating a shortfall at date of first
          survey. Detailed information concerning
          individual members of the Halfway River Band,
          absentees/arrears and late adherents is
          contained in the Genealogical Appendices.
          Halfway River Band on Hudson Hope Band
          Paylist - Date of First Survey - 1914           77
          Deduct Double Counts                             0
          Base Paylist                                    77
          Absentees/Arrears                               13
          Late Adherents                                   4
          Adjusted Date of First Survey Population        94
          Calculation of Shortfall
          94 x 128 acres - 9823 acres = Treaty Land
            Entitlement Shortfall of 2,139 acres
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 108
     I do not pretend to have grasped the full import of this
     claim, nor the relationship to it, if any, of Section 13
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     of the British Columbia Terms of Union and the various
     events arising from that section, as to which see my
     judgment in British Columbia (Attorney General) v. Mount
     Currie Indian Band (1991), 54 B.C.L.R. (2d) 156 at 176
     (C.A.), where the whole sorry history of reserves in other
     parts of the Province is recounted and in which, in my
     opinion, the right clearly belonged to the Mount Currie
     Indian Band.   If the Halfway River First Nation is right
     and the claim is not settled but must be pursued in an
     action, an interesting question of law will fall to be
     determined:    Is British Columbia bound to provide further
     lands and, if so, who is to choose those lands, or is
     Canada bound to pay compensation and, in either event, to
     what ancillary remedies, if any, is the Halfway River
     First Nation entitled?    At this stage, no authority with
     the power to resolve the claim as made in 1995 has made
     any findings of fact or law relating thereto.
2.   Development in the area has deleteriously affected the
     hunting.   Chief Metecheah deposes:
     3.   The Halfway River First Nation community is very
     poor. More than 75% of our members rely on social
     assistance and hunting to feed their families.
     Because we are so poor, the members of our community
     rely very much on hunting to feed their children.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 109
     4.   All of the land within Cutting Permit 212 ("C.P.
     212") is very good for hunting and is the land that
     is used the most by our people to feed their
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     children. The C.P. 212 area is next to our reserve.
      Our members don't need to spend much money to get
     there to get food for their families.
     5.   All through C.P. 212, there is proof of this
     use. Our members' permanent camp sites, corrals and
     meat drying racks are everywhere in the area.
     6.   We have many religious, cultural and historical
     sites in C.P. 212.
     7.   I am told by one of our members that some of the
     cut blocks are right where important spiritual
     ceremonies are held.
     8.   We have told the Ministry of Forests
     ("Ministry") that we are willing to gather this
     information but we need money and help to do this.
     9.   I have hunted throughout the Treaty 8 territory
     all my life and I have seen the effects of forestry
     activities on wildlife and hunting. The land is not
     as good for hunting once the trees have been cut.
     Non-Native hunters use the roads left by the forestry
     people to hunt in our traditional territory and there
     is less game left to feed our families.
     10. If the hunting in C.P. 212 is affected, children
     in our community will go hungry.
     11. C.P. 212 is right next to our Reserve. Because
     of all of the things that the government has done to
     our traditional territory by allowing logging
     companies and oil and gas companies to cut trees and
     pollute the land without consulting us or respecting
     our rights, our people must go farther and farther
     from our Reserve to get to land where we can hunt and
     gather berries and medicine. We use the land in C.P.
     212 for teaching our children about our spiritual
     beliefs and our way of life. If the trees in C.P.
     212 are cut down and the animals are driven away we
     will not be able to teach our children how to hunt
     and how our ancestors lived.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 110
[210]      The appellants do not accept that the development of
the area has adversely affected the animal population or, more
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
particularly, that cutting pursuant to this cutting permit will
do so.   There is some evidence that logging, because it results
in fresh growth, ultimately produces good browse for ungulates,
including moose.
[211]      The assertions by the Chief in paragraphs 9-11 are
sweeping and I am sure he is profoundly convinced of their
truth.   But, in my opinion, assertions, even if contained in an
affidavit, which are sweeping in scope but which the deponent
does not support, to use Lord Blackburn's words in another
context, by condescending to particulars, should be given
little weight in a proceeding seeking a final, in contra-
distinction to an interlocutory, order.
[212]      As I understand Mr. Justice Finch's reasons, his
central premise is set forth in this paragraph:
     [144] I respectfully agree with the learned chambers
     judge that any interference with the right to hunt is
     a prima facie infringement of the Indians' treaty
     right as protected by s.35 of the Constitution Act,
     1982.
[213]     That premise leads inexorably to the application of
the doctrine of R. v. Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, [1990] 3
C.N.L.R. 160, [1990] 4 W.W.R. 410, 46 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 111
[214]      It is upon that premise that my colleague and I part
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
company.
[215]      I accept that the doctrine of the honour of the Crown
applies to the interpretation of treaties which are within
s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act.    But I do not accept that the
central words of the Treaty bear the construction put upon them
by my colleague.   To my mind, the words which, in the court
below, ought to have been but were not addressed, except
perhaps by a side wind, are "as may be required or taken up".
Do the words empower the Crown, to whom all the lands covered
by the Treaty were surrendered, to convey those lands away to
others in fee simple?   Such a conveyance would, of course, give
exclusive possession to the grantee.
[216]      In the case at bar, the issuance of a cutting permit
did not give exclusive possession to the appellant Canfor.     It
did not exclude the respondents from hunting.   But if the Crown
did grant all the lands away, it might be argued with some
force that it had made the reservation nugatory.   One might
apply the common law doctrine of derogation from a grant, by
analogy, to such a state of affairs.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 112
[217]      In order that the significance of the principal issue
to this Province may be understood, I must set out some
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
history.
[218]      By the British Columbia Boundaries Act, 26 & 27
Vict., c. 83 (1863), Parliament at Westminster established the
boundaries of then Colony of British Columbia thus:
          3. British Columbia shall for the Purposes of
     the said Act, and for all other Purposes, be held to
     comprise all such Territories within the Dominions of
     Her Majesty as are bounded to the South by the
     Territories of the United States of America, to the
     West by the Pacific Ocean and the Frontier of the
     Russian Territories in North America, to the North by
     the Sixtieth Parallel of North Latitude, and to the
     East, from the Boundary of the United States
     Northwards, by the Rocky Mountains and the One
     hundred and twentieth Meridian of West Longitude, and
     shall include Queen Charlotte's Island and all other
     Islands adjacent to the said Territories, except
     Vancouver's Island and the Islands adjacent thereto.
[219]      When the Colony of British Columbia, which by then
encompassed Vancouver Island as well, became part of Canada in
1871, it did so pursuant to the Terms of Union and the order in
council of 16 May 1871.   By the Terms of Union a substantial
part of British Columbia known as the Railway Block was
conveyed to the Dominion government.   By subsequent statutes,
other lands known as the Peace River Block were granted by the
Province to Canada.   These statutes are recited in the Railway
Belt Retransfer Agreement Act, S.B.C. 1930, c. 60.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 113
[220]     From the time that the Beaver adhered to this treaty
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
in 1900 until after the Second World War, there was very little
settlement in what British Columbians call the Peace River
which, more sensibly, ought to have been part of Alberta, lying
as it does east of the Rocky Mountains.
[221]     The introduction by Gordon E. Bowes to Peace River
Chronicles (Prescott Publishing Co., 1963) gives a sufficient
overview [p. 13 et seq]:
          The Hudson's Bay Company remained in undisturbed
     possession of its huge fur preserve until the gold
     rush to the Peace and the Finlay in 1862. Many of
     the gold-seekers turned to the fur trade themselves,
     and so ended the Company's monopoly. There was
     another gold rush in the years 1870-73, this time to
     the Omineca country. Klondikers passed through in
     1898-99, and a few returned later as traders. In
     1908-09, there was a smaller gold rush to McConnell
     Creek on the Ingenika River.
          Ignoring difficulties and hardships, the miners
     and the independent traders and trappers opened up
     the country and made it known to the outside world.
     They were soon followed by missionaries, travellers,
     and railway and geological survey parties. Their
     favourable reports drew attention to the agricultural
     advantages of the eastern part of the region.
          Land surveyors and settlers entered the Peace
     River region of British Columbia only a few years
     prior to the First World War. Until that time, the
     area from the Rockies east to the Alberta boundary
     had been kept under a provincial government reserve
     which prohibited homesteading. The purpose of this
     reserve was to permit the federal government to
     select 3,500,000 acres of unalienated arable land
     (the Peace River Block) in return for aid given
     earlier by Ottawa for railway construction elsewhere
     in the province. The long-delayed choice of the
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 114
     block was announced in 1907, and Ottawa threw open
     some of the lands for homesteading in 1912.
          Lack of transportation has been the great
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     obstacle to development of the region. Some settlers
     came in on the mere rumour of a railway. In 1913
     there were 40 settlers near Hudson Hope, 30 along the
     Peace down to Fort St. John, and about 400 in the
     Pouce Coupe prairie. Even Finlay Forks had two
     general stores in 1913, and hopes were high. The
     First World War pricked the bubble, leaving deserted
     cabins everywhere.
          The building of what is now the Northern Alberta
     Railways line in 1916 from Edmonton to Grande Prairie
     on the Alberta side facilitated some further
     settlement of the eastern half of the region.
     Following the war, the Soldier Settlement Board
     helped to establish veterans on the land. Another
     influx of land-hungry settlers occurred in 1928 and
     1929, with the result that there were almost 7,000
     persons in the eastern part of the region by 1931.
          The completion of the Northern Alberta Railways
     line to Dawson Creek in January 1931 marked the
     beginning of a new era. At long last the railway had
     arrived, if only just within the area's eastern
     boundary! During the depression years discouraged
     wheat farmers from the parched districts of southern
     Alberta and Saskatchewan swelled the migratory waves.
      The trek into the Promised Land with livestock and
     farm equipment sometimes took as long as three or
     four months.
          The arrival of bush pilots and the establishment
     of air lines in the thirties heralded the coming of
     further improvements in transportation. The Second
     World War, with its building of airports and the
     Alaska Highway and its forced economic expansion,
     played a sudden and spectacular part in the region's
     growth. Dawson Creek was given a highway to the
     Yukon and Alaska a full decade before it obtained one
     to the rest of the province! In the immediate post-
     war years, settlement continued in substantial
     volume. A major land boom occurred in 1948-49.
     Dawson Creek established itself in the front rank in
     all of Western Canada for grain shipments. The
     eastern part of the region is still the fastest-
     growing section of British Columbia.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                    Page: 115
          The initial exploitation of the oil and gas
     fields, the completion of the John Hart Highway from
     Prince George in 1952, the building in 1957 of
     Canada's first major natural gas pipeline, Westcoast
                                                                  1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
     Transmission Company's line from Taylor south to the
     American border, the long-delayed and eagerly-awaited
     extension of the Pacific Great Eastern Railway to
     Fort St. John and Dawson Creek in 1958, the
     completion of the Western Pacific Products and Crude
     Oil pipeline to Kamloops in 1961, and the
     construction, now under way, of the great hydro-
     electric power project near Hudson Hope, all
     represent other significant steps in the region's
     development in recent years.
           The present prosperity and the growing
     commercial importance of Dawson Creek, Fort St. John,
     Hudson Hope, Taylor, and Chetwynd contrast sharply
     with conditions two decades ago. Isolated no longer,
     and provided with air lines, highways, railways, and
     gas and oil pipelines, the region has overcome its
     transportation problems. Nature's lavish endowment
     of this corner of British Columbia is becoming
     evident to all. Not only one of the world's greatest
     power sites but also the untold wealth of natural
     gas, oil, coal, base metals, gold, timber, and
     millions of fertile acres for agriculture are
     beginning to make the pioneers' wildest dreams come
     true.
[222]     Thus, I think it fair to infer that from the time
they adhered to the Treaty in 1900 until after the Second World
War, the Beaver people, including the present respondents, were
left with their hunting ranges largely free of the "taking up"
for any purpose by the Crown of lands ceded to it and from
intrusion by non-natives upon those lands for such purposes as
hunting, fishing, exploring for minerals, and so forth.   Thus,
until then, no issue could have arisen of breach by the Crown.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 116
[223]     Since the early 1960's, there has been in the Peace
River further extensive taking up of land by the Crown,
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
although to what extent that taking up has excluded the Beaver
people from their traditional hunting ranges by the granting of
exclusive possession to others, does not appear with any
clarity in the evidence in this case.
[224]     In my opinion the issue is not whether there is an
infringement and justification within the Sparrow test, but
whether the Crown has so conducted itself since 1900 as to be
in breach of the Treaty.   The proper parties to a proceeding to
determine that issue are in my opinion the Halfway River First
Nation and the Attorney General for British Columbia, or, if
monetary compensation is sought, Her Majesty the Queen in right
of British Columbia, and the proper means of proceeding is an
action.
[225]     The question in such an action would be whether what
the Crown has done throughout the Halfway River First Nation's
traditional lands by taking up land for oil and gas production,
forestry, and other activities has so affected the population
of game animals as to make the right of hunting illusory.    "To
make the right of hunting illusory" may be the wrong test.
Perhaps the right test is "to impair substantially the right of
hunting" or some other formulation of words.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 117
[226]     Whatever is the correct formulation, it cannot be
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
applied without addressing all that has been done by the Crown
since the lands were ceded to it.    The Beaver Indians have the
right to hunt but that right is burdened or cut down by the
right of the Crown to take up lands.   There are many issues of
fact to be addressed on proper evidence to answer the question
in whatever terms one puts it.
[227]     My colleague, Madam Justice Huddart, approaches this
case differently from Mr. Justice Finch.   The culmination of
her reasons is in this paragraph:
     [191]     In summary, so as to fulfill the Crown's
     fiduciary and constitutional duties to Halfway, the
     District Manager is required to initiate a process of
     adequate and meaningful consultation with Halfway to
     ascertain the nature and scope of the treaty right at
     issue. Having done so, and having determined the
     effect of the proposed non-aboriginal use, he then
     makes a determination as to whether the proposed use
     is compatible with the treaty right. If it is he
     must seek to accommodate the uses to each other. It
     will be that accommodation the court reviews within
     the contours of a justificatory standard yet to be
     determined.
[228]     Essentially, therefore, she accedes to the
respondent's prayer for relief contained in the petition for
judicial review.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                     Page: 118
[229]     With respect, to create a system in which those
appointed to administrative positions under the Forest Act or
                                                                   1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
any other statute of British Columbia regulating Crown land in
the Peace River are expected to consult "to ascertain the
nature and scope of the treaty right at issue" and to determine
"whether the proposed use is compatible with the treaty right"
is to place on our civil servants a burden they should not have
to bear - a patchwork quilt of decision making by persons
appointed not for their skill in legal questions but for their
skill in forestry, mining, oil and gas, and agriculture.
[230]     A District Manager under the Forest Act is no more
qualified to decide a legal issue arising under this treaty
than my colleagues and I are qualified to decide how much
timber Canfor should be permitted or required to cut in any one
year in order to conform to the terms of its tenure.
[231]     Not only is this burden on the civil servants unfair
to them, but also it ladens the people of British Columbia with
burdens heavy to be borne, burdens which no other province's
people have to bear, even though the other provinces, except
Newfoundland, also have First Nations.
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                       Page: 119
[232]     If my colleagues are right, British Columbia, which
was once described as the spoilt child of Confederation, is
                                                                     1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
about to become the downtrodden stepchild of Confederation.
[233]     This case has serious economic implications.     To
decide the issues arising on the evidence here adduced, which,
as the parties chose to proceed, was not focused on that
question only, is a course fraught with danger, especially to
third parties.   Those third parties include, as well as those
who have rights acquired under the Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996,
c. 157, and predecessor statutes, those who have rights
acquired under the Petroleum and Natural Gas Act, R.S.B.C.
1996, c. 361, and predecessor statutes, the Mineral Tenure Act,
R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 292, and predecessor statutes, and the Land
Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 245, and predecessor statutes.
[234]     If the Crown has so conducted itself that it has
committed a breach of its obligations under the Treaty to the
respondents, and, perhaps, other First Nations who are also
Beaver Indians, then it is right that the Crown should answer
for that wrong and pay up.   The paying up will be done by all
the taxpayers of British Columbia.   But it is not right that
Canfor and all others, who in accordance with the Statutes of
British Columbia have obtained from the Crown rights to lands
in the Peace River and conducted their affairs in the not
 Halfway River First Nation v. B.C.                      Page: 120
unreasonable belief that they were exercising legal rights,
should find themselves under attack in a proceeding such as
                                                                    1999 BCCA 470 (CanLII)
this.
[235]     Canfor, a substantial corporation, presumably can
afford this litigation.    But others whose rights may be
imperilled may not have Canfor's bank account.
[236]     I would allow the appeal and set aside the judgment
below.
                          "The Honourable Madam Justice Southin"
    Federal Court                                   Cour fédérale
                                                               Date: 20090512
                                                                                 2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                                                            Dockets: T-225-08
                                                                     T-921-08
                                                                     T-925-08
                                                         Citation: 2009 FC 484
Ottawa, Ontario, May 12, 2009
PRESENT:     The Honourable Mr. Justice Barnes
                                                             Docket: T-225-08
BETWEEN:
       BROKENHEAD OJIBWAY NATION, LONG PLAIN FIRST NATION,
  SWAN LAKE FIRST NATION, FORT ALEXANDER FIRST NATION, also known as
   “SAGKEENG FIRST NATION”, ROSEAU RIVER ANISHINABE FIRST NATION,
 PEGUIS FIRST NATION AND SANDY BAY FIRST NATION, known collectively as the
                     TREATY ONE FIRST NATIONS
                                                                    Applicants
                                         and
                    THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA,
                       THE NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
                                  and
                  TRANSCANADA KEYSTONE PIPELINE GP LTD.
                                                                 Respondents
                                                             Docket: T-921-08
BETWEEN:
       BROKENHEAD OJIBWAY NATION, LONG PLAIN FIRST NATION,
  SWAN LAKE FIRST NATION, FORT ALEXANDER FIRST NATION, also known as
   “SAGKEENG FIRST NATION”, ROSEAU RIVER ANISHINABE FIRST NATION,
                                                                         Page: 2
    PEGUIS FIRST NATION AND SANDY BAY FIRST NATION, known collectively as the
                         TREATY ONE FIRST NATIONS
                                                                                                          Applicants
                                                         and
                              THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA,
                                THE NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
                                                                                                                         2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                                            and
                                   ENBRIDGE PIPELINES INC.
                                                                                                        Respondents
                                                                                                             T-925-08
BETWEEN:
          BROKENHEAD OJIBWAY NATION, LONG PLAIN FIRST NATION,
     SWAN LAKE FIRST NATION, FORT ALEXANDER FIRST NATION, also known as
      “SAGKEENG FIRST NATION”, ROSEAU RIVER ANISHINABE FIRST NATION,
    PEGUIS FIRST NATION AND SANDY BAY FIRST NATION, known collectively as the
                        TREATY ONE FIRST NATIONS
                                                                                                          Applicants
                                                         and
                              THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA,
                                THE NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
                                            and
                                        ENBRIDGE PIPELINES INC.
                                                                                                        Respondents
                           REASONS FOR JUDGMENT AND JUDGMENT
[1]      The Applicants are the seven First Nations who are the successors to those Ojibway First
Nations who entered into what is known as Treaty One with the federal Crown on August 3,
18711. They are today organized collectively as the Treaty One First Nations and they assert
1
   Treaty One was the first of several treaties entered into from 1871 to 1877 between the federal Crown and the First
Nations peoples who then occupied much of the lands of the southern prairies and the south-western corner of what is
now Ontario.
                                                                                             Page: 3
treaty, treaty-protected inherent rights and indigenous cultural rights over a wide expanse of
land in southern Manitoba. By these applications the Treaty One First Nations seek declaratory
and other prerogative relief against the Respondents in connection with three decisions of the
Governor in Council (GIC) to approve the issuance by the National Energy Board (NEB) of
Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity for the construction respectively of the
                                                                                                      2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
Keystone Pipeline Project, the Southern Lights Pipeline Project and the Alberta Clipper Pipeline
Expansion Project (collectively, “the Pipeline Projects”). All of the Pipeline Projects involve the
use or taking up of land in southern Manitoba for pipeline construction by the corporate
Respondents. Because the material facts and the legal principles that apply are the same for all
three of the decisions under review, it is appropriate to issue a single set of reasons.
I.      Regulatory Background
The Keystone Pipeline Project
[2]     On December 12, 2006 TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd. (Keystone) applied to the
NEB for approvals related to the construction and operation of the Keystone Pipeline Project (the
Keystone Project).
[3]     The Keystone Project consists of a 1235 kilometer pipeline running from Hardisty, Alberta
to a location near Haskett, Manitoba on the Canada-United States border. In Manitoba all new
pipeline construction is on privately owned land with the balance of 258 kilometers running over
existing rights-of-way (including 4 kilometers on leased Crown land and 2 kilometers on
unoccupied Crown land). The width of the permanent easement in Manitoba is 20 metres and the
pipeline is buried.
                                                                                          Page: 4
[4]    During its hearings, the NEB considered submissions from Standing Buffalo First Nation
near Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan and from five First Nations in southern Manitoba known
collectively as the Dakota Nations of Manitoba. Keystone also engaged a number of Aboriginal
communities located within 50 kilometers of the pipeline right-of-way including Long Plain First
Nation, Swan Lake First Nation and the Roseau River Anishinabe First Nation.
                                                                                                   2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
[5]    In its Reasons for Decision dated September 6, 2007 the NEB approved the Keystone
Project subject to conditions. Included in those reasons are the following findings concerning
project impacts on Aboriginal peoples:
               Although discussions with Standing Buffalo and the Dakota Nations
               of Manitoba began somewhat later than they could have, overall, the
               Board is satisfied that Keystone meaningfully engaged Aboriginal
               groups potentially impacted by the Project. Aboriginal groups were
               provided with details of the Project as well as an opportunity to
               express their concerns to Keystone regarding Project impacts.
               Keystone considered the concerns and made Project modifications
               where appropriate. Keystone also worked within established
               agreements which TransCanada had with Aboriginal groups in the
               area of the Project and persisted in its attempts to engage certain
               Aboriginal groups. The Board is also satisfied that Keystone has
               committed to ongoing consultation through TransCanada.
               The evidence before the Board is that TransCanada, on behalf of
               Keystone, was not aware that Standing Buffalo and the Dakota
               Nations of Manitoba had asserted claims to land in the Project area.
               The Board is of the view that, since TransCanada has a long history
               of working in the area of the Keystone Project, it should have known
               or could have done more due diligence to determine claims that may
               exist in the area of the Keystone Project. The Board acknowledges
               that as soon as Keystone became aware that Standing Buffalo and the
               Dakota Nations of Manitoba had an interest in the Project area, it did
               take action and initiated consultation activities. The Board further
               notes that consultation with Carry the Kettle and Treaty 4 was based
               upon TransCanada’s established protocol agreements and that
               Keystone is willing to establish similar agreements and work plans
               with other Aboriginal groups, including Standing Buffalo and the
               Dakota Nations of Manitoba.
                                                                          Page: 5
Once an application is filed, all interested parties, including
Aboriginal persons, have the opportunity to participate in the Board’s
processes to make their views known so they can be factored into the
decision-making. With respect to the Keystone Project, the Board
notes that Standing Buffalo and the Dakota Nations of Manitoba took
the opportunity to participate in the proceeding and the Board
undertook efforts to facilitate their application. The Board agreed to
late filings by Standing Buffalo and the Elders had an opportunity to
provide oral testimony in their own language at the hearing. In
                                                                                   2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
addition, the Board held two hearing days in Regina to facilitate the
participation of Standing Buffalo and was prepared to consider
hearing time in Winnipeg for the benefit of the Dakota Nations of
Manitoba. The Board notes it undertook to ensure it understood the
concerns of Standing Buffalo by hearing the testimony of the Elders,
making an Information Request and asking questions at the hearing.
The Board is satisfied that Standing Buffalo and the Dakota Nations
of Manitoba were provided with an opportunity to participate fully in
its process and to bring to the Board’s attention all their concerns.
The hearing process provided all parties with a forum in which they
could receive further information, were able to question and
challenge the evidence put forward by the parties, and present their
own views and concerns with respect to the Keystone Project.
Standing Buffalo and the Dakota Nations of Manitoba had the
opportunity to present evidence, including any evidence of potential
infringement the Project could have on their rights and interests. The
Dakota Nations of Manitoba did not provide evidence at the hearing.
Standing Buffalo filed affidavit evidence and gave oral evidence at
the hearing, which was carefully considered by the Board in the
decision-making process. Standing Buffalo also suggested that the
Project would further limit the Crown lands that would be available
to meet the terms of its flood compensation agreement and any
Treaty claim. In the Board’s view, the evidence on this point is too
speculative to warrant the Board’s consideration of it as an impact
given there are Crown lands available for selection and private lands
available for purchase within the traditional territory claimed by
Standing Buffalo.
It is not within the jurisdiction of the Board to deal with land claim
matters. Accordingly, to the extent that the evidence provided by
Standing Buffalo relates to its asserted land claim rather than the
effects of this particular Project on its interests, it is of limited
probative value to the consideration of the application before the
Board.
Standing Buffalo presented evidence of a general nature as to the
existence of sacred sites along the existing and proposed RoW. The
                                                                                               Page: 6
               Board notes Keystone’s commitment to discuss with Standing
               Buffalo the potential for the Project to impact sacred sites, develop a
               work plan and incorporate mitigation to address specific impacts to
               sacred sites into its Environment Protection Plan. The Board would
               encourage Standing Buffalo to bring to the attention of TransCanada
               its concerns with respect to impacts to sacred sites from existing
               projects and to involve their Elders in these discussions.
               The Board notes that almost all the lands required for the Project are
                                                                                                        2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
               previously disturbed, are generally privately owned and are used
               primarily for ranching and agricultural purposes. Project impacts are
               therefore expected to be minimal and the Board is satisfied that
               potential impacts identified by Standing Buffalo which can be
               considered in respect of this application will be appropriately
               mitigated.
               With respect to the request by the Dakota Nations of Manitoba for
               additional conditions, the Board notes that Keystone and the Dakota
               Nations of Manitoba have initiated consultations and that both parties
               have committed to continue these discussions. In addition, the Board
               notes Keystone’s commitment to address concerns that are raised
               through all its ongoing consultation activities and its interest in
               developing agreements and work plans with Aboriginal groups in the
               area of the Project. The Board strongly supports the development of
               such arrangements and encourages project proponents to build
               relationships with Aboriginal groups with interests in the area of their
               projects. Given the commitments both parties have made to ongoing
               dialogue, the Board does not see a need to impose the conditions as
               outlined.
[6]    On the recommendation of the NEB the GIC issued Order in Council No. P.C. 2007-1786
dated November 22, 2007 approving the issuance of a Certificate of Public Convenience and
Necessity authorizing the construction and operation of the Keystone Project. This is the decision
which is the subject of the Applicants’ claim for relief in T-225-08.
The Southern Lights Pipeline Project and the Alberta Clipper Pipeline Expansion Project
[7]    In March 2007 and May 2007 respectively, Enbridge applied to the NEB for approval of the
Southern Lights Pipeline Project (Southern Lights Project) and the Alberta Clipper Pipeline
Expansion Project (Alberta Clipper Project). These two projects are related. The Alberta Clipper
                                                                                              Page: 7
Project consists of 1078 kilometers of new oil pipeline beginning at Hardisty, Alberta and ending
at the Canada-United States border near Gretna, Manitoba.
[8]        The Southern Lights Project uses the same corridor as the Alberta Clipper Project. Both are
constructed within or contiguous to existing pipeline rights-of-way which run almost entirely over
                                                                                                         2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
private and previously disturbed land2.
[9]        The record discloses that Enbridge consulted widely with interested Aboriginal communities
about their project concerns. This included communities located within an 80-kilometer radius of
the pipeline right-of-way and, where other interest was expressed, beyond that limit. There were
discussions with Long Plain First Nation, Swan Lake First Nation, Roseau River Anishinabe First
Nation and collectively with the Treaty One First Nations. Enbridge also provided funding to the
Treaty One First Nations to facilitate the consultation process.
[10]       Furthermore, the NEB received representations from interested Aboriginal parties during its
hearings. This included discussions with Standing Buffalo First Nation, the Dakota Nations of
Manitoba, Roseau River Anishinabe First Nation and Peepeekisis First Nation. Among other
concerns, Standing Buffalo raised the issue of unresolved land claims which the NEB characterized
as follows:
                    Chief Redman stated in his written evidence that Standing Buffalo
                    has been involved in extensive meetings with the Government of
                    Canada and the Office of the Treaty Commissioner regarding
                    outstanding issues concerning unextinguished Aboriginal title and
                    governance rights of the Dakota/Lakota. Chief Redman also stated
                    that there have been 70 meetings and yet the Government of Canada
                    has not acknowledged its lawful obligation and continues to
                    discriminate against Standing Buffalo regarding its lawful
2
      See Affidavit of Lyle Neis sworn September 19, 2008 at paras. 6 to 9.
                                                                                         Page: 8
               obligations concerning Aboriginal title, sovereign rights and
               allyship status by failing to resolve these outstanding issues.
               Despite sending a number of letters to the Government of Canada
               “regarding the discussions with the Government of Canada
               concerning the Board interventions and how they relate to
               outstanding Dakota/Lakota issues,” Chief Redman stated that he has
               received no response.
                                                                                                  2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
               Chief Redman alleges the consultation listed in the Applicants’
               evidence relates to the Alida to Cromer Capacity Expansion hearing
               and the Applicants and Canada have failed to consult Standing
               Buffalo in breach of lawful obligation to the First Nation. He stated
               that the route of the pipeline is through traditional territories of
               Standing Buffalo and suggested that the Project would further limit
               the Crown lands that would be available to meet the terms of its
               flood compensation agreement and any Treaty claim. Standing
               Buffalo also presented evidence of a general nature as to the
               existence of sacred sites along the existing and proposed RoW for the
               Project.
[11]   The NEB’s Reasons for Decision by which it approved the Alberta Clipper Project include
the following findings:
               In the case of the Project, the Board notes that fourteen Aboriginal
               groups participated in various ways in the proceeding. The Board is
               satisfied that the Aboriginal groups were provided with an
               opportunity to participate fully in its process, and bring their
               concerns to the Board’s attention.
               A number of Aboriginal intervenors expressed concerns regarding
               how the proposed Project could impact undiscovered historical,
               archaeological and sacred burial sites. The Board notes Enbridge’s
               commitments to work with Aboriginal communities in the event that
               such sites are discovered and the implementation of a Heritage
               Resource Discovery Contingency Plan which includes specific
               procedures for the discovery and protection of archaeological,
               palaeontological and historical sites including the evaluation and
               implementation of appropriate mitigation measures. The Board also
               notes Enbridge’s decision to route the pipeline path to avoid the
               Thornhill Burial Mounds site. However, in view of the importance
               of these sites, should the Project be approved, the Board would
               include a condition to direct Enbridge to immediately cease all work
               in the area of any archaeological discoveries and to contact the
               responsible provincial authorities. This would ensure the protection
                                                                                           Page: 9
               and proper handling of any archaeological discoveries and potential
               impacts to traditional use. If the Project were to be approved, the
               Board would also direct Enbridge to file with the Board, and make
               available on its website, reports on its consultation with Aboriginal
               groups concerning the Thornhill Burial Mounds.
               In terms of the potential adverse impacts of the Project to current
               traditional use, the Board notes that there were suggestions of current
               traditional use over the proposed route, but no specific evidence was
                                                                                                    2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
               provided. The large majority of the facilities would be buried and
               would be completed within a short construction window and a large
               majority of the land required for the Project has been previously
               disturbed and is generally privately owned and used for agricultural
               purposes. In view of these facts and Enbridge’s commitment to
               ongoing consultation with Aboriginal people throughout the life
               cycle of the Project, the Board is of the view that potential Project
               impacts to Aboriginal interests, particularly with regard to traditional
               use over the RoW would be minimal and would be appropriately
               mitigated. The Board is satisfied that ongoing discussions between
               the Applicant and Aboriginal people, together with the Heritage
               Resource Discovery Contingency Plan, would minimize potential
               impacts to traditional use sites, if encountered.
               The Board considers that Enbridge’s Aboriginal engagement
               program was appropriate to the nature and scope of the Project. In
               view of Enbridge’s demonstrated understanding that Aboriginal
               engagement is an ongoing process, its commitments and the
               proposed conditions, the Board finds that Enbridge’s Aboriginal
               engagement program would fulfill the consultation requirements for
               Alberta Clipper.
[12]   The NEB’s findings concerning the impact of the Southern Lights Project on Aboriginal
peoples included the following:
               The Applicants indicated that they were not aware of any potential
               impacts on Aboriginal interests that had not been identified in the
               Southern Lights applications or subsequent filings. The Applicants
               submitted that, in the event that there are more interests that are
               identified that may be impacted, they would meet with the
               Aboriginal organization or community that has identified an interest
               and work with that community to jointly develop a course of action.
               The Board is of the view that those Aboriginal people with an
               interest in the Southern Lights applications were provided with the
               details of the Project and were given the opportunity to make their
                                                                                                     Page: 10
                 views known to the Board in a timely manner so that they could be
                 factored into the decision-making process.
                 Further, the Board is of the view that the Applicants’ consultation
                 program was effective in identifying the impacts of the Project on
                 Aboriginal people.
                 The Project would involve a relatively brief window of construction,
                 with the vast majority of the facilities being buried. As almost all the
                                                                                                               2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                 lands required for the Project are previously disturbed, are generally
                 privately owned, are used primarily for agricultural purposes and are
                 adjacent to an existing pipeline RoW, the Board is of the view that
                 potential Project impacts on Aboriginal interests could be
                 appropriately mitigated. The Board is therefore of the view that
                 impacts on Aboriginal interests are likely to be minimal.
[13]    On the recommendation of the NEB the GIC issued Order in Council Nos. P.C. 2008-856
and P.C. 2008-857, both dated May 8, 2008, approving the issuance of Certificates of Public
Convenience and Necessity authorizing the construction and operation respectively of the Southern
Lights Project and the Alberta Clipper Project. These are the decisions which are the subject of the
Applicants’ claims for relief in T-921-08 and in T-925-08.
[14]    In 2006 and 2007 the Treaty One First Nations attempted to directly engage the federal
Crown in “a meaningful consultation and accommodation” concerning the Pipeline Projects and
their impact upon their “constitutionally protected Aboriginal and Treaty rights and title” but those
efforts were ignored.
II.     Issues
[15]    It is the position of the Treaty One First Nations in these proceedings that the federal Crown
failed to fulfill its legal obligations of consultation and accommodation before granting the
necessary approvals for the construction of the Pipeline Projects in their traditional territory.
                                                                                          Page: 11
Although the Treaty One First Nations acknowledge that the corporate Respondents and the NEB
have engaged in consultations in connection with the Pipeline Projects and have accommodated
some of their concerns, those efforts they say, are not a substitute for the larger obligations of the
Crown. Indeed, while the NEB and the corporate Respondents appear to have been quite attentive
to the remediation of Aboriginal construction or project-related concerns, they acknowledge an
                                                                                                                                2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
inability to resolve outstanding land claims3.
[16]     At the root of these proceedings is the issue of the Treaty One First Nations’ outstanding
land claims in southern Manitoba. The primary issue before the Court is whether the Pipeline
Projects have a sufficient impact on the interests of the Treaty One First Nations such that a duty to
consult on the part of the Crown was engaged. If a duty to consult was engaged, the Court must
also determine its content and consider whether and to what extent the duty may be fulfilled by the
NEB acting essentially as a surrogate for the Crown.
III.     Analysis
Standard of Review
[17]     With respect to the issue of the standard of review that applies in these proceedings, I would
adopt the view of my colleague Justice Danièle Tremblay-Lamer in Tzeachten First Nation v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2008 FC 928, 297 D.L.R. (4th) 300 at paras. 23-24:
                   23      In Ka'a'Gee Tu First Nation v. Canada (Attorney General),
                   2007 FC 763, 315 F.T.R. 178 at paras. 91-93, my colleague
                   Justice Edmond Blanchard, following the general principles
                   espoused in Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests),
3
    The NEB Reasons for Decision by which the Keystone Pipeline Project was approved clearly acknowledge this
limitation in the following passage: “It is not within the jurisdiction of the Board to deal with land claim matters.
Accordingly, to the extent that the evidence provided by Standing Buffalo relates to its asserted land claim rather than the
effects of this particular Project on its interests, it is of limited probative value to the consideration of the application
before the Board.” The same limitation was noted by the Federal Court of Appeal in Standing Buffalo Dakota First
Nation et al. v. Canada and Enbridge, 2008 FCA 222 at para. 15.
                                                                                                  Page: 12
                2004 SCC 73, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511 at paras. 61-63, indicated that a
                question as to the existence and content of the duty to consult and
                accommodate is a question of law reviewable on the standard of
                correctness and further that a question as to whether the Crown
                discharged this duty to consult and accommodate is reviewable on
                the standard of reasonableness.
                24       Accordingly, when it falls to determine whether the duty to
                consult is owed and the content of that duty, no deference will be
                                                                                                            2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                afforded. However, where a determination as to whether that duty
                was discharged is required, the analysis will be concerned with "the
                existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the
                decision-making process [and also with] [...] whether the decision
                falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are
                defensible in respect of the facts and law" (Dunsmuir, above, at
                para. 47).
Also see: Ahousaht Indian Band v. Canada (Minister of Fisheries and Oceans), 2008 FCA 212,
297 D.L.R. (4th) 722 at paras. 33 and 34.
[18]    In the result the question of the existence and content of a Crown duty to consult in this case
will be assessed on the basis of correctness. The question of whether any such duty or duties were
discharged by the Crown will be determined on a standard of reasonableness.
To What Extent Was the Crown on Notice of the Applicants’ Concerns?
[19]    The Crown makes the preliminary point that much of the evidence tendered in this
proceeding to establish a foundation for the asserted duty to consult was not placed before the GIC
by the Treaty One First Nations. While that is true, the GIC was made aware and must be taken to
have known of the Treaty One First Nations’ primary concern that the Pipeline Projects traversed
land that was at one time within their traditional territory and, as well, that the Treaty One First
Nations have asserted a long-standing claim to additional land in southern Manitoba. In addition,
                                                                                            Page: 13
the Crown is always presumed to know the content of its treaties: see Mikisew Cree First Nation v.
Canada (Minister of Canadian Heritage), 2005 SCC 69, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 388 at para. 34.
[20]   The record before me establishes very clearly that the Treaty One First Nations diligently
attempted to directly engage the Crown in a dialogue about the impact of the Pipeline Projects on
                                                                                                       2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
their unresolved treaty claims. Over several months in 2007 letters were sent from Treaty One First
Nations’ Chiefs to the Prime Minister, to the Minister of Indian Affairs, to other Ministers, and to
the Secretary to the GIC seeking consultation, but their letters were never answered even to the
extent of a simple acknowledgement. The frustration engendered by the Crown’s refusal to open a
dialogue with the Treaty One First Nations prior to the commencement of this litigation is reflected
in the following passage from the affidavit of Chief Dennis Meeches of the Long Plain First Nation
Reserve:
               38.     As Chief, I had been conducting myself under the belief that
                       the federal government, on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen
                       in Right of Canada, has a legal duty to consult with my First
                       Nation before making any decisions related to lands in our
                       traditional territory inside the boundaries of Treaty 1. I know
                       also the Crown has a Duty to seek workable accommodations
                       of our concerns and protect our interests, title, and rights.
               39.     I have no doubt that throughout all this time, the federal
                       government, acting on behalf of the crown, has been aware of
                       the existence of my First Nation’s rights, title, and interests in
                       the (sic) our traditional territory. I have brought this to the
                       attention of federal ministers and the Canadian public many
                       times over the years, and particularly in relation to the
                       proposed construction of pipelines through our Territory.
               40.     The events in this process regarding consultation on pipeline
                       construction have added to my serious concerns about the
                       Federal Government’s respect for me, our First Nation, my
                       people, and our Treaty. We raised concerns about the
                       pipelines crossing our territory and our rights, title, and
                       interest being affected. We asked to be consulted about these
                       matters, we told the government we would suffer serious
                       adverse effects if the pipelines were constructed without
                                                                                                 Page: 14
                        accommodating our interests and rights. We warned that if
                        the pipelines proceeded without our being consulted, we
                        would have no alternative except to appeal to the Courts for
                        relief, and that this could cause unfortunate delays with the
                        potential to cause damages for the companies involved and
                        the Canadian economy in general. Nonetheless the federal
                        Ministers have ignored us to this day, and with respect to the
                        Keystone pipeline, made their decision without any
                        consultation whatsoever. I feel frustrated, angry, saddened
                                                                                                           2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                        and disappointed about being ignored and treated this way.
To the extent noted above the GIC was well aware of the Treaty One First Nations’ broad concerns
about the potential impact of the Pipeline Projects. From the NEB Reasons for Decision issued in
connection with the Pipeline Projects, the GIC was also aware of the specific concerns of the
Aboriginal peoples who were either consulted or who made representations at the NEB hearings.
Against this evidentiary background, it is disingenuous for the Crown to assert that it was unaware
of the concerns raised by the Treaty One First Nations in these proceedings. The evidence the
Crown objects to adds nothing of significance to what it already knew or would be taken to have
understood.
Duty to Consult – Legal Principles
[21]    For the sake of argument, I am prepared to accept that an approval given by the GIC under
s. 52 of the National Energy Board Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-7 (NEB Act) may, in an appropriate
context, be open to judicial review in accordance with the test established in Thorne's Hardware
Ltd. v. Canada, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 106, [1983] S.C.J. No. 10 on the basis of a failure to consult. It is
enough for present purposes to say that where a duty to consult arises in connection with projects
such as these it must be fulfilled at some point before the GIC has given its final approval for the
issuance of a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity by the NEB.
                                                                                         Page: 15
[22]    The Crown’s duties to consult and accommodate were thoroughly discussed in Haida
Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), 2004 SCC 73, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511 and in Taku
River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia, 2004 SCC 74, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550. More recently in
Ka'a'Gee Tu First Nation v. Canada (Attorney General), 2007 FC 763, [2007] F.C.J. No. 1006,
Justice Edmond Blanchard provided the following helpful summary of those and other relevant
                                                                                                     2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
authorities:
               94 The duty to consult was first held to arise from the fiduciary
               duty owed by the Crown toward Aboriginal peoples (see Guerin v.
               Canada, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, 13 D.L.R. (4th) 321 and R. v.
               Sparrow, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075). In more recent cases, the Supreme
               Court has held that the duty to consult and accommodate is founded
               upon the honour of the Crown, which requires that the Crown, acting
               honourably, participate in processes of negotiation with the view to
               effect reconciliation between the Crown and the Aboriginal peoples
               with respect to the interests at stake (see Haida, supra; Taku, supra,
               and Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian
               Heritage), 2005 SCC 69, [2005] S.C.J. No. 71).
               95 In Haida, Chief Justice McLachlin sets out the circumstances
               which give rise to the duty to consult. At paragraph 35 of the reasons
               for decision, she wrote:
                      But, when precisely does a duty to consult arise? The
                      foundation of the duty in the Crown's honour and the
                      goal of reconciliation suggest that the duty arises
                      when the Crown has knowledge, real or constructive,
                      of the potential existence of the Aboriginal right or
                      title and contemplates conduct that might adversely
                      affect it: see Halfway River First Nation v. British
                      Columbia (Minister of Forests), [1997] 4 C.N.L.R. 45
                      (B.C.S.C), at p. 71, per Dorgan J.
               96 For the duty to arise there must, first, be either an existing or
               potentially existing Aboriginal right or title that might be adversely
               affected by the Crown's contemplated conduct. Second, the Crown
               must have knowledge (either subjective or objective) of this
               potentially existing right or title and that the contemplated conduct
               might adversely affect those rights. While the facts in Haida did not
               concern treaties, there is nothing in that decision which would
               indicate that the same principles would not find application in Treaty
               cases. Indeed in Mikisew, the Supreme Court essentially decided that
               the Haida principles apply to Treaties.
                                                                         Page: 16
97 While knowledge of a credible but unproven claim suffices to
trigger a duty to consult and, if appropriate, accommodate, the
content of the duty varies with the circumstances. Precisely what is
required of the government may vary with the strength of the claim
and the impact of the contemplated government conduct on the rights
at issue. However, at a minimum, it must be consistent with the
honour of the Crown. At paragraph 37 of Haida, the Chief Justice
wrote:
                                                                                   2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
       ...Precisely what duties arise in different situations
       will be defined as the case law in this emerging area
       develops. In general terms, however, it may be
       asserted that the scope of the duty is proportionate to
       a preliminary assessment of the strength of the case
       supporting the existence of the right or title, and to
       the seriousness of the potentially adverse effect upon
       the right or title claimed. Hence, unlike the question
       of whether there is or is not a duty to consult, which
       attracts a yes or no answer, the question of what this
       duty consists, is inherently variable. Both the strength
       of the right asserted and the seriousness of the
       potential impact on this right are the factors used to
       determine the content of the duty to consult.
98 At paragraphs 43 to 45, the Chief Justice invokes the concept of
a spectrum to assist in determining the kind of duties that may arise
in different situations.
       Against this background, I turn to the kind of duties
       that may arise in different situations. In this respect,
       the concept of a spectrum may be helpful, not to
       suggest watertight legal compartments but rather to
       indicate what the honour of the Crown may require in
       particular circumstances. At one end of the spectrum
       lie cases where the claim to title is weak, the
       Aboriginal right limited, or the potential for
       infringement minor. In such cases, the only duty on
       the Crown may be to give notice, disclose
       information, and discuss any issues raised in response
       to the notice. "'[C]onsultation' in its least technical
       definition is talking together for mutual
       understanding": T. Isaac and A. Knox, "The Crown's
       Duty to Consult Aboriginal People" (2003), 41 Alta.
       L. Rev. 49, at p. 61.
       At the other end of the spectrum lie cases where a
       strong prima facie case for the claim is established,
                                                                                                    Page: 17
                        the right and potential infringement is of high
                        significance to the Aboriginal peoples, and the risk of
                        non-compensable damage is high. In such cases deep
                        consultation, aimed at finding a satisfactory interim
                        solution, may be required. While precise
                        requirements will vary with the circumstances, the
                        consultation required at this stage may entail the
                        opportunity to make submissions for consideration,
                        formal participation in the decision- making process,
                                                                                                              2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                        and provision of written reasons to show that
                        Aboriginal concerns were considered and to reveal
                        the impact they had on the decision. This list is
                        neither exhaustive, nor mandatory for every case. The
                        government may wish to adopt dispute resolution
                        procedures like mediation or administrative regimes
                        with impartial decision-makers in complex or
                        difficult cases.
                        Between these two extremes of the spectrum just
                        described, will lie other situations. Every case must
                        be approached individually. Each must also be
                        approached flexibly, since the level of consultation
                        required may change as the process goes on and new
                        information comes to light. The controlling question
                        in all situations is what is required to maintain the
                        honour of the Crown and to effect reconciliation
                        between the Crown and the Aboriginal peoples with
                        respect to the interests at stake. Pending settlement,
                        the Crown is bound by its honour to balance societal
                        and Aboriginal interests in making decisions that may
                        affect Aboriginal claims. The Crown may be required
                        to make decisions in the face of disagreement as to
                        the adequacy of its response to Aboriginal concerns.
                        Balance and compromise will then be necessary.
                99 The kind of duty and level of consultation will therefore vary in
                different circumstances.
[23]    These are the general principles by which the issues raised in these proceeding must be
determined. Of particular importance in this case is the principle that the content of the duty to
consult with First Nations is proportionate to both the potential strength of the claim or right
asserted and the anticipated impact of a development or project on those asserted interests.
                                                                                                  Page: 18
Was a Duty to Consult Engaged and, if so, Was that Obligation Fulfilled?
[24]    I do not intend nor do I need to determine the validity of the Treaty One First Nations’
outstanding treaty claims and on a historical and evidentiary record as limited as this one, it would
be inappropriate to do so: see Ka'a'Gee, above, at para. 107. Suffice it to say that I do not agree
                                                                                                            2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
with Enbridge when it states that “Treaty One is clear on its terms that the Aboriginal parties cede
all lands except those specifically set aside for reserves”. The exercise of treaty interpretation is not
constrained by a strict literal approach to the text or by rigid rules of construction. What the Court
must look for is the natural common understanding of the parties at the time the treaty was entered
into which may well be informed by evidence extraneous to the text: see Mikisew, above, at paras.
28-32. From the evidence before me there could well have been an understanding or expectation at
the time of signing Treaty One that the First Nations’ parties would continue to enjoy full access to
unallocated land beyond the confines of the reserves, that additional reserve lands would be later
made available and that further large scale immigrant encroachment on those lands was not
contemplated. I am proceeding on the assumption, therefore, that the Applicants’ claim to
additional treaty lands and the right to continued traditional use of those lands within Manitoba is
credible. The more significant issue presented by this case concerns the impact of the Pipeline
Projects on the interests and claims asserted by the Treaty One First Nations and the extent to which
those concerns were adequately addressed through the NEB regulatory processes.
[25]    In determining whether and to what extent the Crown has a duty to consult with Aboriginal
peoples about projects or transactions that may affect their interests, the Crown may fairly consider
the opportunities for Aboriginal consultation that are available within the existing processes for
regulatory or environmental review: Hupacasath First Nation v. British Columbia, 2005 BCSC
                                                                                            Page: 19
1712, 51 B.C.L.R. (4th) 133 at para. 272. Those review processes may be sufficient to address
Aboriginal concerns, subject always to the Crown’s overriding duty to consider their adequacy in
any particular situation. This is not a delegation of the Crown’s duty to consult but only one means
by which the Crown may be satisfied that Aboriginal concerns have been heard and, where
appropriate, accommodated: see Haida, above, at para. 53 and Taku, above, at para. 40.
                                                                                                        2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
[26]    The NEB process appears well-suited to address mitigation, avoidance and environmental
issues that are site or project specific. The record before me establishes that the specific project
concerns of the Aboriginal groups who were consulted by the corporate Respondents or who made
representations to the NEB (including, to some extent, the Treaty One First Nations) were well-
received and largely resolved.
[27]    These regulatory processes appear not to be designed, however, to address the larger issue of
unresolved land claims. As already noted in these reasons, the NEB and the corporate Respondents
have acknowledged that obvious limitation.
[28]    From the perspective of the Treaty One First Nations, the remediation of their project
specific concerns may not answer the problem presented by the incremental encroachment of
development upon lands which they claim or which they have enjoyed for traditional purposes.
While the environmental footprint of any one project might appear quite modest, the eventual
cumulative impact of development on the rights and traditional interests of Aboriginal peoples can
be quite profound.
                                                                                               Page: 20
[29]     It follows from this that the NEB process may not be a substitute for the Crown’s duty to
consult where a project under review directly affects an area of unallocated land which is the subject
of a land claim or which is being used by Aboriginal peoples for traditional purposes.
[30]     The fundamental problem with the claims advanced in these proceedings by the Treaty One
                                                                                                         2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
First Nations is that the evidence to support them is expressed in generalities. Except for the issue
of their unresolved land claims in southern Manitoba that evidence fails to identify any interference
with a specific or tangible interest that was not capable of being resolved within the regulatory
process. Even to the extent that cultural, environmental and traditional land use issues were raised
in the evidence, they were not linked specifically to the projects themselves. This is not surprising
because the evidence was clear that the Pipeline Projects were constructed on land that had been
previously exploited and which was almost all held under private ownership. For example, the
evidence is clear that the Alberta Clipper and Southern Lights projects will have negligible, if any,
impact upon the Treaty One First Nations outstanding land claims in southern Manitoba. The
Southern Lights Pipeline uses the same corridor as the Alberta Clipper Pipeline. Both are
constructed within or contiguous to existing pipeline rights-of-way which run almost entirely over
private and previously disturbed land. With the exception of 700 meters of pipeline corridor
crossing the Swan Lake Reserve (with that Band’s consent) the Aboriginal representatives consulted
by Enbridge indicated that the affected lands were not the subject of any land claim or the site of
any traditional activity4.
[31]     Although Enbridge and the NEB did receive representations from Aboriginal leaders about
specific impacts upon known and unidentified archaeological, sacred, historical, and paleontological
4
    See affidavit of Lyle Neis sworn September 19, 2008 at paras. 36-37.
                                                                                             Page: 21
sites, the record indicates that those concerns were considered and accommodated including, in one
instance, the relocation of the right-of-way to protect a burial ground. The level of engagement
between Enbridge and Aboriginal communities and Band Councils (including the Treaty One First
Nations) was, in fact, extensive and quite thorough. The NEB findings in relation to the Aboriginal
concerns raised before it are reasonably supported by the record before me and the Treaty One First
                                                                                                                         2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
Nations have not argued otherwise except to say that they do not necessarily agree.
[32]     The NEB findings concerning the Keystone Pipeline were to the same general effect and are
reasonably supported by the evidence in that record. In fact, the Treaty One First Nations do not
dispute the NEB findings that the land affected by the Keystone Pipeline was almost all in private
ownership and previously utilized for pipeline, agricultural and ranching purposes5. Once buried it
is reasonable to conclude that this pipeline would have a minimal impact on the surrounding
environment.
[33]     The inability of the Treaty One First Nations to make a case for a substantial interference
with a treaty or a traditional land use claim around these projects becomes evident from the
affidavits they submitted. The affidavit of Chief Terrance Nelson offers one example of this at
paras. 29-34:
                  29.      We are located near the proposed pipeline, maybe 18 miles
                           away. Our traditional community are very concerned that
                           their culture, which involves the use of traditional herbs and
                           medicines, will be affected by the pipeline. They are worried
                           about spiritual aspects of having a pipeline running through
                           the ground.
5
    Paragraph 4 of the Applicants’ Memorandum of Fact and Law in T-225-08 states: “While the lands required for the
project are generally ‘previously disturbed’ agricultural lands and generally privately owned, the NEB determined that
the project ‘has the potential to adversely affect several components of the environment, as detailed in the ESR’”.
An almost identical passage is set out at para. 12 of the Applicants’ Memorandum of Fact and Law in T-921-08.
                                                                                              Page: 22
               30.     The rivers are already quite polluted, and our people are
                       concerned about further pollution if there would be a leak of
                       the pipeline that would spread through the water ways in this
                       low and flat area. There are tributaries of the Red River
                       which flow south and then flow back north into Lake
                       Winnipeg.
               31.     Our people do considerable hunting. There is a concern that
                       the pipelines could affect animal migration, or that animals
                                                                                                        2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                       would abandon the area completely.
               32.     Our people have been in this are for centuries. There are
                       numerous burial sites in the area. Our elders also know of
                       sacred sites. Our people engage in many traditional activities
                       throughout the year. They gather many herbs, and many
                       plants are becoming very scarce and are at risk.
               33.     Our First Nation has no knowledge that at any time any
                       Treaty One First Nation, including our own First Nation, has
                       surrendered our Treaty, Treaty-protected inherent rights or
                       title to our traditional territory within the boundaries of
                       Treaty 1. Our only agreement was to share lands for
                       “immigration and settlement”.
               34.     As Chief, I had been conducting myself under the belief that
                       the federal government, on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen
                       in Right of Canada, has a legal duty to consult with my First
                       Nation before making any decisions related to lands in our
                       traditional territory inside the boundaries of Treaty 1. I know
                       also the federal government, on behalf of the Crown, has a
                       Duty to seek workable accommodations of our concerns and
                       protect our interests, title, and rights.
[34]   I do not question that the above statements reflect a profoundly held concern not only of
Chief Nelson but of others in the Manitoba Aboriginal community. The problem is that to establish
a procedural breach around projects such as these there must be some evidence presented which
establishes both an adverse impact on a credible claim to land or to Aboriginal rights accompanied
by a failure to adequately consult. The Treaty One First Nations are simply not correct when they
assert in their evidence that a duty to consult is engaged whenever the Government of Canada
                                                                                                 Page: 23
makes “any decision related to lands in our traditional territory inside the boundaries of Treaty 1”6.
There is no at-large duty to consult that is triggered solely by the development of land for public
purposes. There must be some unresolved non-negligible impact arising from such a development
to engage the Crown’s duty to consult.
                                                                                                           2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
[35]       Moreover, in a number of respects, the arguments advanced by Treaty One First Nations for
a duty to consult outside of the NEB process exceeded the scope of the evidence they adduced in
support.
[36]       For example, the Treaty One First Nations assert that, had the Crown engaged in a separate
consultation, it would have been told that the Pipeline Projects would disrupt “their ongoing
harvesting activities” and that they were also concerned about “environmental pollution”. The
Treaty One First Nations also claim that they needed to be consulted about previously unidentified
sacred or cultural sites which might have been threatened by the Pipeline Projects. At the same time
they acknowledge that these were matters that were brought before the NEB or raised with the
corporate Respondents and largely accommodated or mitigated. The advantage of a separate
consultation with the Crown about such matters is not explained beyond making the point that
where mitigation measures are adequate but unilaterally imposed there must still be a consultation
to meet the goal of reconciliation. This argument effectively ignores the fact that the mitigatory
measures adopted here by the NEB were not unilaterally created but were the product of an
extensive dialogue with interested Aboriginal communities including some of the Treaty One First
Nations.
6
    See affidavit of Chief Francine Meeches at para. 36.
                                                                                                  Page: 24
[37]   The Treaty One First Nations maintain that there must always be an overarching
consultation regardless of the validity of the mitigation measures that emerge from a relevant
regulatory review. This duty is said to exist notwithstanding the fact that Aboriginal communities
have been given an unfettered opportunity to be heard. This assertion seems to me to represent an
impoverished view of the consultation obligation because it would involve a repetitive and
                                                                                                            2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
essentially pointless exercise. Except to the extent that Aboriginal concerns cannot be dealt with,
the appropriate place to deal with project-related matters is before the NEB and not in a collateral
discussion with either the GIC or some arguably relevant Ministry.
[38]   The authorities relied upon by the Treaty One First Nations to support their separate
argument for a duty to consult with respect to their land claims are distinguishable because each of
those cases involved fresh impacts that were, to use the words of Justice Ian Binnie in Mikisew,
above, “clear, established and demonstrably adverse” to the rights in issue. That cannot be fairly
said of the relationship between the Pipeline Projects and the Treaty One First Nations’ land claims
in this case where no meaningful linkage is apparent on the evidence before me.
[39]   This is not a case like Mikisew where there was compelling evidence of injurious affection
to the interests of local hunters and trappers notwithstanding the limited footprint of the proposed
winter road. This is made clear at para. 55 of the decision:
               55 The Crown has a treaty right to "take up" surrendered lands for
               regional transportation purposes, but the Crown is nevertheless under
               an obligation to inform itself of the impact its project will have on the
               exercise by the Mikisew of their hunting and trapping rights, and to
               communicate its findings to the Mikisew. The Crown must then
               attempt to deal with the Mikisew "in good faith, and with the
               intention of substantially addressing" Mikisew concerns
               (Delgamuukw, at para. 168). This does not mean that whenever a
               government proposes to do anything in the Treaty 8 surrendered
               lands it must consult with all signatory First Nations, no matter how
                                                                                                 Page: 25
               remote or unsubstantial the impact. The duty to consult is, as stated
               in Haida Nation, triggered at a low threshold, but adverse impact is a
               matter of degree, as is the extent of the Crown's duty. Here the
               impacts were clear, established and demonstrably adverse to the
               continued exercise of the Mikisew hunting and trapping rights over
               the lands in question.
                                                                                                           2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
Even though the project considered in Mikisew involved direct and immediate interference with
identified Aboriginal interests, the Court said that the Crown’s consultation duty was at the lower
end of the spectrum requiring notice to the Mikisew and the careful consideration of their concerns
with a view to minimizing adverse impacts.
[40]   The development that was of concern in Taku, above, similarly involved the construction of
an access road. Although the road was said to represent a small intrusion relative to the size of the
outstanding land claim it would nonetheless “pass through an area critical to the [Taku River First
Nation’s] domestic economy”. This was held sufficient to trigger a duty to consult that was
significantly deeper than minimum requirement. Because the environmental assessment for the
road mandated consultation with affected Aboriginal peoples and because the Taku River First
Nation was consulted throughout the certification process, the Crown’s duty was found to have been
met.
[41]   In Ka’a’Gee, above, Justice Blanchard dealt with an application for judicial review from a
decision by the federal Crown to approve an oil and gas development in the Northwest Territories.
That project was extensive and involved the drilling of up to 50 wells, the excavation of 733
kilometers of seismic lines, the construction of temporary camps, the use of water from area lakes
and the disposal of drill waste. Justice Blanchard found that the project would have significant and
lasting impact on an area over which the affected First Nation asserted Aboriginal title and where
                                                                                                  Page: 26
they carried out harvesting activity. This, he said, triggered a duty to consult that was higher than
the minimum described in Mikisew. Up to a point, Justice Blanchard was satisfied that the
comprehensive regulatory process was sufficient to fulfill the Crown’s duty to consult. It was only
when the Crown unilaterally modified the process and made fundamental changes to important
recommendations that had come out of the earlier consultations that the duty to consult was found to
                                                                                                            2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
have been breached.
[42]    I am satisfied that the process of consultation and accommodation employed by the NEB
was sufficient to address the specific concerns of Aboriginal communities potentially affected by
the Pipeline Projects including the Treaty One First Nations. The fact that the Treaty One First
Nations may not have availed themselves fully of the opportunity to be heard before the NEB does
not justify the demand for a separate or discrete consultation with the Crown. To the extent that
regulatory procedures are readily accessible to Aboriginal communities to address their concerns
about development projects like these, there is a responsibility to use them. First Nations cannot
complain about a failure by the Crown to consult where they have failed to avail themselves of
reasonable avenues for seeking relief. That is so because the consultation process is reciprocal and
cannot be frustrated by the refusal of either party to meet or participate: see Ahousaht v. Canada,
2008 FCA 212, [2008] F.C.J. No. 946 at paras. 52-53. This presupposes, of course, that available
regulatory processes are accessible, adequate and provide First Nations an opportunity to participate
in a meaningful way.
[43]    It cannot be seriously disputed that the Pipeline Projects have been built on rights-of-way
that are not legally or practically available for the settlement of any outstanding land claims in
southern Manitoba. Even the Treaty One First Nations acknowledge that the additional lands they
                                                                                                  Page: 27
claim were intended to be taken from those lands not already taken up by settlement and
immigration7. In the result, if the Crown had any duty to consult with the Treaty One First Nations
with respect to the impact of the Pipeline Projects on their unresolved land claims, it was at the
extreme low end of the spectrum involving a peripheral claim attracting no more than an obligation
to give notice: see Haida Nation, above, at para. 37. Here the relationship between the land claims
                                                                                                            2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
and the Pipeline Projects is simply too remote to support anything more: also see Ahousaht v.
Canada, 2007 FC 567, [2007] F.C.J. No. 827 at para. 32, aff’d 2008 FCA 212, [2008] F.C.J. No
946 at para. 37.
[44]       I have no doubt, however, that had any of the Pipeline Projects crossed or significantly
impacted areas of unallocated Crown land which formed a part of an outstanding land claim a much
deeper duty to consult would have been triggered. Because this is also the type of issue that the
NEB process is not designed to address, the Crown would almost certainly have had an independent
obligation to consult in such a context.
IV.        Conclusion
[45]       The consultation duty owed by the Crown to the Treaty One First Nations has been met.
This is not to say that the Treaty One First Nations do not have a credible land claim but only that
the impact these Pipeline Projects have upon those claims is negligible. The Pipeline Projects have
been built almost completely over existing rights-of-way and on privately owned and actively
utilized land not now nor likely in the future to be available for land claims settlement. The
pipelines in question are also largely below ground and are reasonably unobtrusive. There is no
evidence before me or, more importantly that was before the NEB or the GIC, to prove that the
7
    See para. 52 of the Applicants’ Memorandum of Fact and Law in T-225-08.
                                                                                                Page: 28
Pipeline Projects would be likely to interfere with traditional Aboriginal land use or would
represent a meaningful interference with the future settlement of outstanding land claims in southern
Manitoba. To the extent that any duty to consult was engaged, it was fulfilled by the notices that
were provided to the Treaty One First Nations and to other Aboriginal communities in the context
of the NEB proceedings and by the opportunities that were afforded there for consultation and
                                                                                                          2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
accommodation.
[46]   These applications are, accordingly, dismissed. If any of the Respondents are seeking costs
against the Applicants, I will receive further submissions in that regard. Any such submissions shall
not exceed 5 pages in length and must be submitted within 7 days of this Judgment. I will then
allow the Applicants an additional 10 days to respond with their own submissions which
individually shall not exceed 5 pages in length.
                                                                                            Page: 29
                                           JUDGMENT
       THIS COURT ADJUDGES that these applications are dismissed with the matter of costs
to be reserved pending further submissions, if any, from the parties.
                                                                                                      2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
                                                                        “ R. L. Barnes ”
                                                                             Judge
                                    FEDERAL COURT
                              SOLICITORS OF RECORD
                                                                                     2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
DOCKET:                                T-225-08, T-921-08 and T-925-08
STYLE OF CAUSE:                        Brokenhead Ojibway Nation, et al.
                                       v.
                                       AGC, et al.
PLACE OF HEARING:                      Winnipeg, MB
DATE OF HEARING:                       September 2 to 4, 2008 and January 16, 2009
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
AND JUDGMENT BY:                       Mr. Justice Barnes
DATED:                                 May 12, 2009
APPEARANCES:
Peter W. Hutchins                                               FOR THE APPLICANTS
(514) 849-2403 / Fax: (514) 849-4907
Jameela Jeeroburkhan
(514) 849-2403 ext. 233 /
Fax: (514) 849-4907
David Kalmakoff
(514) 849-2403 / Fax: (514) 849-4907
Wina Sioui
Ph: 778.327.4744 Fx: 778.327.4757
Harry Glinter                                           FOR THE RESPONDENT-
(204) 983-4589                              THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA
Dayna Anderson
(204) 984-6961 / Fax: (204) 984-6488
Maria Yuzda                                                  FOR THE RESPONDENT-
(403) 299-3643 / Fax: (403) 292-5503                  THE NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
                                                                            Page: 2
Laurent Fortier                                    FOR THE RESPONDENT-
(514) 397-3139 / Fax: (514) 397-3411            TRANSCANADA KEYSTONE
                                                        PIPELINE GP LTD.
                                                                                     2009 FC 484 (CanLII)
Steven Mason                                       FOR THE RESPONDENT-
Ph: 416.362.1812 Fx: 416.868.0673                ENBRIDGE PIPELINES INC.
Harry Underwood
Ph: 416.362.1812 Fx: 416.868.0673
Lewis L. Manning                                    FOR THE INTERVENOR
(403) 269-6900 / Fax: (403) 269-9494
SOLICITORS OF RECORD:
Hutchins, Caron & Associés                          FOR THE APPLICANTS
485 rue McGill, Suite 700
Montréal, PQ, H2Y 2H4
John H. Sims, Q.C.                                 FOR THE RESPONDENT-
Deputy Attorney General of Canada      THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA
National Energy Board                              FOR THE RESPONDENT-
444 7 Ave. S.W.                             THE NATIONAL ENERGY BOARD
Calgary, AB, T2P 0X8
Stikeman Elliott LLP                               FOR THE RESPONDENT-
Bureau 4000                                     TRANSCANADA KEYSTONE
1155 boul. René-Lévesque o.                             PIPELINE GP LTD.
Montréal, PQ, H3B 3V2
McCarthy Tétrault LLP                              FOR THE RESPONDENT-
Box 48, 5300-66 Wellington St. W.                ENBRIDGE PIPELINES INC.
Toronto Dominion Bank Tower
Toronto, ON, M5K 1E6
Lawson Lundell LLP                                  FOR THE INTERVENOR
3700 Bow Valley Square 2
205 5 Avenue S.W.
Calgary, AB, T2P 2V7
                               September 17, 2009
      FSIN OFFICES
                               Claudine Dutil-Berry
                               Secretary of the Board
                               National Energy Board
                               444 Seventh Avenue S.W.
                   Head Office Calgary Alberta T2P 0X8
Asimakaniseekan Askiy Reserve
Suite 100 – 103A Packham Ave
       Saskatoon, SK S7N 4K4
       Business (306) 665-1215
            Fax (306) 244-4413 Dear Ms. Claudine Dutil-Berry:
                               Re:      TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd.
                                        Keystone XL Pipeline Project Application of 27 February 2009
            Regina Sub-Office
             490A Hoffer Drive
          Regina, SK S4N 7A1   This Letter of Comment – addition is submitted regarding the proposed
       Business (306) 721-2822
            Fax (306) 721-2707
                               TransCanada Keystone Pipeline GP Ltd. Keystone XL Project (“Keystone
                               XL”) (Hearing Order No. OJ-1-2009 / File No. OF-Fac-Oil-T241-2009-01
                               01).
                               The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations (FSIN) is providing the
                               following additional comments in order to supplement and further address
                               concerns raised in our initial Letter of Comment submitted September 16,
                               2009. The FSIN would also like to point out that that there are gaps in the
                               information obtained and being considered by the NEB in this process, and
                               not all potentially affected First Nations have been adequately consulted
                               and accommodated through this process.
    Protecting and
             enhancing         I.       FURTHER ISSUES
 Treaty Rights for
   First Nations of                 A. JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY
      Saskatchewan
                                    i.       Consultation Obligations Require Assessment Prior to
                                             Issuing an Authorization
                                    1. FSIN takes the position that the Crown is obligated to consult with
                                        all potentially affected First Nations prior to the issuance of any s.52
                                        Certificate by the NEB.
                                    2. Therefore, the FSIN submits that the scope, content, and sufficiency
                                        of consultation must be assessed prior to the NEB considering
                                        whether to authorize a s.52 Certificate of Public Convenience and
                                        Necessity.
 3. Prior to the NEB making any authorization, there must be a
    determination of whether consultation has been sufficient according
    to the scope and content of consultation required in accordance with
    Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), 2004 SCC 73
    (S.C.C.), and Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada, 2005 SCC 69 at
    paras. 63 – 69, where the court held that “the determination of the
    content of the duty to consult will, as Haida suggests, be governed
    by the context”.
4. The FSIN submits that since there has not yet been a determination
    of whether consultation obligations have been meaningfully and
    sufficiently discharged, it is premature for the NEB to consider
    authorizing the Keystone XL Pipeline by issuing a s.52 Certificate.
5. If consultation obligations are not assessed prior to authorizing
    contemplated conduct which triggers consultation, consultation
    becomes, de facto, meaningless.
6. Therefore, it is necessary to consider whether consultation has
    upheld Crown honor prior to issuing an authorization which
    transforms ‘contemplated’ conduct into conduct which is authorized
    or permitted to occur.
7. The FSIN takes the position that the determination of the content of
    the duty to consult, and the sufficiency of whether consultation
    obligations have been exercised in accordance with such scope,
    must be assessed prior to the issuance by the NEB of the s.52
    Certificate for Public Convenience and Necessity.
8. In Siksika First Nation v. Director (Southern Region Environment),
    2007 ABCA 402, the Alberta Court of Appeal held that “whether the
    process followed by the Director, the EAB, or a remedy issued by
    any of them, might be relevant to consultation or might meet the
    requisites of consultation” was a “live and significant issue” for the
    trial court to determine: at para. 13.
9. Therefore, it was within the scope of the trial judge, upon an
    application for judicial review, to consider whether consultation
    obligations, determined with reference to Haida Nation for their
    scope and content, could be met by relying on the scheme of the
    Environmental Protection and Enhancement Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. E-
    12.
10. The FSIN submits that in this circumstance, it is necessary for a
    independent assessment and review to be undertaken in order to
      determine whether consultation obligations can be met by relying on
     the NEB process to the extent possible.
 ii.          NEB is in a Conflict of Interest Position
11. The FSIN submits that the NEB is in a conflict of interest position,
     with regard to determining the scope, content, and sufficiency of
     consultation through its very own procedures.
12. In considering whether its own process was implemented sufficiently
     to uphold Crown honor and whether such constitutes meaningful
     consultation, the NEB is in a conflict position.
13. Not only does NEB have the power to issue a s.52 Certificate of
     Public Convenience and Necessity, but moreover, in order to
     exercise such authority, it is required to itself assess the adequacy
     of consultation that occurs through its own structure.
14. In Siksika, the appellate court held that the Environmental Appeals
     Board did not have the jurisdiction to consider “a question of
     constitutional law,” including consultation obligations, and further
     stated that the Board could not transcend its own jurisdiction:
     Siksika, supra, at para. 10.
15. More importantly, the appellate court held that, even given its lack of
     jurisdiction to consider consultation, were the Board or Minister to
     assess consultation and the sufficiency of discharging consultation
     through the EPEA, “the Minister was unlikely to do more than
     presuppose the constitutionality of his decision”: Siksika, supra, at
     para. 10.
16. The same can be said for the NEB. If the NEB were to consider the
     constitutionality of its own process and whether its implementation
     was sufficient to uphold Crown honour, the NEB would similarly be
     unlikely to do anything other than to presuppose that its process is
     constitutional.
17. While the NEB is an “independent” quasi-judicial tribunal, it loses
     this independence when it is required to assess the sufficiency of
     the implementation of its own procedures to determine their
     constitutionality.
18. The jurisdiction of the NEB is limited to considering questions of fact
     and law: National Energy Board Act, s.12(2). The NEBA does not
     provide the NEB with the authority to consider questions of
    jurisdiction, however.
19. When the legislature has given authority over questions of both law
    and jurisdiction, it has expressly stated both the words “law” and
    “jurisdiction”: See, for example, Alberta (Worker’s Compensation
    Board v. Appeals Commission, 2005 ABCA 276 at para. 26, citing
    previous acts including the Alberta Energy and Utilities Board Act,
    R.S.A. 2000, c. A-17, s.26(1), and the Natural Resources
    Conservation Board Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. N-3, s.31.
20. The FSIN submits that the NEB was not given the authority to
    determine questions of jurisdiction. The FSIN further submits that
    question of whether the NEB has the authority to determine the
    constitutionality of its own procedures in relation to consultation is a
    question of jurisdiction which is ultra vires the NEB’s authority.
21. As such, the NEB is not in a position to assess whether its
    procedures sufficiently meet constitutional obligations.
22. Therefore, the FSIN submits that it is beyond the jurisdiction and
    authority of the NEB to consider issuing a s.52 Certificate in this
    circumstance, given the consultation concerns raised.
23. Even if the NEB were not in a conflict position, the FSIN takes the
    position that the Crown has a legal and constitutional duty to consult
    with potentially affected First Nations; there are limits on the
    delegation of the Crown’s duties to industry proponents; and that the
    NEB public hearing process, is not an adequate substitute for
    discharge of the Crown’s duty to consult.
24. The NEB is mandated to balance various public interest factors, and
    to make decisions in the public interest; therefore, given the NEB’s
    role to balance these polycentric interests, the NEB does not have
    the appropriate role to ensure that First Nations rights which are
    affirmed and recognized, are constitutionally protected: see
    National Energy Board Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-7 [NEBA] references
    to ‘public interest’, s.12(1)(b), s.52(e), and s.54(1).
25. Indeed, s.12(1)(b) of the NEBA provides that the NEB has “full and
    exclusive jurisdiction to inquire into, hear and determine any matter
    (b) where it appears to the Board that the circumstances may
    require the Board, in the public interest, to make any order or give
    any direction…”
 26. When the purpose of a board is to balance polycentric interests,
     such as where an administrative tribunal plays a “protective role”
     over the public, this often involves a “multi-factored balancing test”.
     The determination of polycentric issues involves making
     determinations among “a large number of interacting and
     interlocking interests”. This is very different from the judicial role of
     determining questions of law, based on the “bi-polar opposition” of
     parties and interests, where courts have particular expertise. This is
     often a difference between administrative structures and courts. See
     Pushpanathan v. Canada, [1998] Canlii 778 (S.C.C.) at para. 36.
27. The FSIN therefore submits that, given the role of the NEB in
     making determinations in the public interest, and considering a
     number of polycentric interests, this role stands in the way of the
     ability of the NEB to properly determine the constitutional rights
     based question of the scope, content, and sufficiency of
     consultation.
28. The FSIN submits that stakeholder and public processes, including
     the NEB public process and hearing, with the NEB making
     determinations in the ‘public interest’, provides an insufficient
     process by which to meaningfully fulfill consultation obligations to
     First Nations.
iii.          Further Research and Information Required
29. The FSIN has identified areas which require further research and
     information, prior to a determination of whether to issue a s.52
     Certificate.
30. In its Question and Answer document on Aboriginal Consultation,
     the NEB provides that while the NEB is constrained by the rules of
     natural justice, which preclude one-on-one meetings and direct
     consultation, “the Board does take steps to ensure that it has
     sufficient evidence before it makes its decision, including the impact
     the proposed project may have on Aboriginal peoples”. In addition,
     the Board states that it “can only consider evidence that is filed by
     the applicant and any interested parties in the hearing”.
31. In this same document, the NEB answers the question “How can
     Aboriginal peoples ensure that their views are made known to the
     Board?”, by stating that “Aboriginal people who have a concern with
     any particular application are encouraged to participate directly in
     the proceedings”, and the Board considers all submissions prior to
    making its decision.
32. Further, the NEB states that “to ensure that it has sufficient
    evidence about the possible impact of a project on Aboriginal
    people”, it requires the applicant to contact potentially affected
    Aboriginal communities to identify the potential issues and impacts.
33. The FSIN would like to point out to the NEB, that there are still gaps
    in information about the impact of the proposed project on First
    Nations.
34. Not all of the relevant information has been gathered by the
    applicant on the impacts to all potentially affected First Nation
    communities.
35. There needs to be further information and research conducted in
    order to determine the impacts on other First Nation communities
    who were not identified and contacted by the Applicant.
36. The FSIN is taking this opportunity to inform the NEB that the
    proposed location of the Keystone XL Pipeline crosses known
    hunting areas where a number of First Nations gathered to exercise
    their rights. Therefore, the radius of 50 km to determine potentially
    impacted communities is flawed because it does not take into
    account this information, and the potential impacts of the project on
    all First Nations who may be adversely affected.
v.           Summary of Concerns
37. The FSIN position regarding the relationship of First Nation
    consultation with the NEB process, can be summarized as follows:
        i.   The Crown is required to consult with all potentially affected
             First Nations prior to the issuance of a s.52 Certificate;
       ii.   The scope, content, and sufficiency of Crown consultation
             must be determined prior to issuing a s.52 Certificate;
      iii.   The NEB is not in a position to make this determination due
             to its conflict of interest;
      iv.    In the alternative, if the NEB assesses the adequacy of
             Crown consultation and finds that it has been inadequate,
             the FSIN submits that it may not proceed to consider
       whether to issue a s.52 Certificate unless and until
      consultation obligations have been properly discharged, lest
      consultation be rendered meaningless;
  v.  Consultation cannot be deferred until after the “regulatory”
      and approval phase of a project is complete and a s.52
      Certificate has been issued;
 vi.  First Nations participation in stakeholder and public hearings
      is not sufficient to discharge the duty to consult;
vii.  First Nations have a unique relationship with the Crown that
      is sui generis, and based on Treaty. First Nations therefore
      cannot be treated the same as other stakeholders and the
      public, because First Nations have constitutionally protected
      rights that must be taken into consideration and impacts on
      these rights must be avoided, mitigated, or meaningfully
      accommodated;
viii. Such is necessary in order to uphold the honor of the Crown
      and effect reconciliation, which is the purpose of the duty to
      consult;
 ix.  The NEB is mandated to balance various public interest
      factors, and to make decisions in the public interest;
      therefore, it is beyond the scope and limits of the NEB’s
      authority and jurisdiction to ensure that First Nations rights
      which are affirmed and recognized, are constitutionally
      protected;
  x.  Questions of jurisdiction and the constitutionality of
      consultation are beyond the authority of the NEB to consider;
 xi.  An independent assessment and review of whether the NEB
      process can sufficiently be utilized to discharge Crown
      consultation obligations needs to be undertaken.
xii.  Further research and information is required prior to
      determining whether to issue a s.52 Certificate.
      38. The FSIN reserves the right to submit and raise further issues of
         concern to be addressed in relation to the Keystone XL Pipeline.
Thank you for accepting our submission and additional considerations.
Yours truly,
FEDERATION OF SASKATCHEWAN INDIAN NATIONS
Delbert P. Wapass
Second Vice Chief, FSIN
Att:
Alberta (Worker’s Compensation Board v. Appeals Commission, 2005
ABCA 276
Pushpanathan v. Canada, [1998] Canlii 778 (S.C.C.)
Siksika First Nation v. Director (Southern Region Environment), 2007 ABCA
402
Cc:
Honourable Minister of Natural Resources Canada Lisa Raitt
Honourable Minister of Environment Jim Prentice
Honourable Minister of INAC Chuck Strahl
Mai-Linh Huynh, Environmental Officer, Transport Canada
Karmen Klarenbach, Major Resource Projects, Transport Canada
John Woodward, Canadian Transportation Agency
Don Sweet, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
Jaela Shockey, Executive Director, Lands and Resources, FSIN
                       In the Court of Appeal of Alberta
Citation: Alberta (Workers’ Compensation Board) v. Appeals Commission, 2005 ABCA 276
                                                                         Date: 20050825
                                                                   Docket: 0403-0096-AC
                                                                                             2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
                                                                     Registry: Edmonton
Between:
                     The Workers’ Compensation Board - Alberta
                                                                     Appellant (Applicant)
                                        - and -
                              The Appeals Commission
                                                                  Respondent (Respondent)
             _______________________________________________________
The Court:
                     The Honourable Madam Justice Ellen Picard
                    The Honourable Madam Justice Adelle Fruman
                       The Honourable Mr. Justice Keith Ritter
             _______________________________________________________
                            Reasons for Judgment Reserved
                      of the Honourable Madam Justice Fruman
                Concurred in by the Honourable Madam Justice Picard
                  Concurred in by the Honourable Mr. Justice Ritter
                               Appeal from the Order by
                        The Honourable Mr. Justice E.S. Lefsrud
                         Granted the 16th day of December, 2003
                         Entered on the 25th day of March, 2004
                        (2003 ABQB 1035, Docket: 0303 07833)
                _______________________________________________________
                              Reasons for Judgment Reserved
                        of the Honourable Madam Justice Fruman
               _______________________________________________________
                                                                                                         2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
[1]      In Alberta, a worker who suffers injuries in a work-related accident is entitled to claim
compensation pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act, R.S.A. 2000 c. W-15 (WCB Act). This
legislative scheme replaces the worker’s right to sue in tort. If the worker’s claim is refused at the
initial stage by a Workers’ Compensation Board (WCB) claims adjudicator, the worker may appeal
to a review body, an internal organization within the WCB. If a further rejection is encountered, an
appeal is available to the Appeals Commission, an independent tribunal, comprised of panels of two
or more commissioners appointed by order-in-council.
[2]     For many years, all Appeals Commission decisions were protected by a full privative clause,
specifying that its decisions were not open to question or review by any court. In September 2002,
amendments to the WCB Act came into effect, adding, for the first time, a statutory right of appeal
to the Court of Queen’s Bench from decisions of the Appeals Commission, on questions of law or
jurisdiction. The full privative clause was retained for other types of questions.
[3]     The addition of a statutory right of appeal raises questions about the issues appealable under
the new right of appeal and the standard of review to be applied to decisions of the Appeals
Commission. The response by Queen’s Bench to these questions has been inconsistent. Queen’s
Bench decisions also reveal varied approaches to the functional and pragmatic analysis, employed
to determine the standard of review. This case presents the first opportunity for this Court to
consider the 2002 amendments and provide guidance.
[4]    Two sections of the WCB Act are of particular relevance to this appeal. Section 13.4(1),
added in 2002, grants a statutory right of appeal to Queen’s Bench on particular types of questions:
       13.4(1) The Board and any person who has a direct interest in a decision of the
       Appeals Commission made pursuant to section 13.2 may appeal the decision to the
       Court of Queen’s Bench on a question of law or jurisdiction.
[5]     Sections 13.1(1) and (9) provide a full privative clause in respect of questions not covered
by s. 13.4(1):
       13.1(1) Subject to sections 13.2(11) and 13.4, the Appeals Commission has exclusive
       jurisdiction to examine, inquire into, hear and determine all matters and questions
       arising under this Act and the regulations in respect of
       ...
               (b) appeals from decisions under section 120 made by a review body
               appointed under section 119
                                                                                                  Page: 2
        and the decision of the Appeals Commission on the appeal or other matter is final
        and conclusive and is not open to question or review in any court.
                                                                                                             2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
        (9) No proceedings by the Appeals Commission shall be restrained by injunction,
        prohibition or other process or proceedings in any court, nor shall any action be
        maintained or brought against the Appeals Commission or any member of the
        Appeals Commission in respect of any act done or decision made in the honest belief
        that it was within the jurisdiction of the Appeals Commission.
[6]     The present case involves an individual worker, James Davick, who appealed the denial of
his claim through the internal appeals process, concluding with a hearing before the Appeals
Commission. The Appeals Commission allowed his appeal, ordering the WCB to pay benefits. The
WCB then appealed the Appeals Commission’s decision to Queen’s Bench, without success. The
WCB now appeals to this Court. Before addressing the merits of the appeal, it is useful to set out
some guiding principles for review of Appeals Commission decisions.
THE PUSHPANATHAN FUNCTIONAL AND PRAGMATIC ANALYSIS
[7]     Administrative regimes are often created in the hope they will provide a more effective and
efficient alternative to the court system. See MacMillan Bloedel Ltd. v. Simpson, [1995] 4 S.C.R.
725 at para. 53; International Woodworkers of America, Local 2-69 v. Consolidated-Bathhurst
Packaging Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 282 at para. 69. One method by which the legislature reinforces
this goal is the inclusion of a privative clause in the constating statute, declaring that all or certain
types of decisions are final and are not open to question or review by any court.
[8]     Because superior courts retain supervisory jurisdiction over administrative tribunals, the
legislature cannot completely preclude judicial review, no matter how clear and strong the wording
of the privative clause. However, the legislature’s intended protection is not ignored by the
reviewing court. That intention translates into the amount of deference the court accords to the
question under review, and, in turn, the level of scrutiny, or standard of review, the court uses to
examine the tribunal’s decision on that question. There is an inverse relationship between deference
and standard of review. When the intended protection is strong, the court gives greater deference
to the administrative tribunal’s decision and employs a lower standard of review (reasonableness
or patent unreasonableness). When the intended protection is weak or non-existent, less deference
is given and the standard of review is higher (correctness).
[9]     The reviewing court must therefore determine the level of deference the legislature intended
to accord to the tribunal on the particular questions under review. The presence or absence of a
privative clause is relevant, though not wholly determinative. The court must use the functional and
pragmatic analysis articulated in Pushpanathan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
Immigration), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 982. This analysis, which involves consideration of the privative
clause together with a number of other factors, facilitates the process of inquiring into that legislative
                                                                                               Page: 3
intent, while at the same time recognizing the role superior courts play in maintaining the rule of
law: Dr. Q. v. College of Physicians and Surgeons of British Columbia, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 226, 2003
                                                                                                          2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
SCC 19 at para. 21.
[10] The concept of judicial review of administrative decisions embraces both statutory appeals
and applications for judicial review (the old prerogative writs): Dr. Q., supra, at para. 21. The
Pushpanathan functional and pragmatic approach applies to both. The analysis involves an
examination of four factors: (1) the presence or absence of a privative clause or statutory right of
appeal; (2) the expertise of the tribunal relative to that of the reviewing court on the issue in
question; (3) the purpose of the legislation and the provision in particular; and (4) the nature of the
question: law, fact or mixed fact and law. A reviewing court must consider and balance these four
factors to determine the level of deference the legislature intended, and to select the appropriate
standard of review for each question. The three standards, in decreasing order of deference, are
correctness, reasonableness and patent unreasonableness. The chosen standard is then applied to the
question under review.
[11] In the course of judicial review applications, courts are sometimes invited by the parties to
establish the standard of review for all decisions of a given tribunal. Occasionally, they take the
parties up on the offer. Sweeping statements in some judgments profess to set the standard of review
for all decisions, or all questions within a general category (questions of law, fact or mixed fact and
law) of a particular administrative decision-maker. Sometimes other courts rely on these general
pronouncements instead of applying the functional and pragmatic analysis.
[12] As recently confirmed in Voice Construction Ltd. v. Construction and General Workers’
Union, Local 92, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 609, 2004 SCC 23, these practices are inappropriate. There is no
one, correct, standard of review of general application for all decisions of a specific tribunal or all
questions within a general category. In each case, the court must select the standard of review, using
the functional and pragmatic approach: Dr. Q. at para. 21. This analysis must be employed on every
judicial review application, to every question under review, from every administrative decision-
maker.
[13] Conducting the functional and pragmatic analysis can be a complex and lengthy process,
sometimes longer than the actual review of the impugned decision. Nevertheless, there are no
shortcuts and general statements by previous courts as to the standard of review cannot serve as
precedents. While the reasoning in the application of the functional and pragmatic analysis by other
reviewing judges may be instructive, it cannot replace the mandatory application of that analysis in
each case. As noted at paras. 24-26 of Dr. Q., the old categorical approach of slotting issues into
judicial review pigeon holes has now been replaced by a principled approach.
[14] The structure of the WCB Act raises some unique issues in terms of judicial review. I will
therefore discuss each step in the functional and pragmatic analysis in the context of the WCB Act.
                                                                                               Page: 4
Part 1: Characterize the question
                                                                                                          2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
[15] Perhaps the judge’s most difficult task in WCB Act judicial review applications is
determining whether the question is one of law, fact or mixed fact and law, and deciding whether
the question is subject to the statutory right of appeal, or alternatively, judicial review with a full
privative clause.
[16] Although the Pushpanathan factors are often outlined with characterization of the question
as the fourth step, there is no requirement that the analysis proceed in this order. In fact, judicial
review under the WCB Act compels a different order. The reviewing court must begin by
characterizing the question because the Legislature intended to give a different level of protection
to different types of questions, which are, in turn, subject to different court review processes.
Questions of law or jurisdiction enjoy a statutory right of appeal under s. 13.4(1), indicating less
intended protection from court scrutiny, while other questions are subject to a full privative clause
under s. 13.1, indicating more protection. In terms of process, questions of law or jurisdiction may
be appealed by way of statutory appeal, while only judicial review is available on other questions.
[17] When an application for judicial review involves several questions, each question must be
characterized separately. Moreover, the questions before the reviewing court will not likely be the
same as the ultimate question before the tribunal below. Although the applicant will express general
dissatisfaction with the tribunal’s decision, particular errors will be identified. The reviewing judge
must confine the exercise of characterization to those errors. In each case, after characterizing a
question, the judge must decide whether the review of that question will proceed as a statutory
appeal, under s. 13.4(1) (questions of law or jurisdiction) or by judicial review (other questions).
[18] This procedural characterization has an important practical aspect. The form of originating
notice and service requirements are somewhat different for statutory appeals and judicial review
applications. For example, r. 753.09(1) of the Rules of Court, A.R. 356/90 requires an application
for judicial review to be served on the Attorney General, while there is no similar requirement for
a statutory appeal under the WCB Act. Accordingly, a proceeding mistakenly commenced as a
statutory appeal will not necessarily meet the procedural requirements for a judicial review.
[19] The reviewing court must also keep in mind that it is in an applicant’s best interest to
characterize a question as one of law or jurisdiction, as those questions generally attract a less
deferential standard of review. A nimble drafter may succeed in dressing errors of fact in error-of-
law clothing. Simply asserting a question of law or jurisdiction is insufficient. The reviewing court
must identify the true target of the applicant’s attack, determine if it raises a question of law or
jurisdiction and gauge whether the issue is arguable. When a statutory right of appeal is conditioned
on leave being granted (see, for example, Municipal Government Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. M-26, s.
688(1); Alberta Energy and Utilities Board Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. A-17, s. 26(1)), this inquiry is
performed by the judge hearing the leave application. As the statutory right of appeal under the WCB
Act does not import a leave requirement, the reviewing judge must perform this threshold function.
                                                                                               Page: 5
[20] This leads to a consideration of the types of errors that are properly appealed under the
                                                                                                          2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
statutory right of appeal. While there is general agreement that questions of law and jurisdiction are
appealable under s. 13.4(1), and questions of fact are subject to the full privative clause in s. 13.1,
Queen’s Bench judges have struggled to decide where questions of mixed fact and law properly lie.
[21] There is a well-recognized distinction between questions of law and questions of mixed fact
and law. In Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Competition Act) v. Southam Inc.,
[1997] 1 S.C.R. 748 at paras. 35-37, the Supreme Court noted that questions of law are about the
correct legal test, whereas questions of mixed fact and law are about whether the facts satisfy the
legal test. A general proposition with precedential value might qualify as a principle of law, but not
its application to particular facts or circumstances.
[22] The Supreme Court confirmed this distinction in Housen v. Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235,
2002 SCC 33 at paras. 27-31. In that case the Court noted that questions of mixed fact and law
involve the application of a legal standard to a set of facts; conversely, errors of law involve an
incorrect statement of the legal standard, or a flawed application of the legal test. An example of the
latter occurs when a decision-maker only considers factors A, B, and C, but the test also requires
factor D to be considered. The Court also acknowledged an exception to the distinction between
questions of law and questions of mixed fact and law, when it is possible to extricate a pure legal
question from what appears to be a question of mixed fact and law: at para. 34.
[23] Despite this well-recognized distinction, the WCB urges us to conclude that questions of
mixed fact and law are synonymous with questions of law, and subject to the statutory right of
appeal. The WCB bases its argument on the WCB Act’s legislative history. Prior to the 2002
amendments, decisions of the Appeals Commission were protected by a full privative clause, subject
only to the WCB’s right to order a rehearing if the WCB thought the Appeals Commission had not
properly applied policy or the provisions of the WCB Act (former ss. 12(1) and 13(7)). The
September 2002 amendments followed the work of two review committees, the MLA Workers’
Compensation Board Service Review Input Committee (Hon. Victor Doerksen, chair) and the
Review Committee of the Workers’ Compensation Board Appeal System (Samuel Friedman, Q.C.,
chair). The reports issued by these committees identified systemic problems at every level of the
WCB process. The Friedman report called for more accountability to the injured worker and
criticized the WCB for its “culture of denial” of long-term disability claims: The Workers’
Compensation Board Appeals Systems: Are They Working Well?, Final Report, Review Committee
of the Workers’ Compensation Board Appeals System (Friedman report) at i-ii. In response, the
Alberta Legislature amended the WCB Act. Among other things, the amendments extinguished the
WCB’s power to order a rehearing, substituting a right of appeal to Queen’s Bench by interested
parties on a question of law or jurisdiction (s. 13.4(1)), and adding a provision permitting the
Appeals Commission to ask Queen’s Bench for an opinion on any question of law or jurisdiction
(s. 13.2(11)). The amended WCB Act retained the privative clause in s. 13.1, making it subject to ss.
13.4(1) and 13.2(11).
                                                                                                Page: 6
[24] The WCB cited excerpts from the Friedman report, a discussion guide from a symposium
                                                                                                           2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
on Workers’ Compensation, and Hansard in support of its argument that the Alberta Legislature
intended questions of mixed fact and law to be appealable under s. 13.4(1). These excerpts are of
little assistance because they make no mention of questions of mixed fact and law; rather, the
materials evidence an intent to confine the statutory right of appeal to questions of law, jurisdiction
and policy: Friedman report, supra, at 21-23; Edmonton, Symposium Discussion Guide, Charting
a New Course for Workers’ Compensation, September 17-18, 2001 (Edmonton: Alberta Human
Resources and Employment, 2001) at 19; Alberta, Legislative Assembly, Hansard, 999 (29 April
2002) at 25.
[25] Moreover, many recommendations in the reports, such as the Friedman report’s
recommended deletion of the entire privative clause, were not implemented in the amended
legislation: Friedman report at 23. Accordingly, it is difficult to make a convincing argument that
these extrinsic materials are a reliable indicator of legislative intent. They should be given little
weight in this case. See R. v. Heywood, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 761 at para. 41; R. v. Morgentaler, [1993]
3 S.C.R. 463 at para. 28.
[26] In contrast, an examination of the words chosen by the Legislature is key to interpreting their
meaning. Section 13.4(1), the statutory appeal section, refers only to questions of law or jurisdiction,
with no reference to questions of mixed fact and law. The words “question of law or jurisdiction”
are familiar, as several Alberta statutes provide a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal on such
questions. See, for example, Municipal Government Act, supra, s. 688(1); Alberta Energy and
Utilities Board Act, supra, s. 26(1); Metis Settlements Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. M-14, s. 204; Natural
Resources Conservation Board Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. N-3, s. 31.
[27] Consequently, this Court has frequently interpreted the words “law or jurisdiction.” In doing
so, we have consistently refused to consider questions of mixed fact and law under the rubric of
questions of law or jurisdiction. The words “law or jurisdiction” have been confined to their ordinary
and grammatical meaning. See Pachanga Energy Inc. v. Mobil Canada Energy Inc. (1993), 149
A.R. 73 at para. 4 (C.A.); R. v. Wells (2004), 361 A.R. 256, 2004 ABCA 371 at paras. 2-4; R. v.
Seath (1999), 48 M.V.R. (3d) 11, 1999 ABCA 347. In ATCO Gas v. Alberta Energy and Utilities
Board, 2005 ABCA 122 at para. 55, this Court held that when the governing legislation grants a
right of appeal on questions of law or jurisdiction, questions of mixed fact and law are not
appealable unless there is an extricable legal question. This interpretation is consistent with Housen,
supra.
[28] The Legislature’s choice of the words “law or jurisdiction” in s. 13.4(1), and the well-
recognized distinction between questions of law and questions of mixed fact and law, lead to the
logical conclusion that the Legislature did not intend to provide a statutory right of appeal for
questions of mixed fact and law. The only exception is when a pure legal question can be extricated
from a question of mixed fact and law. Even then, only the pure legal question will be considered.
                                                                                                Page: 7
[29] The concept of an extricable legal error can be difficult to understand. In Housen at para.
                                                                                                           2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
36, the Supreme Court provided clarification. In that case the alleged error was a finding of
negligence, a question of mixed fact and law. The Court noted that when the error in a finding of
negligence can be attributed to the application of an incorrect standard, a failure to consider a
required element of a legal test or a similar error in principle, such an error can be characterized as
an extricable error of law. However, when the issue on appeal involves a trial judge’s interpretation
of the evidence as a whole, or the application of the correct legal test to the evidence, there is no
extricable error of law.
[30] After the question has been characterized, the analysis of this Pushpanathan factor involves
considering what level of deference the question attracts. A question of pure fact compels more
deference, while a question of pure law indicates a more searching review is appropriate. When the
question is one of mixed fact and law, more deference will be called for if the question is fact-
intensive and less deference if it is law-intensive: Dr. Q. at para. 34.
Part 2: Examine the privative clause or statutory appeal provision
[31] Under this heading, the reviewing judge must consider the presence or absence of a privative
clause or statutory right of appeal to determine whether the legislature intended deference. The
inclusion of both a statutory right of appeal and a privative clause in the WCB Act has caused some
Queen’s Bench judges to ponder whether the two provisions should be considered together, resulting
in a combined level of deference for all types of questions.
[32] As noted above, the statutory right of appeal in s. 13.4(1) applies to questions of law or
jurisdiction (including a legal issue that can be extricated from a question of mixed fact and law).
The privative clause in s. 13.1(1) is “subject to” s. 13.4. The expression "subject to" in legislation
is “used to assign a subordinate position ... or to pave the way for qualifications”: Elmer A.
Driedger, The Composition of Legislation: Legislative Forms and Precedents, 2nd ed. rev. (Ottawa:
Supply and Services Canada, 1976) at 139-40. The words “subject to” in s. 13.1(1) indicate that
there is no conflict with s. 13.4(1); rather there is a hierarchy. A question of law or jurisdiction (or
an extricable legal error) may be appealed under the statutory right of appeal in s. 13.4(1). All other
questions are subject to the full privative clause in s. 13.1. See Pauli v. Ace Ina Insurance (2003),
334 A.R. 104, 2003 ABQB 107 at paras. 29-33, aff’d (2004), 346 A.R. 263, 2004 ABCA 84.
[33] Accordingly, the appeal provision and privative clause apply to different types of questions,
with no overlap. Similarly, questions heard under each process attract a different level of deference.
There is no blended standard of review for all questions, created by mixing the privative clause and
statutory appeal provisions. Nor do the two clauses somehow offset one another.
[34] Questions of mixed fact and law (without an extricable legal error) and questions of fact fall
outside the statutory appeal provision. These questions are protected by a full privative clause. A
                                                                                                Page: 8
full or true privative clause is one that declares decisions of the tribunal to be final and conclusive,
from which no appeal lies, and all forms of judicial review are excluded: Pasiechnyk v.
                                                                                                           2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
Saskatchewan (Workers’ Compensation Board), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 890 at para. 17. Generally, the
stronger the privative clause, the greater the deference that is due: Dr. Q. at para. 27. The full
privative clause in s. 13.1 indicates that the Legislature has confidence in the ability of the Appeals
Commission to determine questions of fact and mixed fact and law.
[35] The same cannot be said for the statutory right of appeal; the existence of an appeal right
denotes less deference: Law Society of New Brunswick v. Ryan, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 247, 2003 SCC
20 at paras. 28-29. Under the WCB Act, questions of law or jurisdiction (including an extricable
legal error) are not protected by a privative clause, and are appealable pursuant to the statutory right
of appeal. As such, these questions enjoy less deference.
Part 3: Consider the tribunal’s expertise
[36] The reviewing court must consider both the general expertise of the tribunal, and its expertise
on the particular question on appeal. The court must then compare the tribunal’s expertise to its own:
Pushpanathan, supra, at para. 33. Greater deference will be called for only when the decision-
making body is, in some way, more expert than the court, and the question under consideration falls
within the ambit of this expertise: Dr. Q. at para. 28 citing Moreau-Bérubé v. New Brunswick
(Judicial Council), [2002] 1 S.C.R. 249, 2002 SCC 11 at para. 50.
[37] If a tribunal has particular expertise in achieving the aims of an Act, either because of the
specialized knowledge of its decision-makers or the special procedures or non-judicial means it
employs to implement the statute, a greater degree of deference is accorded: Pushpanathan at para.
32. Conversely, if the tribunal has no advantage (no expert qualifications, no accumulated
experience) on the particular issue before it, as compared with the reviewing court, less deference
is due.
[38] Even when decisions of a tribunal are not protected by a full privative clause, or the question
falls under a statutory right of appeal, a specialized tribunal will nonetheless often be shown some
deference on matters squarely within its jurisdiction: United Brotherhood of Carpenters and
Joiners of America, Local 579 v. Bradco Construction Ltd., [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316 at para. 31.
Part 4: Examine the purpose of the statute and the provision in particular
[39] Tribunals perform a wide range of functions. At one end of the spectrum are tribunals that
regularly consider “polycentric” matters, involving many interlocking and interacting interests and
considerations: Pushpanathan at para. 36 citing P. Cane, An Introduction to Administrative Law
(3rd ed., 1996) at 35. A statutory purpose that requires a tribunal to select from a range of remedial
choices or administrative responses, is concerned with the protection of the public, engages policy
                                                                                                Page: 9
issues or involves balancing multiple sets of interests or considerations will demand greater
deference from a reviewing court: Dr. Q. at para. 31.
                                                                                                           2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
[40] At the other end of the spectrum are tribunals charged with determining rights between
parties, resolved largely by the facts before the tribunal. This type of adjudicative function generally
calls for less deference: Dr. Q. at para. 32. However, even when the tribunal is properly classified
as performing adjudicative functions, an examination of the purpose of the statute or the provision
in particular may indicate that the legislature intended that the tribunal be accorded deference, as
was the case in Voice, supra, at para. 28.
Select the standard of review
[41] As discussed above, the purpose of the functional and pragmatic approach is to ascertain the
level of deference the legislature intended for the particular question or issue under review:
Pushpanathan at para. 26; Dr. Q. at para. 21; Voice at para. 15. Following the analysis of the four
factors, the reviewing court must select the standard of review to apply. No single factor is
determinative: Voice at para. 18; Dr. Q. at para. 25. The functional and pragmatic approach calls
upon the court to weigh and balance the four factors in an effort to discern whether a particular issue
before the administrative body should receive exacting review by a court (correctness), undergo
significant searching or testing (reasonableness) or be left to the near-exclusive determination of the
decision-maker (patent unreasonableness): Dr. Q. at para. 22.
[42] Unfortunately, there is no set formula to apply in selecting the applicable standard. When
all factors indicate a high degree of deference, the appropriate standard should be patent
unreasonableness; when all indicate little deference, correctness should be selected: Voice at para.
18. Although cases involving a mixture will most often merit the reasonableness label, careful
analysis will nevertheless be required to determine the most fitting standard.
Apply the standard of review
[43] The reviewing judge’s final task involves applying the selected standard of review to the
question in issue. A review for correctness is the most straightforward: the court completes its own
reasoning process to arrive at the result it judges correct: Ryan at para. 50.
[44] In contrast, when determining whether an administrative decision is reasonable, the
reviewing court should not ask if it agrees with the decision, or what the correct decision would have
been: Ryan at para. 50. The court must not interfere unless the party seeking review has positively
shown that the decision was unreasonable: Ryan at para. 48. If any of the reasons supporting the
conclusion are tenable, in the sense that they can stand up to a somewhat probing examination, the
decision will not be unreasonable and a reviewing court must not interfere: Southam at para. 56;
Ryan at para. 55.
                                                                                             Page: 10
[45] Finally, a patently unreasonable decision has been described as “clearly irrational” or
“evidently not in accordance with reason”: Canada (Attorney General) v. Public Service Alliance
                                                                                                         2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
of Canada, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 941 at para. 44; Centre communautaire juridique de l’Estrie v.
Sherbrooke (City), [1996] 3 S.C.R. 84 at paras. 9-12; Ryan at para. 52. A decision that is patently
unreasonable is so flawed that no amount of curial deference can justify letting it stand: Ryan at
para. 52. The result must almost border on the absurd: Voice at para. 18.
APPLICATION OF THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES TO THE PRESENT CASE
[46]   Having set out the guiding principles, I now turn to the specific circumstances of this appeal.
Background
[47] On January 31, 2000, James Davick was working at Klemke Mining Corporation when a 70-
ton truck he was operating was rear-ended by a loader. He submitted a claim for cervical strain and
impairment in memory retrieval, working memory and concentration. The WCB accepted
responsibility for the cervical strain only, terminating his benefits on May 12, 2000. Mr. Davick
appealed to the review body, which reached the same conclusion. On further appeal, the Appeals
Commission accepted that Mr. Davick sustained a mild traumatic brain injury as a result of the
accident, and was entitled to benefits: Decision No. 2003-235, Application No. 6486 (April 12,
2003).
[48] The WCB applied to Queen’s Bench to appeal the decision, pursuant to s. 13.4(1) of the
WCB Act. In particular, the WCB took issue with the Appeals Commission’s reliance on new
evidence presented at the Appeals Commission hearing by Dr. Flor-Henry, involving quantitative
electroencephalography (qEEG) or “brain mapping” testing.
[49] The reviewing judge dismissed the WCB’s appeal: Alberta (Workers’ Compensation Board)
v. Appeals Commission (2003), 350 A.R. 217, 2003 ABQB 1035. He characterized the WCB’s
grounds of appeal as questions of mixed fact and law, which did not fall under the statutory right
of appeal in s. 13.4(1). Proceeding with the application on the basis of judicial review, he employed
the functional and pragmatic analysis to determine the standard of review, selecting the patent
unreasonableness standard. Then, applying this standard, he concluded that the Appeals
Commission’s decision was not patently unreasonable.
[50]   The WCB raises the following issues in this appeal:
       1.      The reviewing judge erred in failing to characterize one of the questions
               before him as a question of law or jurisdiction.
       2.      The reviewing judge erred in finding that questions of mixed fact and law do
               not fall within the statutory right of appeal in s. 13.4(1) of the WCB Act.
                                                                                              Page: 11
       3.      The reviewing judge erred in his analysis of the four functional and
               pragmatic factors, arriving at the incorrect standard of review.
                                                                                                          2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
[51] These issues all relate to the functional and pragmatic analysis performed by the reviewing
judge, and will be analyzed in that context.
[52] On appeal, our standard of review for each of these alleged errors is correctness. The first
ground, the characterization of the question by the reviewing judge, is a question of law. An
erroneous characterization affects the judge’s determination whether the matter is a statutory appeal
or a judicial review, and has a significant impact on the functional and pragmatic analysis. The
second ground of appeal involves a legal question of statutory interpretation, subject to a correctness
standard of review: Pauli v. Ace Ina Insurance Co., supra, (C.A.) at para. 5. The reviewing judge’s
selection of the standard of judicial review, the third ground of appeal, is also reviewed on a
correctness standard: Dr. Q. at para. 43; Alberta (Minister of Municipal Affairs) v. Telus
Communications Inc. (2002), 312 A.R. 40, 2002 ABCA 199 at paras. 24-26.
Application of the functional and pragmatic approach
Part 1: Characterize the question
[53] Many alleged errors were advanced by the WCB before the reviewing judge. On appeal, the
WCB contends that the reviewing judge erred in the characterization of the following question:
       Whether the Appeals Commission failed to embark on the proper inquiry as to the
       reliability or scientific validity of the qEEG procedure and evidence advanced by Dr.
       Flor-Henry, and failed to inquire into his qualifications as an expert.
This question, the WCB submits, is one of law or jurisdiction, not mixed fact and law, as held by
the reviewing judge.
[54] In order to characterize a question, a court must get to the bottom of the applicant’s
complaint, and determine whether it raises an arguable issue of law or jurisdiction. To ascertain the
true nature of the WCB’s complaint, it is necessary to consider the context in which this issue arose.
[55] Dr. Flor-Henry’s evidence was presented for the first time at the Appeals Commission
hearing. The WCB was given notice of Dr. Flor-Henry’s attendance at the hearing and was familiar
with the brain-mapping techniques he used to diagnose brain injury. However, the WCB chose not
to attend the hearing. Consequently, Dr. Flor-Henry’s expert qualifications were not directly
challenged at the hearing, nor was evidence provided to contest the validity and reliability of brain-
mapping.
                                                                                               Page: 12
[56] Dr. Flor-Henry attended the hearing by conference call and his extensive 37-page resumé
was before the panel of commissioners. The Appeals Commission had previously considered brain-
                                                                                                           2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
mapping evidence proffered by Dr. Flor-Henry. See Application No. 4576, Claim No. 324-1875
(August 30, 2001). At the commencement of his evidence in the Davick hearing, Dr. Flor-Henry
shared his professional qualifications with the panel, and described his current position of
employment (A.B. II 16/14-25; 17/14-18/2). He outlined the information he reviewed before
commencing any testing, including numerous medical reports (A.B. II 18/13-19/8). A member of
the panel noted that “[t]he WCB doesn’t seem to place a very high regard on your methods of this
quantitative EEG”, to which Dr. Flor-Henry provided a response (A.B. II 42/25-44/4). Much of Dr.
Flor-Henry’s testimony concerned the methodology of qEEG testing.
[57] At the hearing, the Appeals Commission also considered written medical reports of at least
10 other medical experts. None of these experts were present, sworn or formally qualified to give
expert evidence. However, their opinions had been considered by the WCB claims adjudicator and
review body in the earlier stages of Mr. Davick’s claim, again without any formal procedures to
determine qualification or admissibility. The WCB does not take issue with the admission of any
of these other expert opinions by the Appeals Commission.
[58] The WCB challenges the Appeals Commission’s decision to admit Dr. Flor-Henry’s
evidence on two related grounds. First, the WCB contends admission of the evidence constituted a
breach of natural justice, which is an error of law or jurisdiction. While conceding the relevance of
the evidence, the WCB takes issue with its reliability and the fact that the Appeals Commission did
not follow strict qualification procedures to qualify Dr. Flor-Henry as an expert.
[59] In an administrative law setting, a failure to admit relevant evidence may render the
proceeding unfair in certain limited circumstances, resulting in a denial of natural justice: Univérsité
du Québec à Trois-Rivières v. Larocque, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 471 at para. 52. But the WCB offers no
authority to support the proposition that admitting relevant evidence, without further inquiry,
constitutes a denial of natural justice. The duty to be fair, or natural justice, has two fundamental
principles: the requirement that persons affected be heard before they are adversely impacted by
some action or decision, and the rule against bias: David P. Jones Q.C. & Ann S. de Villars,
Principles of Administrative Law, 4th ed. (Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 2004) at 249; David J.
Mullan, Administrative Law, (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2001) at 232. The WCB does not allege bias.
[60] In terms of the right to be heard, a tribunal must not abuse its discretion by basing its
decision on insufficient or no evidence, or on irrelevant considerations: Principles of Administrative
Law, supra, at 289. The decision-maker must consider relevant evidence, inform the parties of that
evidence, and allow the parties to comment on it and present argument on the whole of the case:
ibid. at 289, citing R. v. Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner, [1965] 1 Q.B. 456 at 488-90.
[61] The WCB concedes that Dr. Flor-Henry’s evidence was relevant and does not complain
about lack of notice or violation of any other aspect of the right to be heard. Accordingly, the
                                                                                              Page: 13
particular right the WCB alleges, to have the Appeals Commission qualify Dr. Flor-Henry and
inquire further into the reliability and scientific validity of brain-mapping, does not fit within the
                                                                                                          2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
established parameters of procedural fairness or natural justice. This issue is not arguable and does
not raise an appealable question of law or jurisdiction.
[62] The WCB’s second argument is that the Appeals Commission erred in failing to apply the
test for admission of expert evidence outlined by the Supreme Court in R. v. Mohan, [1994] 2
S.C.R. 9 at para. 17. The Mohan test requires four elements to be established as a precondition to
the admission of expert opinion evidence: 1) relevance; 2) necessity in assisting the trier of fact; 3)
the absence of any exclusionary rule; and 4) a properly qualified expert. Specifically, the WCB
alleges the Appeals Commission failed to fulfill the fourth criterion which, it contends, was an error
of law.
[63] This argument departs from established principles of administrative law. As a general rule,
strict rules of evidence do not apply to administrative tribunals, unless expressly prescribed: Toronto
(City) v. CUPE, Local 79 (1982), 35 O.R. (2d) 545 at 556 (C.A.). See also Principles of
Administrative Law at 289-90; Sara Blake, Administrative Law in Canada, 3rd ed., (Markham, Ont.:
Butterworths, 2001) at 56-57; Robert W. MacAulay, Q.C. & James L.H. Sprague, Practice and
Procedure before Administrative Tribunals, looseleaf (Toronto: Carswell, 2004) at 17-2. While rules
relating to the inadmissibility of evidence (such as the Mohan test) in a court of law are generally
fixed and formal, an administrative tribunal is seldom, if ever, required to apply those strict rules:
Practice and Procedure before Administrative Tribunals at 17-11. “Tribunals are entitled to act on
any material which is logically probative, even though it is not evidence in a court of law”: T.A.
Miller Ltd. v. Minister of Housing and Local Government, [1968] 1 W.L.R. 992 at 995 (C.A.);
Trenchard v. Secretary of State for the Environment, [1997] E.W.J. No. 1118 at para. 28 (C.A.).
See also Bortolotti v. Ontario (Ministry of Housing) (1977), 15 O.R. (2d) 617 (C.A.).
[64] This general rule applies even in the absence of a specific legislative direction to that effect.
While many statutes stipulate that a particular tribunal is not constrained by the rules of evidence
applicable to courts of civil and criminal jurisdiction, “these various provisions do not however alter
the common law; rather they reflect the common law position: in general, the normal rules of
evidence do not apply to administrative tribunals and agencies”: Administrative Law, supra, at 279-
80.
[65] Although the WCB Act does not expressly state that strict rules of evidence do not apply, two
of its provisions support the application of this rule in respect of Appeals Commission proceedings.
Pursuant to ss. 13.2(1) and (2), the Appeals Commission must consider the records of the claims
adjudicator and the review body relating to the claim. Notably, these records often contain medical
documents and opinion evidence, all unsworn, in the form of hearsay and lacking expert
qualification or other admissibility procedures. In addition, s. 13.2(6) provides that the Appeals
Commission “shall give all persons with a direct interest in the matter under appeal ... an opportunity
                                                                                              Page: 14
to present any new or additional evidence” [emphasis added].These provisions are inconsistent with
the application of strict rules of evidence.
                                                                                                          2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
[66] As strict rules of evidence do not apply to Appeals Commission hearings, it follows that the
Appeals Commission’s failure to formally qualify Dr. Flor-Henry to give expert evidence does not
give rise to an arguable question of law or jurisdiction. The record reflects that the Appeals
Commission considered Dr. Flor-Henry’s resumé, professional qualifications and testing
methodology, and concluded that his evidence deserved some weight. The Appeals Commission did
not rely on this evidence alone, but found it supported the evidence of other medical practitioners:
Decision No. 2003-235, supra, at 10.
[67] It appears, therefore, that the WCB’s real complaint is with the weight the Appeals
Commission placed on Dr. Flor-Henry’s evidence. In an administrative law context, “[r]elevant
expert evidence is admissible. Any frailties in the facts or hypotheses upon which an opinion is
based, or in the qualifications of the expert, affect the weight of the evidence, but not its
admissibility”: Administrative Law in Canada, supra, at 59, citing Canada (A.G.) v. Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission (1980), 113 D.L.R. (3d) 295 at 306-07 (F.C.T.D.); University of Sask.
Engineering Students Society v. Sask. (Human Rights Commission) (1983), 24 Sask. R. 167 at 176
(Q.B.).
[68] The reviewing judge correctly concluded that it was not open to the WCB to argue that the
Appeals Commission was bound to apply the admissibility criteria outlined in Mohan, or that a
failure to apply these criteria constituted a denial of natural justice. Rather, the arguable issue
involved the weight the Appeals Commission placed on this evidence, which he characterized as a
question of mixed fact and law: at para. 20.
[69] Weighing evidence is generally characterized as a question of fact, as factual conclusions
result from the weight assigned to the underlying evidence: Housen at para. 23. See also R. v.
Spencer, 2002 ABCA 32 at para. 13. There is a legal aspect to the Appeals Commission’s weighing
of evidence because it had to decide whether Mr. Davick suffered an injury in the accident that
entitled him to benefits under workers’ compensation legislation. However, the question raised by
the WCB in this case, the weight given to expert medical evidence, does not have the traditional
earmarks of a legal issue: there is no legal principle or test involved and the question is specific to
the case, lacking in precedential value: Southam at para. 37. Nor is there any extricable legal
question. The question in issue is highly fact intensive, attracting a more deferential standard of
review: Dr. Q. at para 34.
Part 2: Examine the privative clause or statutory appeal provision
[70] As the second ground of appeal, the WCB takes issue with the reviewing judge’s finding that
questions of mixed fact and law do not automatically fall within s. 13.4(1).
                                                                                              Page: 15
[71] As discussed above, the statutory right of appeal in s. 13.4(1) applies to questions of law or
jurisdiction. Questions of mixed fact and law are not appealable unless there is an extricable legal
                                                                                                          2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
question. There is no such question in this case, and the reviewing judge properly held at para. 26
that the questions the WCB raised fell outside the statutory right of appeal. At para. 27, he correctly
noted that since the “subject to” clause in 13.1(1) does not apply to the alleged errors in this case,
the Appeals Commission’s decision is protected by the full privative clause in s. 13.1, signalling a
more deferential standard of review.
Part 3: Consider the tribunal’s expertise
[72] The Appeals Commission has been constituted with particular expertise in achieving the
aims of the WCB Act because of its experience and non-judicial means of implementing the
legislation and policy. As such, greater deference will be accorded to its decisions: Pushpanathan
at para. 32. Because the Appeals Commission is regularly called on to make findings of fact in a
distinctive legislative context, it can be said to have gained a measure of relative institutional
expertise: Dr. Q. at para. 29.
[73] The question in issue in this case, the weight given to expert medical evidence, falls within
the Appeals Commission’s relative expertise. The Appeals Commission hears and decides
approximately 1100 appeals each year, the vast majority of which involve medical opinion evidence.
It has more expertise than the courts in considering and weighing this medical evidence to determine
a worker’s entitlement to benefits under the workers’ compensation scheme, as the reviewing judge
noted at para. 28. This factor indicates a high degree of deference.
Part 4: Examine the purpose of the statute and the provision in particular
[74] The Appeals Commission is not required to undertake a polycentric analysis, taking into
account broad policy objectives, or the public interest; rather, it routinely resolves disputes among
workers, employers and the WCB. Nevertheless, one of the principal purposes of the WCB Act is
to provide a system of compensation independent of court involvement, as recognized by the
reviewing judge at paras. 29-31. The Appeals Commission’s role is central to this purpose,
indicating deference to the Appeals Commission’s decision. In addition, the WCB Act is properly
described as a policy-laden statute, further suggesting deference: Voice at para. 18; Alberta
(Workers’ Compensation Board) v. Alberta (Workers’ Compensation Appeals Commission), 2005
ABCA 235 at para. 28.
Select the standard of review
[75] The presence of a fact-intensive question protected by a full privative clause, the Appeals
Commission’s experience and particular expertise in evaluating medical evidence and the WCB
Act’s purpose of providing an efficient and rapid process of compensation independent of court
involvement, indicate that a high level of deference should be accorded to the Appeals
                                                                                               Page: 16
Commission’s decision, in this case, on this question. The reviewing judge correctly selected the
patent unreasonableness standard of review.
                                                                                                           2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
[76] While the WCB alleges the reviewing judge erred in selecting the patently unreasonable
standard, it does not take issue with his application of that standard to the Appeals Commission’s
decision. It is therefore not necessary to consider his application of the standard of review or his
determination that the Appeals Commission’s decision on this question was not patently
unreasonable.
DISPOSITION
[77] In summary, questions of mixed fact and law from which no legal question can be extricated
are not appealable under the statutory right of appeal in s. 13.4(1) of the WCB Act. The question at
issue in this appeal was properly characterized by the reviewing judge as highly fact-intensive and
subject to the privative clause in s. 13.1. Finally, an analysis of the functional and pragmatic factors
indicates that the standard of patent unreasonableness was appropriate for review of the question in
issue in this case. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
APPEAL BY THE EMPLOYER
[78] Mr. Davick’s former employer, Klemke Mining Corporation, made its first appearance in
this matter before the reviewing judge. In that proceeding, Klemke supported the WCB’s grounds
of appeal, and raised one additional ground. It alleged that it did not receive adequate notice of the
new evidence to be introduced by Dr. Flor-Henry at the Appeals Commission hearing. The
reviewing judge held that sufficient notice had been given: at para. 4. Klemke appeals that finding.
[79] The Appeals Commission provided Klemke with a hearing notice well in advance of the
hearing date, stating that Dr. Flor-Henry would be presenting evidence. It also sent an appeal
document package to the parties. Dr. Flor-Henry’s report was not included because it was not
submitted to the Appeals Commission until two days before the hearing. It should be noted that the
WCB received the same information as Klemke, but did not allege inadequate notice.
[80] Notwithstanding receipt of the hearing notice indicating that Dr. Flor-Henry would be in
attendance by conference call, Klemke chose not to contact the Appeals Commission or the WCB
before the hearing, to indicate an interest in attending or to inquire about Dr. Flor-Henry’s evidence.
Nor did Klemke appear at the hearing.
[81] Klemke argues the Appeals Commission contravened the rules of natural justice, in failing
to provide “sufficient” or “adequate” notice of the nature of the opinion that would be expressed by
Dr. Flor-Henry and failing to provide a copy of Dr. Flor-Henry’s report to it in advance of the
hearing.
                                                                                           Page: 17
[82] Sufficiency or adequacy of notice is a question of procedural fairness or natural justice. A
finding of inadequate or no notice renders the tribunal’s decision void: Wiswell v. Winnipeg
                                                                                                       2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
(Metropolitan), [1965] S.C.R. 512. The relevant factors to be considered were recently reiterated
in Congrégation des témoins de Jéhovah de St-Jérôme-Lafontaine v. Lafontaine (Village), [2004]
2 S.C.R. 650 at para. 5, citing Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [1999]
2 S.C.R. 817:
       (1) the nature of the decision and the decision-making process employed by the
       public organ;
       (2) the nature of the statutory scheme and the precise statutory provisions pursuant
       to which the public body operates;
       (3) the importance of the decision to the individuals affected;
       (4) the legitimate expectations of the party challenging the decision; and
       (5) the nature of the deference accorded to the body.
[83] As to the third and fourth factors, it should be noted that Klemke has a more limited interest
in this process than the WCB or Mr. Davick. Here, the ultimate dispute is between the worker and
the WCB, as any awarded benefits are paid from WCB coffers. The employer has an indirect
financial interest only, through a possible increase in WCB premiums.
[84] Dealing with the remaining factors, while the Appeals Commission performs an adjudicative
function, the WCB Act does not require it to provide copies of expert opinions to interested parties
prior to a hearing. Section 13.1(3) authorizes the Appeals Commission to set its own procedures,
indicating that deference should be accorded to the Appeals Commission in its decision not to supply
the report or more detailed information in advance of the hearing.
[85] In these circumstances, the Appeals Commission was not remiss in failing to provide Klemke
with the report and the reviewing judge did not err in finding sufficient notice had been given.
Klemke’s appeal is also dismissed.
Appeal heard on June 10, 2005
Reasons filed at Edmonton, Alberta
this 25th day of August, 2005
                                                                       Page: 18
                                                                   Fruman J.A.
                                                                                   2005 ABCA 276 (CanLII)
                                 I concur:
                                             Authorized to sign for: Picard J.A.
                                 I concur:
                                             Authorized to sign for: Ritter J.A.
Appearances:
J.J. Bodnar
        for the Appellant
S.R. Hermiston
       for the Respondent
H.L. Goldford
      for James Davick
C.W. Neuman
      for Klemke Mining Corporation
Pushpanathan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 982
Veluppillai Pushpanathan (Pushpanathan Veluppillai)                   Appellant
                                                                                            1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
v.
The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration                           Respondent
and
The Canadian Council for Refugees                                     Intervener
Indexed as: Pushpanathan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
File No.: 25173.
1997: October 9; 1998: June 4.
Present: L’Heureux-Dubé, Sopinka,* Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Major and Bastarache
JJ.
on appeal from the federal court of appeal
                Administrative law -- Standard of review -- Immigration and Refugee Board
-- Standard of review applicable to Board’s decision.
      *
          Sopinka J. took no part in the judgment.
                                             -2-
            Immigration -- Convention refugee -- Exclusion -- Refugee Convention not
applicable to those who are “guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations” -- Individual guilty of serious narcotics offence in Canada claiming
                                                                                             1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
refugee status -- Whether claim for refugee status should be denied -- Meaning of phrase
“guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations” --
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Can. T.S. 1969 No. 6, Art. 1F(c) .
            In 1985, the appellant claimed refugee status under the UN Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees (“Convention”), as implemented by the Immigration
Act, but his claim was never adjudicated as he was granted permanent residence status
in Canada under an administrative program. The appellant was later arrested in Canada
and charged with conspiracy to traffic in a narcotic. At the time of his arrest, he was a
member of a group in possession of heroin with a street value of some $10 million. He
pleaded guilty and was sentenced to eight years in prison. In 1991, the appellant, then
on parole, renewed his claim for Convention refugee status.            Employment and
Immigration Canada subsequently issued a conditional deportation order against him
under ss. 27(1)(d) and 32.1(2) of the Act. Since the deportation pursuant to those
sections is conditional upon a determination that the claimant is not a Convention
refugee, the appellant’s claim was referred to the Convention Refugee Determination
Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board. The Board decided that the appellant
was not a refugee by virtue of the exclusion clause in Art. 1F(c) of the Convention,
which provides that the provisions of the Convention do not apply to a person who “has
been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations”. The
Federal Court, Trial Division dismissed the appellant’s application for judicial review
and certified the following as a serious question of general importance for consideration:
Is it an error of law for the Refugee Division to interpret Art. 1F(c) of the Convention
to exclude from refugee status an individual guilty of a serious narcotics offence
                                               -3-
committed in Canada? The Federal Court of Appeal answered “no” and upheld the
judgment of the Trial Division.
                                                                                                1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
            Held (Cory and Major JJ. dissenting): The appeal should be allowed.
            Per L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, McLachlin and Bastarache JJ.: A pragmatic
and functional analysis of the Immigration Act leads to the conclusion that, in this case,
the correctness standard should be applied to the Board’s decision. The use of the words
“a serious question of general importance” in s. 83(1) of the Act is the key to the
legislative intention as to the standard of review. The general importance of the question
-- that is, its applicability to numerous future cases -- warrants the review by a court of
justice. Moreover, the purpose of Art. 1F(c) of the Convention is to protect human rights
and the Board appears to enjoy no relative expertise in that matter. The Board’s
expertise is in accurately evaluating whether the criteria for refugee status have been met
and, in particular, in assessing the nature of the risk of persecution faced by the applicant
if returned to his country of origin. The relationship between the Board’s expertise and
Art. 1F(c) is thus remote. Nor is there any indication that the Board’s experience with
previous factual determinations of risk of persecution gives it any added insight into the
meaning or desirable future development of that provision. The legal principle here is
easily separable from the undisputed facts of the case and would undoubtedly have a
wide precedential value. The factual expertise enjoyed by the Board does not aid it in
the interpretation of this general legal principle. Furthermore, the Board itself is not
responsible for policy evolution. Finally, the absence of a strong privative clause is
another factor militating against deference.
            Since the purpose of the Immigration Act incorporating Art. 1F(c) is to
implement the underlying Convention, an interpretation consistent with Canada’s
                                             -4-
obligations under the Convention must be adopted. The wording of the Convention and
the rules of treaty interpretation are therefore applicable to determine the meaning of
Art. 1F(c) in domestic law. The general words “purposes and principles of the United
                                                                                             1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
Nations” in Art. 1F(c) are not so unambiguous as to foreclose examination of other
indications of the proper scope of the provision. The purpose and context of the
Convention as a whole, as well as the purpose of the individual provision in question as
suggested by the travaux préparatoires, provide helpful interpretative guidelines.
            The Convention has a human rights character.           While Art. 1 of the
Convention defines who is a refugee, the general purpose of Art. 1F is to exclude ab
initio those who are not bona fide refugees at the time of their claim for refugee status.
The purpose of Art. 33 of the Convention, by contrast, is to allow for the refoulement of
a bona fide refugee to his native country where he poses a danger to the security of the
country of refuge, or to the safety of the community. Although all of the acts described
in Art. 1F could presumably fall within the grounds for refoulement described in Art. 33,
the two are distinct. Article 1F(c) is not limited to acts performed outside the country
of refuge. The relevant criterion under Art. 1F(c) is the time at which refugee status is
obtained and any act performed before a person has obtained that status must be
considered relevant pursuant to Art. 1F(c). The rationale of Art. 1F of the Convention
is that those who are responsible for the persecution which creates refugees should not
enjoy the benefits of a convention designed to protect those refugees. In the light of the
general purposes of the Convention and the indications in the travaux préparatoires as
to the relative ambit of Arts. 1F(a) and 1F(c), the purpose of Art. 1F(c) is to exclude
those individuals responsible for serious, sustained or systemic violations of fundamental
human rights which amount to persecution in a non-war setting. Article 1F(c) may be
applicable to non-state actors. Although it may be more difficult for a non-state actor
to perpetrate human rights violations on a scale amounting to persecution without the
                                               -5-
state thereby implicitly adopting those acts, the possibility should not be excluded a
priori.
                                                                                                1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
            Article 1F(c) will thus be applicable where there is consensus in international
law that particular acts constitute sufficiently serious and sustained violations of
fundamental human rights as to amount to persecution, or are explicitly recognized as
contrary to the UN purposes and principles. First, where a widely accepted international
agreement or UN resolution explicitly declares that the commission of certain acts is
contrary to the UN purposes and principles, then there is a strong indication that those
acts will fall within Art. 1F(c). Where such declarations or resolutions represent a
reasonable consensus of the international community, then that designation should be
considered determinative. A second category of acts which fall within the scope of
Art. 1F(c) are those which a court is able, for itself, to characterize as serious, sustained
and systemic violations of fundamental human rights constituting persecution. Where
the rule which has been violated is very near the core of the most valued principles of
human rights and is recognized as immediately subject to international condemnation
and punishment, then even an isolated violation could lead to an exclusion under
Art. 1F(c). The status of a violated rule as a universal jurisdiction offence would be a
compelling indication that even an isolated violation constitutes persecution. A serious
and sustained violation of human rights amounting to persecution may also arise from
a particularly egregious factual situation, including the extent of the complicity of the
claimant.
            Conspiring to traffic in a narcotic is not a violation of Art. 1F(c). Even
though international trafficking in drugs is an extremely serious problem that the UN has
taken extraordinary measures to eradicate, in the absence of clear indications that the
international community recognizes drug trafficking as a sufficiently serious and
                                              -6-
sustained violation of fundamental human rights as to amount to persecution, either
through a specific designation as an act contrary to the UN purposes and principles, or
through international instruments which otherwise indicate that trafficking is a serious
                                                                                              1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
violation of fundamental human rights, individuals should not be deprived of the
essential protections contained in the Convention for having committed those acts.
Article 33 of the Convention and its counterparts in the Immigration Act, ss. 53 and 19,
are designed to deal with the expulsion of individuals who present a threat to Canadian
society, and the grounds for such a determination are wider and more clearly articulated.
The Minister, therefore, is not precluded from taking appropriate measures to ensure the
safety of Canadians. Lastly, the presence of Art. 1F(b), which excludes from the
protection of the Convention a person who has committed a serious non-political crime
outside the country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee, suggests
that even a serious non-political crime such as drug trafficking should not be included
in Art. 1F(c).
            Per Cory and Major JJ. (dissenting): What constitutes an act “contrary to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations” for the purposes of the Convention
is a question of law. While the Immigration and Refugee Board must be accorded some
deference in its findings of fact, that deference should not be extended to a finding on a
question of law. The Board cannot be said to have any particular expertise in legal
matters. Therefore the issue is whether the Board’s decision on the question of law was
correct.
            The category of acts contrary to the UN purposes and principles should not
be restricted to those expressly declared to be so. A domestic tribunal is entitled, upon
considering the relevant material, to find that the phrase includes other types of acts.
While not every UN initiative is so central to its purposes and principles that any act
                                               -7-
which violates or undermines those initiatives is contrary to the UN purposes and
principles, some problems have been recognized by the international community as
being so serious and of such a nature that they pose a threat to the entire international
                                                                                                1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
community and the principles of its social order. Conduct which directly or significantly
contributes to these problems or which violates agreed principles or obligations with
respect to them should, in appropriate cases, be regarded as contrary to the UN purposes
and principles.
            While serious or systematic violation of human rights would be conduct that
is contrary to the UN purposes and principles, it is not the only conduct that should be
considered in interpreting Art. 1F(c) of the Convention. The determination of what
constitutes an act contrary to the UN purposes and principles need not be limited to the
consideration of one purpose notwithstanding the fact that it is important and that the
Convention is a human rights instrument. Although the purpose of the instrument will
be taken into account in interpreting its provisions, it must not restrict the content of the
exclusion so as to limit it to conduct relating directly to human rights. All of the UN
purposes and principles should be considered. Furthermore, some types of conduct may
indirectly but significantly contribute to the violation of human rights.
            The Convention should be interpreted in a manner consistent with the
contemporary context. As international law develops, the content of a phrase such as
“acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations” must be capable of
development. Courts should recognize that the guidance provided by interpretive aids
such as the travaux préparatoires and subsequent practice must be considered in the
light of the current state of the law and international understandings. The travaux
préparatoires should be taken into account, yet this does not mean that courts are
restricted to a precise interpretation of that material. Rather, consideration should be
                                              -8-
given to the underlying principles and concerns that they express with the aim of giving
them a contemporary meaning. Similarly, with regard to state practice, some consistency
should be maintained with the line of interpretation revealed by the practice of state
                                                                                               1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
parties, but that interpretation must be adjusted to take into account evolving ideas and
principles in international law.
            Although traditionally it was thought that the UN purposes and principles,
like international law generally, are addressed only to states, and can be violated only
by state actors, it is now generally accepted that an individual acting in his private
capacity can commit acts which constitute violations of international law.
            Significant trafficking in a dangerous illicit drug can constitute an act which
is contrary to the UN purposes and principles and would thus form the basis of exclusion
from refugee status pursuant to Art. 1F(c). The rationale for including illicit drug
trafficking in Art. 1F(c) is the reality that this activity is recognized, both legally and
practically, as an activity that not only is a domestic criminal offence, but occasions very
serious and significant harm in the international community. The categorization of an
act as an international crime or crime of international concern is not determinative of the
question. The additional factor which distinguishes illicit drug trafficking from some
other “crimes of international concern” or UN initiatives is the nature and gravity of the
harm to people in countries around the world and to the international community as a
whole that results from this activity. The harm caused by the illicit traffic in drugs is of
the utmost severity. This illicit traffic takes a dreadful toll on the lives of individuals,
families and communities. It destabilizes and retards the development of whole nations
and regions. Drug trafficking now also threatens peace and security at a national and
international level.     It affects the sovereignty of some states, the right of
self-determination and democratic government, economic, social and political stability
                                               -9-
and the enjoyment of human rights. Many of the UN purposes and principles are
undermined, directly or indirectly, by the international trade in illicit drugs. It is on this
basis that at least some individuals who participate in and contribute to this activity must
                                                                                                 1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
be considered to be committing acts contrary to the UN purposes and principles.
             The statements on this subject by the international community, including the
relevant conventions and General Assembly resolutions, reflect an acute awareness of
the nature and gravity of the problem, and a severe condemnation of the activities that
give rise to the problem. While the UN has never specifically declared that drug
trafficking is contrary to its purposes and principles, it has clearly and frequently
recognized and denounced the evils of this activity. There are also many statements
reflecting an awareness that trafficking threatens essential aspects of the UN purposes
and principles. The statements of the UN and of the international community lead
inexorably to the conclusion that those engaged in trafficking in illicit drugs are
responsible, directly or indirectly, for harms that are so widespread and so severe that
they undermine the very purposes and principles upon which the UN is based. It follows
that their actions must be considered “acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations” and thus come within the exclusion set out in Art. 1F(c). However, not
all acts within the broad category of illicit drug trafficking constitute acts contrary to the
UN purposes and principles. Distinctions must be drawn based on the type and scale of
activities. It is those actually engaged in trafficking who reap most of the profits, cause
the greatest harm and therefore bear the greatest responsibility for perpetuating the illicit
trade. Those who are merely consumers are often victims themselves and do not bear
the same responsibility.
             Here, the appellant was an important participant in a major drug operation
with an organized group trafficking in heroin. He trafficked on a large scale in the most
                                             - 10 -
debilitating of drugs. While not every domestic narcotics offence will provide a basis
for exclusion under Art. 1F(c), in light of the seriousness of the appellant’s crime he
should, as a result of his actions, be excluded.
                                                                                          1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
Cases Cited
By Bastarache J.
            Considered:      Sivasamboo v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
Immigration), [1995] 1 F.C. 741; referred to: Pasiechnyk v. Saskatchewan (Workers’
Compensation Board), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 890; U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault, [1988] 2
S.C.R. 1048; Canada (Director of Investigation and Research) v. Southam Inc., [1997]
1 S.C.R. 748; United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 579 v.
Bradco Construction Ltd., [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316; Pezim v. British Columbia
(Superintendent of Brokers), [1994] 2 S.C.R. 557; National Corn Growers Assn. v.
Canada (Import Tribunal), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1324; Canada (Attorney General) v. Mossop,
[1993] 1 S.C.R. 554; Yuen v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1994]
F.C.J. No. 1045 (QL); Franco v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration),
[1994] F.C.J. No. 1011 (QL); Sornalingam v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
Immigration) (1996), 107 F.T.R. 128; Vetter v. Canada (Minister of Employment and
Immigration) (1994), 89 F.T.R. 17; Ismaeli v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
Immigration), [1995] F.C.J. No. 573 (QL); Connor v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship
and Immigration) (1995), 95 F.T.R. 66; Ross v. New Brunswick School District No. 15,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 825; University of British Columbia v. Berg, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 353;
Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689; Thomson v. Thomson, [1994]
3 S.C.R. 551; Moreno v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1994] 1
F.C. 298; Sivakumar v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1994] 1
                                               - 11 -
F.C. 433; United States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Tehran, Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports 1980, p. 3; Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276
                                                                                                 1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
(1970), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
By Cory J. (dissenting)
             Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689.
Statutes and Regulations Cited
Charter of the International Military Tribunal, 82 U.N.T.S. 280.
Charter of the United Nations, Can. T.S. 1945 No. 7, preamble, Arts. 1, 2.
Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
    Punishment, Can. T.S. 1987 No. 36, Art. 3(1).
Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1019 U.N.T.S. 175.
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Can. T.S. 1969 No. 6, Arts. 1F, 33.
Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-34, s. 423(1)(d).
Draft Articles on the Draft Code of Crimes Against the Peace and Security of Mankind,
     UN Doc. A/46/405, 11 September 1991, Art. 25(1).
Draft Convention against Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and
     Related Activities, G.A. Res. 39/141, 14 December 1984, Annex, Art. 2.
Draft Statute of the International Criminal Court, UN Doc. A/CN.4/L.491/Rev.2.
Immigration Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-2, ss. 2(1) ‘‘Convention refugee’’ [rep. & sub. c. 28
    (4th Supp.), s. 1(2)], 3, 19(1)(c) [rep. & sub. 1992, c. 49, s. 11], (c.1)(i) [en. idem;
    repl. 1995, c. 15, s. 2], (e) [rep. & sub. 1992, c. 49, s. 11], (f) [idem], (g), (j) [en.
    c. 30 (3rd Supp.), s. 3], (k) [en. 1992, c. 49, s. 11], (l) [idem], 27(1)(d), 32.1(2) [en.
    c. 28 (4th Supp.), s. 12], 53(1) [rep. & sub. 1992, c. 49, s. 43], 61(2) [en. c. 10 (2nd
    Supp.), s. 3; rep. & sub. c. 28 (4th Supp.), s. 18; rep. & sub. 1992, c. 49, s. 50],
    67(1) [rep. & sub. c. 28 (4th Supp.), s. 18], 82.1(1) [en. idem, s. 19; rep. & sub.
    1990, c. 8, s. 53; rep. & sub. 1992, c. 49, s. 73], 83(1) [rep. & sub. c. 28 (4th
    Supp.), s. 19; rep. & sub. 1992, c. 49, s. 73].
                                           - 12 -
International Opium Convention, 8 L.N.T.S. 187.
Narcotic Control Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. N-1, s. 4(1).
Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 976 U.N.T.S. 3.
                                                                                        1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 520 U.N.T.S. 204.
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
     Substances, UN Doc. E/Conf.82/15, 19 December 1988, Preamble, Art. 3(1), (5).
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Can. T.S. 1980 No. 37, Arts. 31, 32.
Authors Cited
Bassiouni, M. Cherif. “Critical Reflections on International and National Control of
     Drugs” (1990), 18 Denv. J. Int’l L. & Pol’y 311.
Bassiouni, M. Cherif, ed. International Criminal Law, vol. 1, Crimes. Dobbs Ferry,
     N.Y.: Transnational Publishers, 1986.
Canada. Correctional Service. Research Branch. Homicide, Sex, Robbery and Drug
    Offenders in Federal Corrections: An End-of-1996 Review. By Laurence L.
    Motiuk and Raymond L. Belcourt, January 1997.
Canada. Statistics Canada. Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. An Examination of
    Recidivism in Relation to Offence Histories and Offender Profiles. By Gayle
    Campbell. Ottawa: The Centre, August 1993.
Canada. Statistics Canada. Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. Canadian Crime
    Statistics 1993. Ottawa: The Centre, 1994.
Canada. Statistics Canada. Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. Canadian Crime
    Statistics 1994. Ottawa: The Centre, 1995.
Canada. Statistics Canada. Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. Juristat, vol. 14,
    No. 6, January 1994.
Canada. Statistics Canada. Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. Juristat, vol. 17,
    Nos. 8 and 9, 1997.
Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse. The Costs of Substance Abuse in Canada:
    Highlights. A Cost Estimation Study by Eric Single et al. Ottawa: The Centre,
    1996.
Cane, Peter. An Introduction to Administrative Law, 3rd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
     1996.
                                            - 13 -
Collected Travaux Préparatoires of the 1951 Geneva Convention Relating to the Status
     of Refugees, vol. III, The Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees
     and Stateless Persons, 2-25 July 1951, Geneva, Switzerland. Compiled by Alex
     Takkenberg and Christopher C. Tahbaz. Amsterdam: Dutch Refugee Council,
     1989.
                                                                                            1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
Goodwin-Gill, Guy S. The Refugee in International Law, 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon
    Press, 1996.
Grahl-Madsen, Atle. The Status of Refugees in International Law, vol. 1. Leyden,
     Netherlands: Sijthoff, 1966.
Hathaway, James C. The Law of Refugee Status. Toronto: Butterworths, 1991.
Kindred, Hugh M., et al. International Law Chiefly as Interpreted and Applied in
     Canada, 5th ed. Toronto: Edmond Montgomery, 1993.
McKenzie, Diane. Canadian Profile: Alcohol, Tobacco & Other Drugs. Ottawa:
   Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse & Addiction Research Foundation of
   Ontario, 1997.
Murphy, John F. “International Crimes”. In Christopher C. Joyner, ed., The United
    Nations and International Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997,
    362.
Sproule, D. W., and Paul St-Denis. “The UN Drug Trafficking Convention: An
     Ambitious Step”, in Canadian Yearbook of International Law 1989, vol. 27.
     Vancouver: Publication Centre, University of British Columbia, 1990, 263.
Stewart, David P. “Internationalizing The War on Drugs: The UN Convention Against
     Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances” (1990), 18 Denv. J.
     Int’l L. & Pol’y 387.
United Nations. Conference for the Adoption of a Convention against Illicit Traffic in
     Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Final Act of the United Nations
     Conference for the Adoption of a Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
     Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, UN Doc. E/Conf.82/14.
United Nations. Economic and Social Council. Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
     Economic and Social Consequences of Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking: An
     Interim Report, UN Doc. E/CN.7/1995/3, 9 November 1994.
United Nations. Economic and Social Council. Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
     Reduction of Illicit Demand for Drugs: Prevention Strategies Including
     Community Participation -- World situation with respect to drug abuse: Report
     of the Secretariat, UN Doc. E/CN.7/1995/5, 10 January 1995.
United Nations. Economic and Social Council. Eleventh Session. Social Committee.
     Summary Record of the 166th Meeting Held at the Palais des Nations, Geneva, on
     Monday, 7 August 1950, UN Doc. E/AC.7/SR.166, 22 August 1950.
United Nations. Economic and Social Council. France: Amendment to the draft
     convention relating to the status of refugees, UN Doc. E/L. 82, 29 July 1950.
                                           - 14 -
United Nations. Economic and Social Council. Principles on the Effective Prevention
     and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions,
     E/RES/1989/65, 24 May 1989, Art. 5.
United Nations. General Assembly. Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
                                                                                         1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     International Terrorism, GA Res. 49/60, 17 February 1995, Annex, Art. 2.
United Nations. General Assembly. Declaration on Principles of International Law
     Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States in Accordance
     with the Charter of the United Nations, GA Res. 2625 (XXV), 24 October 1970,
     Annex.
United Nations. General Assembly. Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from
     Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
     Punishment, GA Res. 3452 (XXX), 9 December 1975, Art. 2.
United Nations. General Assembly. Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from
     Enforced Disappearance, GA Res. 47/133, 18 December 1992, Arts. 1(1), 8.
United Nations. General Assembly. Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration
     on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, GA Res. 51/210, 16 January
     1997, Annex, Art. 2.
United Nations. General Assembly. Political Declaration and Global Programme of
     Action on international co-operation against illicit production, supply, demand,
     trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, GA
     Res. S-17/2, 23 February 1990, Annex, preamble, Arts. 1, 2, 8.
United Nations. General Assembly. Renewing the United Nations: A Programme for
     Reform, UN Doc. A/51/950, 14 July 1997.
United Nations. General Assembly. Report of the International Law Commission on the
     work of its forty-second session, UN Doc. A/45/10, in the Yearbook of the
     International Law Commission 1990, vol. II, Part Two. New York: United
     Nations, 1993, 1.
United Nations. General Assembly. Resolution. International action to combat drug
     abuse and illicit production and trafficking, GA Res. 52/92, 26 January 1998.
United Nations. General Assembly. Resolution. International campaign against traffic
     in drugs, GA Res. 41/127, 4 December 1986.
United Nations. General Assembly. Resolution. International Drug Abuse Control
     Strategy, GA Res. 36/168, 16 December 1981.
United Nations. International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking.
     Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse
     Control and Declaration of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit
     Trafficking, UN Doc. A/Conf.133/12, pp. 3 and 88.
United Nations. International Drug Control Programme. World Drug Report. Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, 1997.
                                            - 15 -
United Nations. International Law Commission. Report of the International Law
     Commission on the work of its forty-eighth session, 6 May-26 July 1996. Official
     record of the General Assembly -- Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 10, UN Doc.
     A/51/10.
                                                                                            1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
United Nations. Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees. Handbook on
     Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status. Geneva: UNHCR,
     1992.
United States. Department of Justice. Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice
     Statistics. Drugs and Crime Facts, 1994. Rockville, M.D.: U.S. Department of
     Justice, June 1995.
            APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal, [1996] 2 F.C. 49,
191 N.R. 247, [1995] F.C.J. No. 1716 (QL), affirming a decision of the Federal Court,
Trial Division, [1993] F.C.J. No. 870 (QL), dismissing the appellant’s application for
judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, [1993] C.R.D.D.
No. 12 (QL) (sub nom. D. (N.U.) (Re)), rejecting his claim for Convention refugee status.
Appeal allowed, Cory and Major JJ. dissenting.
            Lorne Waldman and Jaswinder Singh Gill, for the appellant.
            Urszula Kaczmarczyk and Bonnie Boucher, for the respondent.
            David Matas and Sharryn Aiken, for the intervener.
            The judgment of L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, McLachlin and Bastarache JJ.
was delivered by
//Bastarache J.//
                                                - 16 -
1               BASTARACHE J. — This appeal raises two important questions relating to
    who may be admitted to Canada as a refugee: first, the proper standard of judicial
    review over decisions of the Immigration and Refugee Board; second, the meaning of
                                                                                                 1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
    the exclusion from refugee status of those who are “guilty of acts contrary to the
    purposes and principles of the United Nations”. That exclusion, in Article 1F(c) of the
    United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Can. T.S. 1969 No. 6, is
    incorporated into Canadian law by s. 2(1) of the Immigration Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-2,
    requiring a definition of that phrase with respect to the domestic law of Canada.
    I. Factual Background
2               The relevant facts in this case are not the subject of dispute. The appellant,
    Veluppillai Pushpanathan, left his native Sri Lanka in 1983 and spent time in India and
    France before arriving in Canada, via Italy, on March 21, 1985. He claimed Convention
    refugee status under the Immigration Act (formerly Immigration Act, 1976, S.C. 1976-
    77, c. 52). The basis of the claim was that he had previously been detained by the Sri
    Lankan authorities for his political activities and would likely suffer persecution if
    returned to his country of citizenship. This claim was never adjudicated, however, as the
    appellant was granted permanent residence status in May 1987 under an administrative
    program, and was entitled to remain in Canada on that basis.
3               In December 1987, the appellant was arrested along with seven others on
    charges of conspiracy to traffic in a narcotic under s. 423(1)(d) of the Criminal Code,
    R.S.C. 1970, c. C-34, and s. 4(1) of the Narcotic Control Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. N-1. The
    appellant pleaded guilty to the offence and was among five of the group who were
    convicted. The appellant himself sold brown heroin to an RCMP officer on at least three
    occasions; at the time of the arrest, the group to which Mr. Pushpanathan belonged
                                                 - 17 -
    possessed heroin with a street value of some $10 million. Mr. Pushpanathan was
    sentenced to eight years in prison, while his co-conspirators received between four- and
    ten-year terms each.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
4               On September 23, 1991, the appellant, then on parole, renewed his claim to
    Convention refugee status under the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status
    of Refugees (the “Convention”), as implemented by the Immigration Act (the “Act”). I
    describe the application as a renewal because it is unclear that the initial claim made in
    March 1985 was ever abandoned. On June 22, 1992, a conditional deportation order was
    issued by Employment and Immigration Canada against Mr. Pushpanathan under s.
    27(1)(d) and s. 32.1(2) of the Act, which provide that a permanent resident who has been
    convicted of an offence for which a sentence of more than six months’ imprisonment has
    been imposed, may be deported. Since the deportation pursuant to those sections is
    conditional upon a determination that the claimant is not a Convention refugee, Mr.
    Pushpanathan’s claim to Convention refugee status was referred to the Convention
    Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board. The Board
    decided that the appellant was not a Convention refugee. The Federal Court, Trial
    Division and the Federal Court of Appeal refused to reverse that decision on an
    application for judicial review. Mr. Pushpanathan appeals to this Court.
    II. Statutory Framework
5               Section 2(1) of the Act defines a “Convention refugee” as:
                     . . . any person who
                     (a) by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race,
                     religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political
                     opinion,
                                                  - 18 -
                          (i) is outside the country of the person’s nationality and is unable
                          or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the
                          protection of that country . . .
                    but does not include any person to whom the Convention does not
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                    apply pursuant to section E or F of Article 1 thereof, which sections are
                    set out in the schedule to this Act;
6               That article of the Convention reads:
                                             ARTICLE 1
                                 Definition of the Term “Refugee”
                                                ...
                F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with
                respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
                    (a)       he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
                              against humanity, as defined in the international instruments
                              drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;
                    (b)       he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the
                              country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a
                              refugee;
                    (c)       he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles
                              of the United Nations.
7               Persons described in these paragraphs cannot benefit from any of the
    protections of the Convention. They are denied refugee status from the outset.
8               The importance of the exclusions found in Article 1 can only be understood
    in the context of other sections of the Convention which describe the limited conditions
    under which bona fide refugees may be denied the benefits of their status:
                                            ARTICLE 33
                     Prohibition of Expulsion or Return (“Refoulement”)
                                                  - 19 -
                 1. No Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a refugee in any
                 manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom
                 would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality,
                 membership of a particular social group or political opinion.
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                 2. The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed by
                 a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to
                 the security of the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by
                 a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the
                 community of that country.
9                The precise circumstances in which Article 33(2) is satisfied are defined
     with greater particularity in the Act:
                      53. (1) Notwithstanding subsections 52(2) and (3) [which describe the
                 Minister’s deportation power], no person who is determined under this Act
                 or the regulations to be a Convention refugee . . . shall be removed from
                 Canada to a country where the person’s life or freedom would be threatened
                 for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social
                 group or political opinion unless
                      (a) the person is a member of an inadmissible class described in
                      paragraph 19(1)(c) or subparagraph 19(1)(c.1)(i) and the Minister is of
                      the opinion that the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada;
                      or
                      (b) the person is a member of an inadmissible class described in
                      paragraph 19(1)(e), (f), (g), (j), (k) or (l) and the Minister is of the
                      opinion that the person constitutes a danger to the security of Canada.
10               The paragraph potentially applicable to the appellant’s situation is 19(1)(c):
                                    EXCLUSION AND REMOVAL
                                       Inadmissible Classes
                      19. (1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any
                 of the following classes:
                                                ...
                                                   - 20 -
                      (c) persons who have been convicted in Canada of an offence that may
                      be punishable under any Act of Parliament by a maximum term of
                      imprisonment of ten years or more;
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
11                Other grounds justifying the refoulement of a refugee described in s. 19
     include: conviction outside of Canada for an offence which, if committed in Canada,
     would be subject to a maximum term of imprisonment of ten years or more
     (19(1)(c.1)(i)); previous acts of terrorism, espionage, or subversion of democratic
     government, or grounds to believe that such acts will be committed in the future
     (19(1)(e) and (f)); grounds to believe that an individual will engage in violence in
     Canada (19(1)(g)); commission of war crimes or crimes against humanity (19(1)(j));
     persons who constitute a danger to the security of Canada (19(1)(k)); and, membership
     or participation in a government engaged in terrorism, systematic or gross human rights
     violations, or war crimes or crimes against humanity (19(1)(l)).
12                Where one of these grounds is found to exist, the Minister must then make
     the added determination that the person poses a danger to the safety of the public or to
     the security of the country under s. 53(1)(a) or (b) respectively in order to justify
     refoulement.
13                By contrast, persons falling within Article 1F of the Convention are
     automatically excluded from the protections of the Act. Not only may they be returned
     to the country from which they have sought refuge without any determination by the
     Minister that they pose a threat to public safety or national security, but their substantive
     claim to refugee status will not be considered. The practical implications of such an
     automatic exclusion, relative to the safeguards of the s. 19 procedure, are profound.
                                                   - 21 -
14                  It is against this background that the interpretation of the exclusion
     contained in Article 1F(c) of the Convention must be considered.
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     III. Judicial History
     A. The Immigration and Refugee Board
15                  The panel of the Immigration and Refugee Board ruled that Mr.
     Pushpanathan was not a refugee by virtue of the exclusion clause in Article 1F(c):
     [1993] C.R.D.D. No. 12 (QL) (sub nom. D. (N.U.) (Re)). It also found that by trafficking
     in narcotics, the appellant had committed a crime against humanity under Article 1F(a).
     The parties agree that this finding was in error and have not argued the point in any of
     the appeals.
16                  Citing numerous United Nations conventions, the panel considered it “clear
     that for many years the United Nations has devoted a great deal of time and energy to the
     suppression of illicit traffic in drugs”. The panel accepted that suppression of this traffic
     is one of the purposes and principles of the United Nations, and that trafficking in heroin
     was an action against those purposes and principles. It also rejected the assertion that
     Article 1F(c) should apply only to state agents, or only to crimes committed outside the
     country of refuge.
     B. Application for Judicial Review to the Federal Court, Trial Division
17                  An application for judicial review under s. 82.1(1) of the Act was made to
     the Federal Court, which dismissed the application: [1993] F.C.J. No. 870 (QL).
     McKeown J. found that the Board had “reasonably concluded” and that there were
                                                  - 22 -
     “serious reasons for considering” that the appellant was excluded by Article 1F(c) of the
     Convention. First, the court held that it was reasonable to conclude that initiatives to
     counter drug trafficking could be construed as part of the United Nations’ purposes and
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     principles, although it suggested that, in some instances, the article might not apply
     because of the nature of the violation. Second, the court rejected the claim that Article
     1F(c) should only apply to state actors. Third, the court found there was no room under
     Article 1F(c) for the weighing of the nature of the offence committed against the risk
     of persecution faced by the applicant.
18               Notwithstanding these findings, the court did certify “that a serious question
     of general importance is involved”, giving the applicant a right of appeal to the Federal
     Court of Appeal under s. 83(1) of the Act. The court formulated the question in the
     following terms: “Is it an error of law for the Refugee Division [of the Immigration and
     Refugee Board] to interpret section F(c) of Article I of the United Nations Convention
     relating to the Status of Refugees to exclude from refugee status an individual guilty of
     a serious Narcotic Control Act offence committed in Canada?”
     C. Certified Question in the Federal Court of Appeal
19               The Federal Court of Appeal unanimously upheld the decision of the Trial
     Division: [1996] 2 F.C. 49. It resolved the question before the court into four issues (at
     p. 57):
                 (1) Does Article 1F(c) of the Convention apply to acts committed by a
                 refugee claimant in the country of refuge after his arrival there?
                 (2) Can Article 1F(c) apply to a person already convicted of such acts?
                 (3) Can Article 1F(c) apply to a person in respect of acts not committed on
                 behalf of a state or government?
                                                   - 23 -
                 (4) Is the act of conspiring to traffic in narcotics an act contrary to the
                 purposes and principles of the United Nations?
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
20                Strayer J.A., speaking for the court, began his analysis by considering the
     rules of interpretation which ought to apply in determining the scope of Article 1F(c).
     He observed that treaty interpretation rules may be used as an aid where, as here, a
     statute incorporates a treaty. He found that, in any event, since the treaty article is
     adopted verbatim in the statute, treaty interpretation rules certainly apply. Under this
     standard, he held that those “arguably more relaxed rules” allow for consideration of
     such factors as other provisions of the treaty, even those not implemented in, or
     incorporated by, the statute, and the travaux préparatoires. However, Strayer J.A.
     observed that “none of the rules of interpretation of statutes or treaties authorize a court
     to ignore completely the express terms of the language finally adopted in the treaty or
     the statute, in favour of vague expressions of intention derived from extrinsic sources
     which fail to demonstrate ambiguity in the text of the treaty or adopting statute” (p. 59).
     Finding the travaux préparatoires confusing and reflecting the intentions of only a small
     number of signatories, the court rejected their use as an interpretative guide, preferring
     to “place the most emphasis on the final text as approved” (p. 60). Moreover, he
     assumed that, like statutes, individual treaty provisions have some distinct purpose and
     meaning unless it is impossible to ascribe one. Finally, in considering the proper
     interpretative approach to the exclusions from refugee status, Strayer J.A. asserted that
     there was to be no presumption in favour of a narrow construction simply because the
     treaty was a human rights instrument. Rather, exceptions to “the extraordinary right of
     refuge” were to be construed in a manner “most agreeable to justice and reason” (p. 61).
21                With this approach in place, the court found, first, that Article 1F(c) can
     apply to acts committed in the country of refuge; second, that it may apply to a person
                                                  - 24 -
     previously convicted for these acts; third, that it may apply to a person not acting on
     behalf of a state or government; and, fourth, that conspiring to traffic in narcotics is an
     act contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. The appellant was
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     therefore not a refugee under the exclusion clause contained in Article 1F(c).
     IV. Issues
22                Three issues must be addressed for the determination of this appeal. First,
     what is the standard of review to be applied to the decision of the Immigration and
     Refugee Board? Second, how do the rules of treaty interpretation apply to the
     determination of the meaning of Article 1F(c)? Third, does the appellant’s act of drug
     trafficking fall within the definition of “acts contrary to the purposes and principles of
     the United Nations”?
     V. Analysis
     A. Standard of Review
23                Neither in the decisions below, nor in the written submissions before this
     Court, was the issue of the proper standard of review of the decision of the Convention
     Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board addressed.
     McKeown J., at the Trial Division level, did find that the Board had “reasonably
     concluded” and that there were “serious reasons for considering” that the appellant was
     excluded by Article 1F(c) of the Convention, implying a standard of reasonableness.
     However, in certifying the question to be posed to the Court of Appeal, he asked whether
     the Board’s determination was an “error of law”, suggesting a standard of correctness.
     The Court of Appeal confined itself to answering the certified question. The court did
                                                  - 25 -
     not consider what standard of review had been applied below, nor whether that was the
     correct standard.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
24               Nevertheless, s. 83(1) requires such an inquiry. It states:
                      83. (1) A judgment of the Federal Court — Trial Division on an
                 application for judicial review . . . may be appealed to the Federal Court of
                 Appeal only if the Federal Court — Trial Division has at the time of
                 rendering judgment certified that a serious question of general importance
                 is involved and has stated that question. [Emphasis added.]
25               The certification of a “question of general importance” is the trigger by
     which an appeal is justified. The object of the appeal is still the judgment itself, not
     merely the certified question. One of the elements necessary for the disposition of an
     application for judicial review is the standard of review of the decision of the
     administrative tribunal whose decision is being reviewed, and that question is clearly in
     issue in this case. Reluctant as this Court is to decide issues not fully argued before it,
     determining the standard of review is a prerequisite to the disposition of this case.
26               The central inquiry in determining the standard of review exercisable by a
     court of law is the legislative intent of the statute creating the tribunal whose decision
     is being reviewed. More specifically, the reviewing court must ask: “[W]as the question
     which the provision raises one that was intended by the legislators to be left to the
     exclusive decision of the Board?” (Pasiechnyk v. Saskatchewan (Workers’
     Compensation Board), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 890, at para. 18, per Sopinka J.).
27               Since U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 1048, this Court has
     determined that the task of statutory interpretation requires a weighing of several
     different factors, none of which are alone dispositive, and each of which provides an
                                                   - 26 -
     indication falling on a spectrum of the proper level of deference to be shown the decision
     in question. This has been dubbed the “pragmatic and functional” approach. This more
     nuanced approach in determining legislative intent is also reflected in the range of
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     possible standards of review. Traditionally, the “correctness” standard and the “patent
     unreasonableness” standard were the only two approaches available to a reviewing court.
     But in Canada (Director of Investigation and Research) v. Southam Inc., [1997] 1 S.C.R.
     748, a “reasonableness simpliciter” standard was applied as the most accurate reflection
     of the competence intended to be conferred on the tribunal by the legislator. Indeed, the
     Court there described the range of standards available as a “spectrum” with a “more
     exacting end” and a “more deferential end” (para. 30).
28                Although the language and approach of the “preliminary”, “collateral” or
     “jurisdictional” question has been replaced by this pragmatic and functional approach,
     the focus of the inquiry is still on the particular, individual provision being invoked and
     interpreted by the tribunal. Some provisions within the same Act may require greater
     curial deference than others, depending on the factors which will be described in more
     detail below. To this extent, it is still appropriate and helpful to speak of “jurisdictional
     questions” which must be answered correctly by the tribunal in order to be acting intra
     vires. But it should be understood that a question which “goes to jurisdiction” is simply
     descriptive of a provision for which the proper standard of review is correctness, based
     upon the outcome of the pragmatic and functional analysis.                In other words,
     “jurisdictional error” is simply an error on an issue with respect to which, according to
     the outcome of the pragmatic and functional analysis, the tribunal must make a correct
     interpretation and to which no deference will be shown.
                  (1) Factors to Be Taken into Account
                                                  - 27 -
29               The factors to be taken into account in determining the standard of review
     have been canvassed in a number of recent decisions of this Court, and may be divided
     into four categories.
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                 (i) Privative Clauses
30               The absence of a privative clause does not imply a high standard of scrutiny,
     where other factors bespeak a low standard. However, the presence of a “full” privative
     clause is compelling evidence that the court ought to show deference to the tribunal’s
     decision, unless other factors strongly indicate the contrary as regards the particular
     determination in question. A full privative clause is “one that declares that decisions of
     the tribunal are final and conclusive from which no appeal lies and all forms of judicial
     review are excluded” (Pasiechnyk, supra, at para. 17, per Sopinka J.). Unless there is
     some contrary indication in the privative clause itself, actually using the words “final
     and conclusive” is sufficient, but other words might suffice if equally explicit (United
     Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 579 v. Bradco Construction
     Ltd., [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316, at pp. 331 and 333). At the other end of the spectrum is a
     clause in an Act permitting appeals, which is a factor suggesting a more searching
     standard of review.
31               Some Acts will be silent or equivocal as to the intended standard of review.
     The Court found in Bradco that the submission of a dispute to a “final settlement” of an
     arbitrator was “somewhere between a full privative clause and a clause providing for full
     review by way of appeal” (pp. 331 and 333). Sopinka J. went on to examine other
     factors to determine that some degree of deference was owed to the arbitrator’s ruling.
     In essence, a partial or equivocal privative clause is one which fits into the overall
                                                   - 28 -
     process of evaluation of factors to determine the legislator’s intended level of deference,
     and does not have the preclusive effect of a full privative clause.
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                  (ii) Expertise
32                Described by Iacobucci J. in Southam, supra, at para. 50, as “the most
     important of the factors that a court must consider in settling on a standard of review”,
     this category includes several considerations. If a tribunal has been constituted with a
     particular expertise with respect to achieving the aims of an Act, whether because of the
     specialized knowledge of its decision-makers, special procedure, or non-judicial means
     of implementing the Act, then a greater degree of deference will be accorded. In
     Southam, the Court considered of strong importance the special make-up and knowledge
     of the Competition Act tribunal relative to a court of law in determining questions
     concerning competitiveness in general, and the definition of the relevant product market
     in particular.
33                Nevertheless, expertise must be understood as a relative, not an absolute
     concept. As Sopinka J. explained in Bradco, supra, at p. 335: “On the other side of the
     coin, a lack of relative expertise on the part of the tribunal vis-à-vis the particular issue
     before it as compared with the reviewing court is a ground for a refusal of deference”
     (emphasis added). Making an evaluation of relative expertise has three dimensions: the
     court must characterize the expertise of the tribunal in question; it must consider its own
     expertise relative to that of the tribunal; and it must identify the nature of the specific
     issue before the administrative decision-maker relative to this expertise. Many cases
     have found that the legislature has intended to grant a wide margin for decision-making
     with respect to some issues, while others are properly subject to a correctness standard.
                                                   - 29 -
     Those cases are discussed in the fourth section below, the “Nature of the Problem”. The
     criteria of expertise and the nature of the problem are closely interrelated.
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
34                Once a broad relative expertise has been established, however, the Court is
     sometimes prepared to show considerable deference even in cases of highly generalized
     statutory interpretation where the instrument being interpreted is the tribunal’s
     constituent legislation. In Pezim v. British Columbia (Superintendent of Brokers), [1994]
     2 S.C.R. 557, the B.C. Securities Commission’s definition of the highly general question
     of what constituted a “material change” under the Securities Act was subjected to an
     unreasonableness standard. Iacobucci J. stated that “[c]ourts have also enunciated a
     principle of deference that applies not just to the facts as found by the tribunal, but also
     to the legal questions before the tribunal in the light of its role and expertise” (p. 590).
     This can include the interpretation of a statute which requires recourse to the treaty
     which it was intended to implement, as was the case in National Corn Growers Assn. v.
     Canada (Import Tribunal), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1324, where a patently unreasonableness
     test was applied to the interpretation of a treaty provision because the regulatory and
     economic nature of the determination counselled deference notwithstanding the
     generality of its application.
35                In short, a decision which involves in some degree the application of a
     highly specialized expertise will militate in favour of a high degree of deference, and
     towards a standard of review at the patent unreasonableness end of the spectrum.
                  (iii)   Purpose of the Act as a Whole, and the Provision in Particular
36                As Iacobucci J. noted in Southam, supra, at para. 50, purpose and expertise
     often overlap. The purpose of a statute is often indicated by the specialized nature of the
                                             - 30 -
legislative structure and dispute-settlement mechanism, and the need for expertise is
often manifested as much by the requirements of the statute as by the specific
qualifications of its members. Where the purposes of the statute and of the decision-
                                                                                             1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
maker are conceived not primarily in terms of establishing rights as between parties, or
as entitlements, but rather as a delicate balancing between different constituencies, then
the appropriateness of court supervision diminishes. Thus, in National Corn Growers,
supra, at p. 1336, Wilson J. characterized the function of the board in question as one of
“management”, partially because of the specialized knowledge of the members of the
board, but also because of the range of remedies available upon a determination,
including the imposition of countervailing duties by the Minister (at p. 1346). In
Southam, the Court found (at para. 48) that the “aims of the Act are more ‘economic’
than they are strictly ‘legal’” because the broad goals of the Act “are matters that
business women and men and economists are better able to understand than is a typical
judge”. This conclusion was reinforced by the creation in the statute of a tribunal with
members having a special expertise in those domains. Also of significance are the range
of administrative responses, the fact that an administrative commission plays a
“protective role” vis-à-vis the investing public, and that it plays a role in policy
development; Pezim, supra, at p. 596. That legal principles are vague, open-textured,
or involve a “multi-factored balancing test” may also militate in favour of a lower
standard of review (Southam, at para. 44). These considerations are all specific
articulations of the broad principle of “polycentricity” well known to academic
commentators who suggest that it provides the best rationale for judicial deference to
non-judicial agencies. A “polycentric issue is one which involves a large number of
interlocking and interacting interests and considerations” (P. Cane, An Introduction to
Administrative Law (3rd ed. 1996), at p. 35). While judicial procedure is premised on
a bipolar opposition of parties, interests, and factual discovery, some problems require
the consideration of numerous interests simultaneously, and the promulgation of
                                                   - 31 -
     solutions which concurrently balance benefits and costs for many different parties.
     Where an administrative structure more closely resembles this model, courts will
     exercise restraint. The polycentricity principle is a helpful way of understanding the
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     variety of criteria developed under the rubric of the “statutory purpose”.
                   (iv)   The “Nature of the Problem”: A Question of Law or Fact?
37                 As mentioned above, even pure questions of law may be granted a wide
     degree of deference where other factors of the pragmatic and functional analysis suggest
     that such deference is the legislative intention, as this Court found to be the case in
     Pasiechnyk, supra. Where, however, other factors leave that intention ambiguous, courts
     should be less deferential of decisions which are pure determinations of law. The
     justification for this position relates to the question of relative expertise mentioned
     previously. There is no clear line to be drawn between questions of law and questions
     of fact, and, in any event, many determinations involve questions of mixed law and fact.
     An appropriate litmus test was set out in Southam, supra, at para. 37, by Iacobucci J.,
     who stated:
                   Of course, it is not easy to say precisely where the line should be drawn;
                   though in most cases it should be sufficiently clear whether the dispute is
                   over a general proposition that might qualify as a principle of law or over
                   a very particular set of circumstances that is not apt to be of much interest
                   to judges and lawyers in the future.
     This principle was also articulated by L’Heureux-Dubé J. in Canada (Attorney General)
     v. Mossop, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 554, at pp. 599-600, who sought to clarify the limitations of
     distinctions based on this criterion:
                                             - 32 -
            In general, deference is given on questions of fact because of the “signal
            advantage” enjoyed by the primary finder of fact. Less deference is
            warranted on questions of law, in part because the finder of fact may not
            have developed any particular familiarity with issues of law. While there
            is merit in the distinction between fact and law, the distinction is not always
                                                                                              1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
            so clear. Specialized boards are often called upon to make difficult findings
            of both fact and law. In some circumstances, the two are inextricably
            linked. Further, the “correct” interpretation of a term may be dictated by the
            mandate of the board and by the coherent body of jurisprudence it has
            developed. In some cases, even where courts might not agree with a given
            interpretation, the integrity of certain administrative processes may demand
            that deference be shown to that interpretation of law.
Her dissent in that case was founded essentially on her disapproval of the views of the
majority on the characterization of the human rights tribunal as enjoying no expertise
relative to courts in the understanding and interpretation of human rights Acts.
Nevertheless, the principles discussed in the above quotation correctly state the law.
This was confirmed in Pasiechnyk, at paras. 36 to 42, where the broad expertise of the
Workers’ Compensation Board to determine all aspects of “eligibility” under that system
was considered sufficiently broad to include the determination that the term “employer”
included claims against the government for its alleged negligence in regulating the works
of two companies which had led to workers’ injuries. Claims against the government as
regulator were thus barred by virtue of the determination in issue. To allow such a claim
“would undermine the purposes of the scheme” which was to “solve . . . the problem of
employers becoming insolvent as a result of high damage awards” (para. 42). Such a
finding falls squarely within Iacobucci J.’s description of a question of law: a finding
which will be of great, even determinative import for future decisions of lawyers and
judges. The creation of a legislative “scheme” combined with the creation of a highly
specialized administrative decision-maker, as well as the presence of a strong privative
clause was sufficient to grant an expansive deference even over extremely general
questions of law.
                                                  - 33 -
38               Keeping in mind that all the factors discussed here must be taken together
     to come to a view of the proper standard of review, the generality of the proposition
     decided will be a factor in favour of the imposition of a correctness standard. This factor
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     necessarily intersects with the criteria described above, which may contradict such a
     presumption, as the majority of this Court found to be the case in Pasiechnyk, supra.
     In the usual case, however, the broader the propositions asserted, and the further the
     implications of such decisions stray from the core expertise of the tribunal, the less
     likelihood that deference will be shown. Without an implied or express legislative intent
     to the contrary as manifested in the criteria above, legislatures should be assumed to
     have left highly generalized propositions of law to courts.
                 (2) The Immigration Act
39               Jurisdiction is granted to the Convention Refugee Determination Division
     of the Immigration and Refugee Board in the following terms:
                      67. (1) The Refugee Division has, in respect of proceedings under
                 sections 69.1 and 69.2, sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine
                 all questions of law and fact, including questions of jurisdiction.
                     82.1 (1) An application for judicial review under the Federal Court Act
                 with respect to any decision or order made, or any matter arising, under this
                 Act or the rules or regulations thereunder may be commenced only with
                 leave of a judge of the Federal Court — Trial Division.
                     83. (1) A judgment of the Federal Court — Trial Division on an
                 application for judicial review with respect to any decision or order made,
                 or any matter arising, under this Act or the rules or regulations thereunder
                 may be appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal only if the Federal Court
                 — Trial Division has at the time of rendering judgment certified that a
                 serious question of general importance is involved and has stated that
                 question.
                 (3) Previous Jurisprudence on the Standard of Review
                                                  - 34 -
40               This is the first time this Court has had the opportunity of considering the
     standard of review over decisions of the Immigration and Refugee Board. There is
     surprisingly scant discussion of the issue in previous Federal Court decisions. In most
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     cases, a patent unreasonableness or “perverse or capricious” standard is applied. Those
     cases involved reviews of findings of credibility of witnesses by the Board: Yuen v.
     Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1994] F.C.J. No. 1045 (QL) (C.A.);
     Franco v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1994] F.C.J. No. 1011
     (QL) (C.A.); Sornalingam v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (1996),
     107 F.T.R. 128, per MacKay J.; Vetter v. Canada (Minister of Employment and
     Immigration) (1994), 89 F.T.R. 17, per Gibson J.; Ismaeli v. Canada (Minister of
     Citizenship and Immigration), [1995] F.C.J. No. 573 (QL) (T.D.), per Cullen J. In only
     one case was a correctness standard applied: Connor v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship
     and Immigration) (1995), 95 F.T.R. 66, per Reed J.
41               In the thorough decision of Richard J. in Sivasamboo v. Canada (Minister
     of Citizenship and Immigration), [1995] 1 F.C. 741 (T.D.), however, the question before
     this Court is directly addressed. The case involved a Board determination that the
     applicants were not refugees because they had an “internal flight alternative”. Richard
     J. examines s. 82.1 of the Immigration Act and s. 18.1 of the Federal Court Act, which
     set out the possibility of an application for judicial review of a Board decision, and the
     grounds upon which such a decision may be reversed. He considers many of the
     controlling authorities of the day, including Pezim and Bradco. Although conceding that
     s. 67(1) of the Immigration Act is not a strong privative clause, he points out that many
     cases rely more on the specialized nature of the tribunal in question than on the presence
     or absence of a privative clause and notes: (a) that there is a limited structure for
     applying for judicial review; (b) that appeals from the Trial Division may only be taken
     when certified as a “serious question of general importance” under s. 83(1) of the
                                              - 35 -
Immigration Act; (c) that the structure of refugee determination is not typically
adversarial in nature, and that members of the Board have wide powers as to production
of evidence and fact-finding; (d) that there is no adverse party; (e) that the international
                                                                                               1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
law context, and the implementation of the Refugee Convention in Canadian law is
highly complex and therefore requires specialized knowledge; (f) that the members of
the Board are experts in their field and draw upon detailed, expert reports from the
Documentation Centre of Employment and Immigration Canada. He relies extensively
on a commentary by Professor James Hathaway on the Refugee Division, including, at
p. 758, the following excerpt:
                 These evidentiary and contextual concerns make departure from
            traditional modes of adjudication imperative. We need expert, engaged,
            activist decision-makers who will pursue substantive fairness rather than
            technocratic justice. We must not view refugee claimants as opponents or
            threats, but rather as persons seeking to invoke a right derived from
            international law. It is the commitment to this kind of flexibility and
            sensitivity which led Parliament to abolish the previous court of record
            charged with refugee status determination, and to replace it with an expert
            tribunal with inquisitorial, non-adversarial jurisdiction.
Finally, he distinguishes this Court’s decision in Mossop, supra, contending that the
position of a human rights tribunal is different because its “determination is unrelated
to issues of expertise or specialized knowledge and does not require a high degree of
deference”. He goes on to say: “The questions at issue here are not broad questions
involving general principles of statutory interpretation and legal reasoning, but the
interpretation of a statutory definition within a specific international law and regulatory
framework.” He concludes from all these considerations that the standard is patent
unreasonableness, and that standard ought to apply even to “legal questions before it”
(p. 761). On this basis, Richard J. rejected the application for judicial review, finding
that the determination of “internal flight alternative” was not patently unreasonable.
                                                   - 36 -
                    (4) The Proper Standard: Correctness
42                  Richard J.’s judgment in Sivasamboo, described above in some detail,
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     presents admirably the case for a high level of deference to the decision of the Board.
     In my judgment, however, applying the pragmatic and functional analysis to the Act
     indicates that the decision of the Board in this case should be subjected to a standard of
     correctness.
43                  First, s. 83(1) would be incoherent if the standard of review were anything
     other than correctness. The key to the legislative intention as to the standard of review
     is the use of the words “a serious question of general importance” (emphasis added).
     The general importance of the question, that is, its applicability to numerous future cases,
     warrants the review by a court of justice. Would that review serve any purpose if the
     Court of Appeal were obliged to defer to incorrect decisions of the Board? Is it possible
     that the legislator would have provided for an exceptional appeal to the Court of Appeal
     on questions of “general importance”, but then required that despite the “general
     importance” of the question, the court accept decisions of the Board which are wrong in
     law, even clearly wrong in law, but not patently unreasonable? The only way in which
     s. 83(1) can be given its explicitly articulated scope is if the Court of Appeal — and
     inferentially, the Federal Court, Trial Division — is permitted to substitute its own
     opinion for that of the Board in respect of questions of general importance. This view
     accords with the observations of Iacobucci J. in Southam, supra, at para. 36, that a
     determination which has “the potential to apply widely to many cases” should be a factor
     in determining whether deference should be shown. While previous Federal Court
     decisions, including, arguably, the dispute in Sivasamboo, involve significant
     determinations of facts, or at the highest, questions of mixed fact and law, with little
     or no precedential value, this case involves a determination which could disqualify
                                                  - 37 -
     numerous future refugee applicants as a matter of law. Indeed, the decision of the Board
     in this case would significantly narrow its own role as an evaluator of fact in numerous
     cases.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
44               In short, s. 83(1) of the Act grants a statutory right of appeal based upon the
     criterion of “generality”. The principle described in Southam and applied in many other
     cases, which is really no more than an assumption as to legislative intent, is reinforced
     by explicit statutory inclusion.
45               Moreover, the Board appears to enjoy no relative expertise in the matter of
     law which is the object of judicial review here. A clear majority of this Court has found
     in a number of cases that deference should not be shown by courts to human rights
     tribunals with respect to “general questions of law” (Mossop, supra, at p. 585), even
     legal rules indisputably at the core of human rights adjudication. The categorical nature
     of this rule has been mitigated by observations in other cases, however. As La Forest J.
     stated for the entire Court in Ross v. New Brunswick School District No. 15, [1996] 1
     S.C.R. 825, at para. 29:
                      That having been said, I do not think the fact-finding expertise of human
                 rights tribunals should be restrictively interpreted, and it must be assessed
                 against the backdrop of the particular decision the tribunal is called upon to
                 make. . . . A finding of discrimination is impregnated with facts, facts
                 which the Board of Inquiry is in the best position to evaluate. . . . Given the
                 complexity of the evidentiary inferences made on the basis of the facts
                 before the Board, it is appropriate to exercise a relative degree of deference
                 to the finding of discrimination, in light of the Board’s superior expertise in
                 fact-finding, a conclusion supported by the existence of words importing a
                 limited privative effect into the constituent legislation. [Emphasis added.]
     A similar approach is adopted by the majority in University of British Columbia v. Berg,
     [1993] 2 S.C.R. 353, at p. 370.
                                                  - 38 -
46               Although the precise degree of deference which should be accorded to a
     human rights tribunal may still be open to question, the factors militating against
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     deference in those cases apply with much greater force to the issues here. In those
     cases, the relationship relevant for considering the proper standard of review was that
     between a tribunal with specific expertise and experience in human rights adjudication,
     and provisions whose purpose is to protect human rights. The provision in question here
     shares that purpose. In Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689, at p.
     733, La Forest J. found the purpose underlying the Convention to be “the international
     community’s commitment to the assurance of basic human rights without
     discrimination”. As I will explain in the course of the next section, Article 1F(c) is at
     the core of this human rights purpose.
47               But the Board’s expertise in matters relating to human rights is far less
     developed than that of human rights tribunals. The expertise of the Board is in
     accurately evaluating whether the criteria for refugee status have been met and, in
     particular, assessing the nature of the risk of persecution faced by the applicant if
     returned to his or her country of origin. Unlike the situation of a human rights tribunal,
     the relationship between the expertise and the provision in question here is remote. Only
     10 percent of the members of the Board are required to be lawyers (s. 61(2)) and there
     is no requirement that there be a lawyer on every panel. While this may not be a liability
     for the purposes of assessing the risk of persecution of an applicant if returned to his or
     her country of nationality, it renders unthinkable reposing the broad definition of a basic
     human rights guarantee exclusively in the hands of the Board. Nor is there any
     indication that the Board’s experience with previous factual determinations of risk of
     persecution gives it any added insight into the meaning or desirable future development
     of the provision in question here. Unlike many cases involving determinations by human
                                                   - 39 -
     rights tribunals, this case does not involve any significant “impregnation” of legal
     principle with fact, as demonstrated by the ease with which the reviewing court was able
     to extract a question of general importance for the purposes of s. 83(1). Here, the legal
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     principle is easily separable from the undisputed facts of the case and would undoubtedly
     have a wide precedential value. It bears repeating that with this determination, the
     tribunal is in fact seeking to stifle the application of its own expertise, rather than
     exercise it. The factual expertise enjoyed by this administrative decision-maker does not
     aid it in the interpretation of this general legal principle.
48                Nor can the Board be characterized as performing a “managing” or
     “supervisory” function, as was found in Southam and National Corn Growers. The
     Board itself is not responsible for policy evolution. The purpose of the Convention —
     and particularly that of the exclusions contained in Article 1F — is clearly not the
     management of flows of people, but rather the conferral of minimum human rights’
     protection. The context in which the adjudicative function takes place is not a
     “polycentric” one of give-and-take between different groups, but rather the vindication
     of a set of relatively static human rights, and ensuring that those who fall within the
     prescribed categories are protected.
49                Added to these indications of the intent of the legislator with regard to the
     development of general legal principles, is the absence of a strong privative clause.
     Indeed, read in the light of s. 83(1), it appears quite clear that the privative clause, such
     as it is, is superseded with respect to questions of “general importance”. As has been
     emphasized above, the “pragmatic and functional” approach allows differing standards
     of deference even within different sections of the same Act, and with regard to different
     types of decisions taken by the tribunal in question. Here, the wording of the privative
     clause goes hand in hand with the fourth factor of the functional and pragmatic analysis,
                                                    - 40 -
     namely, that determinations of abstract principles with wide application is a factor
     militating against deference.
                                                                                                 1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
50                I conclude that a correctness standard applies to determinations of law by
     the Board. Sivasamboo dealt with review of a question of a significantly different nature
     and I wish to emphasize that I make no comment about the correctness of that decision,
     specific as it is to the facts presented there.
     B. Principles of Treaty Interpretation: Determining the Purpose of Article 1F(c)
51                Although some non-governmental organizations advocated the determination
     of exclusion under Article 1F(c) of the Convention by the United Nations High
     Commissioner for Refugees, it was ultimately decided that each contracting state would
     decide for itself when a refugee claimant is within the scope of the exclusion clause (J.
     C. Hathaway, The Law of Refugee Status (1991), at pp. 214-15). Since the purpose of
     the Act incorporating Article 1F(c) is to implement the underlying Convention, the Court
     must adopt an interpretation consistent with Canada’s obligations under the Convention.
     The wording of the Convention and the rules of treaty interpretation will therefore be
     applied to determine the meaning of Article 1F(c) in domestic law (Ward, supra, at pp.
     713-16).
52                Those rules are succinctly articulated in the Vienna Convention on the Law
     of Treaties, Can. T.S. 1980 No. 37 (“Vienna Convention”), which states:
                                             ARTICLE 31
                                   General rule of interpretation
                                                  - 41 -
                      1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
                 ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and
                 in light of its object and purpose.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                    2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall
                 comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:
                     (a)     any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all
                             the parties in connexion with the conclusion of the treaty;
                     (b)     any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
                             connexion with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the
                             other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.
                     3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
                     (a)     any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
                             interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;
                     (b)     any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
                             establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its
                             interpretation;
                     (c)     any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
                             between the parties.
                     4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
                 parties so intended.
                                           ARTICLE 32
                             Supplementary means of interpretation
                      Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation,
                 including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its
                 conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application
                 of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according
                 to article 31:
                     (a)     leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
                     (b)     leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.
53               These rules have been applied by this Court in two recent cases, one
     involving direct incorporation of treaty provisions (Thomson v. Thomson, [1994] 3
     S.C.R. 551) and another involving a section of the Immigration Act intended to
     implement Canada’s obligations under the Convention (Ward, supra). In the latter case,
                                                 - 42 -
     La Forest J. makes use of several interpretative devices: the drafting history of, and
     preparatory work on the provision in question; the United Nations High Commissioner
     for Refugees’ Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status
                                                                                                 1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     (“UNHCR Handbook”), and previous judicial comment on the purpose and object of the
     treaty. Indeed, at p. 713, La Forest J. was willing to consider submissions of individual
     delegations in the travaux préparatoires, although he recognized that, depending on their
     content and on the context, such statements “may not go far” in supporting one
     interpretation over another.
54               Although these rules of interpretation were accepted in general terms in the
     courts below and by the parties, there is substantial disagreement as to precisely what
     those rules mean in the context of Article 1F(c) of the Convention as incorporated by s.
     2(1) of the Act. In deciding on the relative weight to be accorded the various
     interpretative sources made available under the Vienna Convention, Strayer J.A. found
     that the terms “purposes and principles of the United Nations” were relatively clear. He
     was also of the opinion that the travaux préparatoires were confused, ambiguous, or
     unrepresentative, and therefore, “completely unhelpful”. The UNHCR Handbook, which
     was accepted as a valid source under Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention, was
     considered “far from emphatic” as to the meaning of Article 1F(c). Finally, the
     categorization of the purpose of the Convention as a “‘human rights’ instrument” did not
     favour the applicant.     Indeed, Strayer J.A. tacitly rejected this purpose as an
     interpretative guide by adopting the words of Robertson J.A. in Moreno v. Canada
     (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1994] 1 F.C. 298 (C.A.), at p. 307:
                      As persuasive as the commentaries may be, I am bound to approach the
                 application of the exclusion clause, first, by reference to the existing
                 jurisprudence of this Court and, second, by reference to the clear intent of
                 the signatories to the Convention. Where, however, there is an unresolved
                                                   - 43 -
                 ambiguity or issue, the construction most agreeable to justice and reason
                 must prevail.
                                                                                                      1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
55               In my view, the Federal Court of Appeal erred in dismissing the objects and
     purposes of the treaty, and in according virtually no weight to the indications provided
     in the travaux préparatoires. As will be seen later, the legislative history of Article 1F
     indicates that the signatories to the Convention wished to ascribe a special meaning to
     the words “purposes and principles of the United Nations” in the context of the
     Convention. In Ward, La Forest J. carefully used each of these interpretative tools as a
     means of understanding the objects and purposes of the Convention as a whole, and the
     particular provisions being interpreted. The extremely general words in Article 1F(c)
     are not so unambiguous as to foreclose examination of other indications of the proper
     scope of the provision. An examination of the purpose and context of the treaty as a
     whole, as well as the purpose of the individual provision in question as suggested by the
     travaux préparatoires, provide helpful interpretative guidelines.
56               The starting point of the interpretative exercise is, first, to define the purpose
     of the Convention as a whole, and, second, the purpose and place of Article 1F(c) within
     that scheme. In Ward, La Forest J., speaking for the entire Court at p. 709, stated that:
                 International refugee law was formulated to serve as a back-up to the
                 protection one expects from the state of which an individual is a national.
                 It was meant to come into play only in situations when that protection is
                 unavailable, and then only in certain situations. The international
                 community intended that persecuted individuals be required to approach
                 their home state for protection before the responsibility of other states
                 becomes engaged. For this reason, James Hathaway refers to the refugee
                 scheme as “surrogate or substitute protection”, activated only upon failure
                 of national protection; see The Law of Refugee Status (1991), at p. 135.
                                                  - 44 -
     Using a textual analysis of the Convention itself, and taking account of the views of
     commentators, La Forest J., at p. 733, defines the purpose of the Convention with
     reference to the specific issue of the definition of refugee, which is precisely the issue
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     in this case as well:
                      Underlying the Convention is the international community’s
                  commitment to the assurance of basic human rights without discrimination.
                  This is indicated in the preamble to the treaty as follows:
                         CONSIDERING that the Charter of the United Nations and the
                      Universal Declaration of Human Rights approved on 10 December 1948
                      by the General Assembly have affirmed the principle that human beings
                      shall enjoy fundamental rights and freedoms without discrimination.
                  This theme outlines the boundaries of the objectives sought to be achieved
                  and consented to by the delegates. It sets out, in a general fashion, the
                  intention of the drafters and thereby provides an inherent limit to the cases
                  embraced by the Convention. Hathaway, supra, at p. 108, thus explains the
                  impact of this general tone of the treaty on refugee law:
                         The dominant view however, is that refugee law ought to concern
                      itself with actions which deny human dignity in any key way, and that
                      the sustained or systemic denial of core human rights is the appropriate
                      standard.
                  This theme sets the boundaries for many of the elements of the definition of
                  “Convention refugee”.
57                The human rights character of the Convention is further confirmed by the
     “Objectives” section of the Act:
                      3. It is hereby declared that Canadian immigration policy and the rules
                  and regulations made under this Act shall be designed and administered in
                  such a manner as to promote the domestic and international interests of
                  Canada recognizing the need
                                                ...
                      (g) to fulfil Canada’s international legal obligations with respect to
                      refugees and to uphold its humanitarian tradition with respect to the
                      displaced and the persecuted; [Emphasis added.]
                                                  - 45 -
     This overarching and clear human rights object and purpose is the background against
     which interpretation of individual provisions must take place.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
58               The purpose of Article 1 is to define who is a refugee. Article 1F then
     establishes categories of persons who are specifically excluded from that definition. The
     purpose of Article 33 of the Convention, by contrast, is not to define who is and who is
     not a refugee, but rather to allow for the refoulement of a bona fide refugee to his or her
     native country where he or she poses a danger to the security of the country of refuge,
     or to the safety of the community. This functional distinction is reflected in the Act,
     which adopts Article 1F as part of s. 2, the definitional section, and provides for the
     Minister’s power to deport an admitted refugee under s. 53, which generally incorporates
     Article 33. Thus, the general purpose of Article 1F is not the protection of the society
     of refuge from dangerous refugees, whether because of acts committed before or after
     the presentation of a refugee claim; that purpose is served by Article 33 of the
     Convention. Rather, it is to exclude ab initio those who are not bona fide refugees at the
     time of their claim for refugee status. Although all of the acts described in Article 1F
     could presumably fall within the grounds for refoulement described in Article 33, the two
     are distinct. This reasoning must also be applied when considering whether the acts
     falling under Article 1F(c) must be acts performed outside the country of refuge, as
     argued by the appellant. In my opinion, the refoulement provisions cannot be invoked
     to read into Article 1F(c) any such limitation. Where geographical limitations were
     required, the Convention specifically provided for them, as evidenced by the terms of
     Article 1F(b). The relevant criterion here is the time at which refugee status is obtained.
     In other words, Article 1F(c) being referable to the recognition of refugee status, any act
     performed before a person has obtained that status must be considered relevant pursuant
     to Article 1F(c).
                                                  - 46 -
59                Some light may be shed on the purpose of Article 1F(c) as distinct from
     Article 1F(a) and F(b) from the travaux préparatoires and from the contemporaneous
     meaning of the terms used. The precursor of Article 1F stated:
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                                            ARTICLE I
                              DEFINITION OF THE TERM “REFUGEE”
                      D.      No contracting State shall apply the benefits of this Convention
                  to any person who in its opinion has committed a crime specified in article
                  VI of the London Charter of the International Military Tribunal or any other
                  act contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
                  Nations. [Emphasis added.]
                  (UN Doc. E/L. 82)
     The inclusion of the underlined words, which eventually were incorporated as Article
     1F(c), generated considerable discussion in the Social Committee of the Economic and
     Social Council where the Convention was being negotiated. The Canadian, Chilean, and
     Pakistani delegates all expressed concern that the vague and potentially overbroad
     exclusionary clause would undermine the primary purpose of the Convention, and give
     states a means to easily reject individuals who deserved protection. The French delegate
     responded that the provision was aimed at “certain individuals who, though not guilty
     of war crimes, might have committed acts of similar gravity against the principles of the
     United Nations, in other words, crimes against humanity” (UN Doc. E/AC.7/SR.166, 22
     August 1950, at p. 4). He was concerned that acts criminalized by the London Charter
     of the International Military Tribunal, 82 U.N.T.S. 280, would only be found to exist
     where a war had actually taken place. This would allow all manner of atrocities to be
     committed without the London Charter being violated simply because of the absence of
     military, interstate conflict. The reference to the London Charter alone, therefore, would
     fail to include
                                                  - 47 -
                 tyrants . . . guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the
                 Charter, who had by such acts helped to create the fear from which the
                 refugees had fled. The fact that they had themselves become suspect to their
                 superiors and were in their turn a prey to the fear which they had themselves
                 created, would . . . certainly not [entitle them] to the automatic benefit of the
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                 international protection granted to refugees.
                 (E/AC.7/SR.166, at p. 6)
60               While a statement such as this one is far from authoritative in determining
     the purpose of what emerged as Article 1F(c), two points may be taken from these
     statements. The first is that the London Charter, in addition to describing crimes against
     the peace and war crimes, also described “crimes against humanity” such as “murder,
     extermination, enslavement, deportation, and other inhumane acts committed against any
     civilian population, before or during the war, or persecutions on political, racial or
     religious grounds in execution of or in connection with any crime within the jurisdiction
     of the Tribunal” (as quoted in H. M. Kindred et al., International Law Chiefly as
     Interpreted and Applied in Canada (1993)), at p. 448 (emphasis added). As articulated
     in the London Charter, then, a crime against humanity was tied to the punishment of
     crimes of war and crimes in times of peace. Although as it finally emerged, Article 1F(a)
     actually spelled out the individual offences contained in the London Charter, including
     “a crime against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make
     provision in respect of such crimes”, there is a clearly articulated concern by the French
     delegate, of which he persuaded the other delegations, that the crimes against humanity
     described in the London Charter were confined to those related to the occurrence of a
     war. Though initially one of the objectors who considered the provision dangerously
     vague, the Canadian delegate eventually agreed that the individuals caught by Article
     1F(c) and not otherwise identified by the London Charter were those “persons who had
     abused positions of authority by committing crimes against humanity, other than war
                                                  - 48 -
     crimes” (E/AC.7/SR.166, at p. 10 (emphasis added)). In short, the delegates whose
     minds were changed by the statement of the French delegate believed that they were
     identifying non-war-related crimes against humanity and that this was a distinct concept
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     worthy of a separate provision, even if the acts falling into that category could not be
     clearly enumerated at that time.
61               It must also be noted that the principle of exclusion by reason of acts
     contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations was found in embryonic
     form in the International Refugee Organization Constitution which also sought to
     exclude “those who, since the end of the Second World War, had participated in any
     organization seeking the overthrow by armed force of a government of a UN member
     State, or in any terrorist organization; or who were leaders of movements hostile to their
     government or sponsors of movements encouraging refugees not to return to their
     country of origin” (G. S. Goodwin-Gill, The Refugee in International Law (2nd ed.
     1996), at p. 108). This is consistent with the position of the British representative who
     stated that acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the UN comprised the
     subversion and overthrow of democratic regimes. Other participants were opposed to
     this interpretation, however, because it was seen to conflict with the right to self-
     determination (Hathaway, supra, at p. 228). The confusion probably explains why the
     UNHCR Handbook, at paras. 162-63, does not consider that Article 1F(c) introduces
     “any specific new element”.
62               Of course, the purposes and principles of the United Nations are set out in
     the Preamble and Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, Can. T.S. 1945
     No. 7. But the statement found there is principally organizational; its general wording
     also allows for a dynamic interpretation of state obligations, which must be adapted to
     the changing international context. The principles set out in the UN Charter are in fact
                                                   - 49 -
     often developed in other international instruments and in decisions of the International
     Court of Justice, as well as in the jurisprudence of signatory states. Hathaway, supra,
     at p. 227, concludes that the multiple interpretations of Article 1F(c) “mirror its confused
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     drafting history”. The article is a residual clause which the UNHCR Handbook suggests,
     “due to its very general character, should be applied with caution” (para. 163). In
     reading the travaux préparatoires, one is easily convinced that the delegates
     participating in the Social Committee meetings intended to give the words “purposes and
     principles of the United Nations” a narrower and more focused meaning than that which
     would naturally be inferred by reading the UN Charter. The work of the drafting
     subcommittee and the resolutions of various bodies that followed are evidence of an
     effort to create a consensus on the special meaning to be given to the terms used in
     Article 1F(c).
63                What is crucial, in my opinion, is the manner in which the logic of the
     exclusion in Article 1F generally, and Article 1F(c) in particular, is related to the purpose
     of the Convention as a whole. The rationale is that those who are responsible for the
     persecution which creates refugees should not enjoy the benefits of a Convention
     designed to protect those refugees. As La Forest J. observes in Ward, supra, at p. 733,
     “actions which deny human dignity in any key way” and “the sustained or systemic
     denial of core human rights . . . se[t] the boundaries for many of the elements of the
     definition of ‘Convention refugee’”. This purpose has been explicitly recognized by the
     Federal Court of Appeal in the context of the grounds specifically enumerated in Article
     1F(a) in Sivakumar v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1994] 1 F.C.
     433, where Linden J.A. stated (at p. 445): “When the tables are turned on persecutors,
     who suddenly become the persecuted, they cannot claim refugee status. International
     criminals, on all sides of the conflicts, are rightly unable to claim refugee status.”
                                                  - 50 -
64               This brings me back to the second point to be taken from the declarations
     of the French delegate referred to earlier. In the light of the general purposes of the
     Convention, as described in Ward, and elsewhere, and the indications in the travaux
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     préparatoires as to the relative ambit of Article 1F(a) and F(c), the purpose of Article
     1F(c) can be characterized in the following terms: to exclude those individuals
     responsible for serious, sustained or systemic violations of fundamental human rights
     which amount to persecution in a non-war setting.
     C. What Acts Are “Contrary to the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations”?
65               Determining the precise content of this phrase is significantly easier having
     defined a discrete purpose which Article 1F(c) was intended to play within the structure
     and purposes of the Convention. The parties before us presented various alternatives as
     to what should be included within the section and sought to do so with a high degree of
     particularity. In my view, attempting to enumerate a precise or exhaustive list stands in
     opposition to the purpose of the section and the intentions of the parties to the
     Convention. There are, however, several types of acts which clearly fall within the
     section. The guiding principle is that where there is consensus in international law that
     particular acts constitute sufficiently serious and sustained violations of fundamental
     human rights as to amount to persecution, or are explicitly recognized as contrary to the
     purposes and principles of the United Nations, then Article 1F(c) will be applicable.
66               Several categories of acts fall within this principle. First, where a widely
     accepted international agreement or United Nations resolution explicitly declares that
     the commission of certain acts is contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
     Nations, then there is a strong indication that those acts will fall within Article 1F(c).
     The Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (GA
                                                   - 51 -
     Res. 47/133, 18 December 1992, Article 1(1)), the Declaration on the Protection of All
     Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
     Treatment or Punishment (GA Res. 3452 (XXX), 9 December 1975, Article 2), and the
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
     Terrorism (GA Res. 51/210, 16 January 1997, Annex, Article 2), all designate acts which
     are contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. Where such
     declarations or resolutions represent a reasonable consensus of the international
     community, then that designation should be considered determinative.
67                Similarly, other sources of international law may be relevant in a court’s
     determination of whether an act falls within Article 1F(c). For example, determinations
     by the International Court of Justice may be compelling. In the case United States
     Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Tehran, I.C.J. Reports 1980, p. 3, at para. 91, the court
     found:
                  Wrongfully to deprive human beings of their freedom and to subject them
                  to physical constraint in conditions of hardship is in itself manifestly
                  incompatible with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as
                  well as with the fundamental principles enunciated in the Universal
                  Declaration of Human Rights.
     The International Court of Justice used even stronger language in the advisory opinion
     concerning the Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa
     in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970),
     I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16, at para. 131, finding that the policy of apartheid “constitute[s]
     a denial of fundamental human rights [and] is a flagrant violation of the purposes and
     principles of the Charter”.
                                                    - 52 -
68                Another important aspect of the exclusion under Article 1F(c) is the
     inference that violators of the principles and purposes of the UN must be persons in
     positions of power. This inference is drawn by the UNHCR Handbook at paras. 162-63
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     and in particular by the Canadian delegate to the Social Committee meetings of 1950 and
     1951. While many commentators share this view (Hathaway, supra, at p. 229; A. Grahl-
     Madsen, The Status of Refugees in International Law (1966), vol. 1, at p. 286; and Kälin,
     Köfner and Nicolaus, in Goodwin-Gill, supra, at p. 110, note 162), the jurisprudence of
     signatory states is evolving along a different stream. Goodwin-Gill reports in his
     treatise, at p. 113, that the Tehran decision was the basis of the exclusion of a refugee
     under Article 1F(c) by Australian immigration authorities, indicating that it may be
     possible for non-state actors to be excluded by the provision. He contrasts this approach
     with that in France and Germany which appear to require that the acts be clothed in the
     authority of the state. Although it may be more difficult for a non-state actor to
     perpetrate human rights violations on a scale amounting to persecution without the state
     thereby implicitly adopting those acts, the possibility should not be excluded a priori.
     As mentioned earlier, the Court must also take into consideration that some crimes that
     have specifically been declared to contravene the purposes and principles of the United
     Nations are not restricted to state actors.
69                In this case, we are concerned with drug trafficking. There is no indication
     in international law that drug trafficking on any scale is to be considered contrary to the
     purposes and principles of the United Nations. The respondent submitted evidence that
     the international community had developed a co-ordinated effort to stop trafficking in
     illicit substances through numerous UN treaties, declarations, and institutions. It has not,
     however, been able to point to any explicit declaration that drug trafficking is contrary
     to the purposes and principles of the United Nations, nor that such acts should be taken
     into consideration in deciding whether to grant a refugee claimant asylum. Such an
                                                  - 53 -
     explicit declaration would be an expression of the international community’s judgment
     that such acts should qualify as tantamount to serious, sustained and systemic violations
     of fundamental human rights constituting persecution.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
70               The second category of acts which fall within the scope of Article 1F(c) are
     those which a court is able, for itself, to characterize as serious, sustained and systemic
     violations of fundamental human rights constituting persecution. This analysis involves
     a factual and a legal component. The court must assess the status of the rule which has
     been violated. Where the rule which has been violated is very near the core of the most
     valued principles of human rights and is recognized as immediately subject to
     international condemnation and punishment, then even an isolated violation could lead
     to an exclusion under Article 1F(c). The status of a violated rule as a universal
     jurisdiction offence would be a compelling indication that even an isolated violation
     constitutes persecution. To that end, if the international community were ever to adopt
     the Draft Statute of the International Criminal Court, UN Doc. A/CN.4/L.491/Rev.2,
     which currently includes trafficking in narcotics within its jurisdiction, along with war
     crimes, torture and genocide, then there would be a much greater likelihood of a court
     being able to find a serious violation of human rights by virtue of those activities.
71               A serious and sustained violation of human rights amounting to persecution
     may also arise from a particularly egregious factual situation, including the extent of the
     complicity of the applicant. Assessing the factual circumstances of a human rights
     violation as well as the nature of the right violated would allow a domestic court, for
     example, to determine on its own that the events in the Tehran hostage-taking warrant
     exclusion under Article 1F(c).
                                                  - 54 -
72               In this case there is simply no indication that the drug trafficking comes
     close to the core, or even forms a part of the corpus of fundamental human rights. The
     respondent sought to bring the Court’s attention to a novel category of international
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     offence devised by M. C. Bassiouni called “crimes of international concern”
     (International Criminal Law, vol. 1, Crimes (1986), at pp. 135-63). Those “crimes”
     evince certain characteristics indicating that the international community does view their
     violation as particularly serious and worthy of immediate sanction; however, the bar
     appears to be set too low, including such categories of offence as “interference with
     submarine cables” and “environmental protection”, as well as drug trafficking and eight
     other categories.
73               It is also necessary to take account of the possible overlap of Article 1F(c)
     and F(b) with regard to drug trafficking. It is quite clear that Article 1F(b) is generally
     meant to prevent ordinary criminals extraditable by treaty from seeking refugee status,
     but that this exclusion is limited to serious crimes committed before entry in the state of
     asylum. Goodwin-Gill, supra, at p. 107, says:
                      With a view to promoting consistent decisions, UNHCR proposed that,
                 in the absence of any political factors, a presumption of serious crime might
                 be considered as raised by evidence of commission of any of the following
                 offences: homicide, rape, child molesting, wounding, arson, drugs
                 trafficking, and armed robbery.
     The parties sought to ensure that common criminals should not be able to avoid
     extradition and prosecution by claiming refugee status. Given the precisely drawn scope
     of Article 1F(b), limited as it is to “serious” “non-political crimes” committed outside
     the country of refuge, the unavoidable inference is that serious non-political crimes are
     not included in the general, unqualified language of Article 1F(c). Article 1F(b)
     identifies non-political crimes committed outside the country of refuge, while Article
                                                  - 55 -
     33(2) addresses non-political crimes committed within the country of refuge. Article
     1F(b) contains a balancing mechanism in so far as the specific adjectives “serious” and
     “non-political” must be satisfied, while Article 33(2) as implemented in the Act by ss.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     53 and 19 provides for weighing of the seriousness of the danger posed to Canadian
     society against the danger of persecution upon refoulement. This approach reflects the
     intention of the signatory states to create a humanitarian balance between the individual
     in fear of persecution on the one hand, and the legitimate concern of states to sanction
     criminal activity on the other. The presence of Article 1F(b) suggests that even a serious
     non-political crime such as drug trafficking should not be included in Article 1F(c). This
     is consistent with the expression of opinion of the delegates in the Collected Travaux
     Préparatoires of the 1951 Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (1989),
     vol. III, at p. 89.
74                 There is no rational connection between the objectives of the Convention
     and the objectives of the limitation on Article 1F(c) as stated by the respondent. Until
     the international community makes clear its view that drug trafficking, in one form or
     another, is a serious violation of fundamental human rights amounting to persecution,
     then there can be no rationale for counting it among the grounds of exclusion. The
     connection between persecution and the international refugee problem is what justifies
     the definitional exclusions in Article 1F(a) and F(c). Acts which fall short of persecution
     may well warrant refoulement under Article 33, and the Act has provided a procedure
     for determination of the merits of that issue. The a priori denial of the fundamental
     protections of a treaty whose purpose is the protection of human rights is a drastic
     exception to the purposes of the Convention as articulated in Ward, supra, and can only
     be justified where the protection of those rights is furthered by the exclusion.
     VI. Disposition
                                                  - 56 -
75               Even though international trafficking in drugs is an extremely serious
     problem that the United Nations has taken extraordinary measures to eradicate, in the
     absence of clear indications that the international community recognizes drug trafficking
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     as a sufficiently serious and sustained violation of fundamental human rights as to
     amount to persecution, either through a specific designation as an act contrary to the
     purposes and principles of the United Nations (the first category), or through
     international instruments which otherwise indicate that trafficking is a serious violation
     of fundamental human rights (the second category), individuals should not be deprived
     of the essential protections contained in the Convention for having committed those acts.
     Article 33 and its counterparts in the Act are designed to deal with the expulsion of
     individuals who present a threat to Canadian society, and the grounds for such a
     determination are wider and more clearly articulated. It is therefore clear that my
     determination of the scope of Article 1F(c) of the Convention, as incorporated in
     domestic law by s. 2(1) of the Act, does not preclude the Minister from taking
     appropriate measures to ensure the safety of Canadians.
76               In my view, the appellant’s conspiring to traffic in a narcotic is not a
     violation of Article 1F(c).
77               I would allow the appeal and return the matter to the Convention Refugee
     Determination Division for consideration under Article 33 of the Convention, and ss. 19
     and 53 of the Act, if the respondent chooses to proceed.
                 The reasons of Cory and Major JJ. were delivered by
78               CORY J. (dissenting) -- Mr. Pushpanathan was a member of a group
     convicted of trafficking in heroin with a street value of $10 million. Obviously this
                                                  - 57 -
     trafficking was on a large scale. He was sentenced to eight years which confirmed his
     role as one of the ringleaders.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
79                The United Nations considers heroin to be the most dangerous of illicit
     drugs. Trafficking in that drug is indeed a despicable crime. It will be demonstrated that
     its consumption leads consumers, almost inexorably, to commit crimes to satisfy their
     addiction. The potential profits are so high that it frequently leads to criminal activity
     and money laundering. It can lead to corruption of customs officials, police and judicial
     officers. It is a crime with such grievous consequences that it tears at the very fabric of
     society.
80                Thus it is apparent that Pushpanathan was convicted of a very serious crime
     that has devastating consequences. The grave nature of the crime cannot be readily
     discounted and forgotten. However even the basest criminal is entitled to exercise all
     the rights to which he is entitled.
81                It is necessary to review and consider the effects of drug trafficking in
     Canada and the world, but before doing so I wish to confirm my agreement with
     Bastarache J. that the applicable standard of review is one of correctness.
     I. Standard of Review
82                What constitutes an act contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
     Nations for the purposes of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Can. T.S.
     1969 No. 6 (“Refugee Convention”), is a question of law. While the Immigration and
     Refugee Board must be accorded some deference in its findings of fact, that deference
     should not be extended to a finding on a question of law. The Board cannot be said to
                                                  - 58 -
     have any particular expertise in legal matters. Therefore the issue is whether the Board’s
     decision on the question of law was correct.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     II. Illicit Drug Trafficking: Background
     A. Impact in Canada
                  (1) Incidence of Illicit Drug Use and Trafficking in Canada
83                Illicit drug use and trafficking is a serious problem in Canada and those that
     traffic in dangerous drugs must be a very real concern for all Canadians. Recent
     information shows that there has been an increase both in the use of illicit drugs and in
     the incidence of drug offences. According to a report of the Canadian Centre on
     Substance Abuse, illicit drug use increased substantially from 1993 to 1994: cannabis
     from 4.2 to 7.4 percent; cocaine from 0.3 to 0.7 percent; LSD, speed or heroin from 0.3
     to 1.1 percent (D. McKenzie, Canadian Profile: Alcohol, Tobacco & Other Drugs
     (1997), at p. 91).
84                The number of drug-related incidents reported annually has increased in
     each of the past several years. In 1993, 56,811 incidents were reported (Canadian Centre
     for Justice Statistics, Canadian Crime Statistics 1993, at p. 52); in 1994, that number had
     increased to 60,594 (Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Canadian Crime Statistics
     1994, at p. 16). The latest reports show another increase from 1995 to 1996; there were
     65,106 drug-related incidents in 1996, which represented a 4.4 percent increase over the
     previous year (Juristat, vol. 17, No. 8, 1997, at p. 10). At the end of 1996, there were
     2,899 drug offenders incarcerated in federal institutions, constituting 21.3 percent of the
     federal prison population (L. L. Motiuk and R. L. Belcourt, Research Branch,
                                                   - 59 -
     Correctional Service of Canada, Homicide, Sex, Robbery and Drug Offenders in Federal
     Corrections: An End-of-1996 Review, at p. 13).
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                  (2) Drugs and Crime
85                Drug offences such as possession and trafficking are only part of the link
     between the drug trade and criminality. There is an established connection between
     heavy drug use and crimes motivated by the need to finance a drug habit (Juristat,
     vol. 14, No. 6, 1994, at p. 5). A Canadian survey of federal inmates showed that
     40 percent of men were drug users and half of those had engaged in criminal activity to
     get drugs. For women, the ratio is even greater: 25 percent of female inmates in Canada
     committed their crimes solely to obtain drugs (ibid., p. 12).
86                In addition, the illegal drug trade is known to involve violence as a means
     of resolving disputes and maintaining discipline (ibid., p. 9). In 1996, 56 homicides, that
     is to say one in ten, were reported by police to be drug-related; this was said to be similar
     to averages for other years (Juristat, vol. 17, No. 9, 1997, at p. 10).
87                Finally, it is well established that the consumption of licit and illicit drugs
     increases the rate of criminality generally, not just offences directly related to drugs.
     Among a sample of federal male inmates, over half were under the influence of alcohol
     or other drugs when they committed at least one of their crimes (Juristat, vol. 14, supra,
     at p. 11). Seventy-one percent of those of those who had consumed drugs said they
     would not have committed the crime if they had not taken the drugs (ibid., p. 12). Thus,
     as might be expected, U.S. research indicates that drug abusers are more likely to be
     re-arrested than non-abusers (Bureau of Justice Statistics, Drugs and Crime Facts, 1994,
     at p. 26). Furthermore, research indicates that from 30 to 50 percent of those convicted
                                                    - 60 -
     of drug offences re-offend (ibid.; Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, An Examination
     of Recidivism in Relation to Offence Histories and Offender Profiles (1993), at p. 21).
                                                                                                       1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
88                In the face of all of this evidence, it is impossible to underestimate the harm
     that is done to Canadian society in the form of criminal activity, often violent, by the
     trafficking of illicit drugs. Unfortunately, there are also other costs associated with illicit
     drug trafficking and use, which reflect the widespread harm caused by these activities.
                  (3) Social and Economic Costs of Illicit Drug Use
89                The costs to society of drug abuse and trafficking in illicit drugs are at least
     significant if not staggering. They include direct costs such as health care and law
     enforcement, and indirect costs of lost productivity.
90                In Canada, the total cost to society of substance abuse has been estimated
     to be $18.45 billion annually (Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse, The Costs of
     Substance Abuse in Canada: Highlights (1996), at p. 2). Of this amount, the cost
     flowing from illicit drugs is $1.4 billion (McKenzie, supra, at p. 227). In 1992 there
     were 732 deaths, 7,095 hospitalizations and 58,571 hospital days in Canada attributable
     to illicit drugs (ibid., p. 91). Mortality from illicit drugs is less than for alcohol and
     tobacco, but tends to involve younger victims (Costs of Substance Abuse in Canada,
     supra, at p. 6).
91                These significant and often tragic consequences serve to emphasize that the
     harm caused by trafficking in illicit drugs is very properly a matter of grave concern in
     Canada, as it is throughout the world.
                                                  - 61 -
     B. International Impacts
                 (1) Extent of the Problem
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
92               Global consumption of illicit drugs is difficult to estimate, due to the lack
     of international information gathering facilities and the difficulty of comparing national
     data. It is clear, however, that illicit drug consumption increased throughout the world
     in the 1980s and 1990s, and the upward trend is thought likely to continue (Commission
     on Narcotic Drugs, Economic and Social Consequences of Drug Abuse and Illicit
     Trafficking: An Interim Report, UN Doc. E/CN.7/1995/3, 9 November 1994, at p. 14).
     The problem of drug abuse has also been increasing in severity as well as in scope.
     There has been an increase not only in the absolute number of drug abusers, but also in
     instances of heroin and amphetamine use, and intravenous drug abuse. Heroin, opium
     and cocaine are increasingly being injected, with all of the increased health risks that
     injection entails (Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Reduction of Illicit Demand for
     Drugs: Prevention Strategies Including Community Participation -- World situation
     with respect to drug abuse: Report of the Secretariat, UN Doc. E/CN.7/1995/5,
     10 January 1995, at pp. 3-4). About 20 percent of the world’s HIV/AIDS population
     inject drugs (UN International Drug Control Programme, World Drug Report (1997), at
     p. 91). Especially disturbing are reports of increasing numbers of young people abusing
     drugs. For example, in Pakistan the proportion of people who began using heroin
     between the ages of 15 and 20 has doubled to almost 24 percent; in the U.S., use of
     marijuana and cocaine amongst eighth grade students is reported to have doubled
     between 1991 and 1994 (ibid., p. 86).
93               Production of illicit drugs has significantly increased over the past 10 to 15
     years. Countries traditionally associated with the production of drugs have also become
                                                   - 62 -
     major consumers, and are now part of the global expansion of markets for illicit drugs
     (World situation with respect to drug abuse, supra, at p. 3). It is estimated that over 300
     tonnes of heroin were produced annually in the 1990s, and enough coca leaf was
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     produced in 1996 to yield 1,000 tonnes of cocaine (World Drug Report, supra, at p. 18).
94                Conservative estimates of the annual global turnover of the illicit drug
     industry are from US$400 to 500 billion. This is approximately one tenth of total
     international trade, and seven to eight times the amount spent on official development
     assistance each year (Economic and Social Consequences of Drug Abuse and Illicit
     Trafficking, supra, at p. 8). The drug trade has become increasingly organized,
     especially for cocaine and heroin, and is controlled by organized groups and in some
     cases cartels. At the upper levels, control is highly centralized (World Drug Report,
     supra, at p. 123).
                  (2) Economic and Social Costs of Illicit Drug Use and Trafficking
95                The economic costs of drug trafficking and abuse are even greater in
     countries other than in Canada. They include enforcement, legal, prevention, care and
     rehabilitation costs.   In all parts of the world, drug abuse reduces productivity
     (Economic and Social Consequences of Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, supra, at
     p. 19). In drug-producing countries, some employment is generated, but less than is
     generally believed (ibid.). Drug money is often invested in sectors that create or
     maintain unproductive jobs (ibid., p. 20).
96                Other economic costs can include inflated costs of food and real estate as a
     result of drug cultivation and the investment of illicit profits in land (ibid., p. 24). This
     inflation causes increased hardship for local communities.           Furthermore, income
                                                   - 63 -
     disparities in society are increased by both production and consumption.               The
     hierarchical nature of the illicit drug industry means that profits are received by only a
     small number of people. At the top level, the entire industry is controlled by a few
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
     individuals (ibid., p. 25).
97                In the short term, drug exports appear to be beneficial to some countries by
     generating much-needed foreign exchange, in some cases as much as half the amount of
     total legal exports. Despite the short term beneficial effects on local economies, the long
     term effects are negative.      The failure to develop alternative exports creates a
     dependence on illicit drug exports and a consequent vulnerability (ibid., pp. 25-26).
98                It is estimated that some US$300 to 500 billion per year from the illicit drug
     industry are available internationally for laundering. These amounts are staggering when
     compared to the gross national products of many developing countries (ibid., p. 26).
     Investment of illicit proceeds and laundering results in significant distortions of national
     economies. In states in transition that are rapidly moving state-owned assets into the
     private sector, problems occur when those assets become the target of criminal finance.
     In all parts of the world, the presence of large amounts of illicit drug money invested in
     an economy makes macro-economic policy and management extremely difficult. Drug
     trafficking and drug related violence require increases in state budgets for enforcement
     at the expense of other social needs, and jeopardize foreign investment by creating
     insecurity (ibid., p. 28).
99                The social impacts of illicit drug use and trafficking are also significant.
     Substance abuse and the breakdown of families and communities are linked together in
     a downward spiral. Disintegration of the family contributes to illicit drug abuse, and
     abuse in turn strains families and tends to make them dysfunctional (ibid., p. 29). In
                                                    - 64 -
      producing areas, communities are subject to intimidation and brutality from both the
      criminal organizations and the police or army; tribal, community and co-operative rural
      organizations are broken down under pressure from traffickers and associated terrorist
                                                                                                  1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      groups (UN Department of Public Information, Drug Trafficking and the World
      Economy (1990); quoted in M. C. Bassiouni, “Critical Reflections on International and
      National Control of Drugs” (1990), 18 Denv. J. Int’l L. & Pol’y 311, at p. 327).
100                The negative impact of drug abuse on health, including increased mortality
      and a range of drug-related health problems, is another significant social cost (Economic
      and Social Consequences of Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, supra, at pp. 29-30).
      The demonstrated links between drug addiction, needle-sharing, prostitution, AIDS and
      other diseases create additional worldwide dangers for health (ibid., p. 32).
101                The use of drugs has a detrimental impact on education; again this is a
      vicious circle in which drug use results in impaired performance and problems such as
      the loss of self-esteem from lack of educational achievement contribute to drug
      consumption (ibid., p. 33).
102                Finally, there is growing evidence of serious detrimental impacts on the
      environment both from drug cultivation and processing (e.g., the use and dumping of
      hazardous chemicals), and from efforts to curtail these activities (such as the spraying
      of herbicides to eradicate illicit cultivation) (ibid., pp. 33-34).
                   (3) Links to Criminal Activity and Corruption
103                Drug-related crime is a serious problem in producer and consumer countries
      alike. The incidence of criminal activity increases with drug addiction, as users engage
                                                   - 65 -
      in property crimes and prostitution to support their habits. Violent conflicts among
      trafficking groups significantly increase the incidence of violence in some areas (ibid.,
      p. 35).
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
104                Illicit drug use and trafficking has a two-fold impact on law enforcement.
      First, it diverts time, energy and resources away from other responsibilities. Second,
      especially in the case of a well-organized industry, there is a risk of police corruption.
      Criminal activity and funds related to drug trafficking also have a broader corrupting
      impact on government and civil society. In some countries the money available from the
      drug trade seriously undermines the democratic process through the purchasing of
      protection, influence and votes. There are obvious dangers of corruption in the judicial
      system as well. Further the presence of large amounts of illegitimate funds also has the
      potential to destabilize national economies, which in turn renders the political system
      vulnerable and dependent (ibid., p. 36).
                   (4) Threats to International Political and Economic Stability
105                The established links between organized crime, terrorist organizations, arms
      dealing and drug trafficking compound the risks to security in individual countries and
      in the international community. According to the United Nations International Drug
      Control Programme, “[i]n situations of armed conflict, illicit drug revenues -- or the
      drugs themselves -- are regularly exchanged for arms” (World Drug Report, supra, at
      p. 17). In some countries, such as Peru, trafficking organizations have formed alliances
      with guerrilla groups to ensure supplies of materials for processing (ibid., p. 128). The
      financial and military power of these organizations threatens to undermine the political
      and economic stability of numerous countries, and indeed the entire international
      community.
                                                   - 66 -
106               The combined effects of the trade in illicit drugs have led one author to
      conclude that drug profits “do more to corrupt social systems, damage economies and
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      weaken moral and ethical values than the combined effects of all other forms of crime.
      . . . The corrupting reach into government officials, politicians and the business
      community further endangers the stability of societies and governmental processes, and
      ultimately threaten political stability and even world order” (Bassiouni, supra, at
      pp. 323-24).
      C. The United Nations and the Control of Illicit Drugs
                  (1) United Nations Activity in the Area of Drug Control
107               The grave concern of the international community relating to the use and
      trafficking of illicit drugs predated the establishment of the United Nations, and drug
      control activities have continued since its founding. The consequences of trafficking in
      opium at the beginning of the century led to cooperative international efforts to control
      it. The International Opium Convention, 8 L.N.T.S. 187, was adopted in 1912. Since
      that time, over a dozen multilateral instruments as well as many bilateral agreements and
      innumerable other documents have been developed by the international community,
      under the auspices first of the League of Nations and then of the United Nations. Indeed
      actions aimed at controlling the traffic in drugs were taken upon the founding of the
      United Nations.
108               Recent UN activity in this area demonstrates an ever increasing concern with
      illicit drug trafficking and its associated ills. There are three major UN bodies that have
      been established to deal with drug control. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs
                                                    - 67 -
      (“CND”), a commission of the Economic and Social Council established in 1946, is the
      central policy-making body within the UN on drug-related matters. The United Nations
      International Drug Control Programme is the UN agency responsible for coordinating
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      activities in this area. The International Narcotics Control Board, established in 1968,
      is responsible for administering treaties relating to the international control of drugs,
      overseeing their implementation and promoting compliance.
109                 Until the 1980s, the most important international instruments were the Single
      Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 30 March 1961, 520 U.N.T.S. 204, amended by
      a Protocol in 1972 (Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,
      25 March 1972, 976 U.N.T.S. 3), and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 21
      February 1971, 1019 U.N.T.S. 175. The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961
      consolidated most of the previous multilateral treaties on drugs. Both the Single
      Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
      focussed on the supply and movement of drugs, and attempted to establish a network of
      administrative controls. More than 116 narcotic drugs and 111 psychotropic substances
      are controlled by these conventions. Canada is a signatory to both conventions
      (Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-General, United Nations, New York
      (ST/LEG/SER.E), as available on http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty on December 4,
      1997).
110                 By the 1980s, however, it had become apparent that the seriousness of the
      problem had continued to increase and that the measures taken up to that time were
      inadequate:
                    . . . as the power of the drug cartels became more pervasive and their
                    methods increasingly sophisticated, the need for new and more stringent
                    international measures became clear. Within the United Nations, the
                                                    - 68 -
                  Commission on Narcotic Drugs became the focus of efforts to formulate and
                  adopt a more comprehensive, long-range approach to the drug problem at
                  the international level.
                  (D. P. Stewart, “Internationalizing The War on Drugs: The UN Convention
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                  Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances”
                  (1990), 18 Denv. J. Int’l L. & Pol’y 387, at p. 390.)
      In 1981, an International Drug Abuse Control Strategy and programme of action were
      adopted (GA Res. 36/168, 16 December 1981), which targeted both use and trafficking.
      In 1984, the United Nations General Assembly passed a unanimous resolution asking
      that the CND be requested to begin preparation of a new convention (GA Res. 39/141,
      14 December 1984). The CND began work on the draft convention in the following year
      (Stewart, supra, at p. 390), and this work continued, with the encouragement of the
      General Assembly, for the next few years (see, e.g., GA Res. 40/120, 13 December
      1985).
111                An International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking attended
      by delegates from 138 states took place in Vienna in 1987 (Report of the International
      Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, UN Doc. A/CONF.133/12, at p. 97).
      Two major documents were adopted at the conference: the conference Declaration and
      the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control
      (ibid., pp. 88 and 3). The Outline is a non-binding set of guidelines to be used by
      member states and organizations in designing a comprehensive approach to the problems
      of drug abuse and trafficking (ibid., p. 7). It covers prevention and demand reduction,
      control of supply, suppression of illicit trafficking, and treatment and rehabilitation. The
      Declaration expressed concern about the effects of drug abuse and called for universal
      accession to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 and the Convention on
      Psychotropic Substances, and the completion and adoption of the new convention.
                                                   - 69 -
112               By the following year, the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic
      in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, UN Doc. E/Conf.82/15, 19 December
      1988 (“Illicit Traffic Convention”), was in the final stages of negotiation and drafting.
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      A conference for its adoption was held, with the delegations from 106 states participating
      (Final Act of the United Nations Conference for the Adoption of a Convention against
      Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, UN Doc. E/Conf.82/14,
      at para. 7). The Illicit Traffic Convention was adopted on December 19, 1988 and was
      immediately signed by 44 states, including Canada (D. W. Sproule and P. St-Denis, “The
      UN Drug Trafficking Convention: An Ambitious Step”, in Canadian Yearbook of
      International Law 1989, vol. XXVII, 263, at p. 263); it came into force in November
      1990. As of December 1997, 88 states have now signed the Illicit Traffic Convention
      (Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-General, United Nations, New York
      (ST/LEG/SER.E), as available on http://www.un.org/Depts/Treaty on December 4,
      1997).
113               The Illicit Traffic Convention has been described as “one of the most
      detailed and far-reaching instruments ever adopted in the field of international criminal
      law” (Stewart, supra, at p. 388). Its preamble recognizes “that illicit traffic is an
      international criminal activity, the suppression of which demands urgent attention and
      the highest priority”, and the eradication of which “is a collective responsibility of all
      States” (emphasis added). It includes provisions regarding the establishment of criminal
      offences for trafficking and related activities, the exercise of jurisdiction, confiscation
      of drugs, other materials and proceeds, extradition, mutual legal assistance and other
      forms of cooperation, control of substances, materials and equipment used in illicit
      manufacture, eradication of cultivation, and various other matters relating to the control
      of trafficking. It covers the narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances listed under the
      Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 and the Convention on Psychotropic
                                                   - 70 -
      Substances, as well as substances commonly used in the illicit manufacture of these
      drugs.
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
114               United Nations concern and activity relating to the control of illicit drug
      trafficking has continued to intensify throughout the last decade. Various organs and
      agencies of the United Nations have been addressing the problem of illicit drugs and
      associated issues such as organized crime, money laundering and terrorism. A special
      session of the General Assembly to consider the problem of illicit drugs is planned for
      8-10 June 1998 (GA Res. 51/64, 28 January 1997), and a high-level political declaration
      has been proposed for that session (Press Release, GA/SHC/3424, 27 October 1997).
115               The new UN Programme for Reform identifies drug control, crime
      prevention and combatting international terrorism as a priority area for the UN in the
      coming years (Renewing the United Nations: A Programme for Reform, UN Doc.
      A/51/950, 14 July 1997, at para. 144). The United Nations International Drug Control
      Programme and the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Division (renamed the Centre
      for International Crime Prevention) are to be reorganized to strengthen the UN’s
      activities in this area (ibid., paras. 144-45). The reform programme recognizes that
      “transnational networks of crime, narcotics, money-laundering and terrorism” are a
      threat to government authority, civil society and law and order, and that this is an issue
      of growing international concern (ibid., para. 143).
                  (2) Statements by the United Nations on Illicit Drug Trafficking
116               Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, international efforts to combat illicit drug
      trafficking have been included as an item of the General Assembly agenda in every
      session, and at each session, the General Assembly has adopted resolutions on the
                                                  - 71 -
      subject. These resolutions are not legally binding upon member states, but they clearly
      and strongly indicate the views of the United Nations and its members. The resolutions
      on the control of drug trafficking consistently contain expressions of extreme concern
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      about the problem and of condemnation for those who are responsible for its
      perpetuation and continued growth.
117               The following excerpts, from a 1986 resolution on the International
      campaign against traffic in drugs, GA Res. 41/127, 4 December 1986, are typical of the
      tone and content of these statements:
                      Conscious of the common concern that exists among peoples of the
                  world regarding the devastating effects of drug abuse and illicit trafficking,
                  which jeopardize the stability of democratic institutions and the well-being
                  of mankind and which therefore constitute a grave threat to the security and
                  an obstacle to the development of many countries,
                                                ...
                       Considering that, despite the efforts made, the situation continues to
                  deteriorate, owing, inter alia, to the growing interrelationship between drug
                  trafficking and transnational criminal organizations that are responsible for
                  much of the drug traffic and abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
                  substances and for the increase in violence, corruption and injury to society,
                      Acknowledging once more that the eradication of this scourge calls for
                  acknowledgement of shared responsibility . . .
                      1. Condemns unequivocally drug trafficking in all its illicit forms --
                  production, processing, marketing and consumption -- as a criminal activity
                  and requests all States to pledge their political will in a concerted and
                  universal struggle to achieve its complete and final elimination. . . .
                  [Emphasis added.]
      Subsequent declarations also expressed alarm at the detrimental impact on youth, both
      in terms of their involvement in production and trafficking, and the increasing numbers
      of drug addicted children and young people (e.g., GA Res. 43/121, 8 December 1988;
      GA Res. 44/141, 15 December 1989; GA Res. 46/103, 16 December 1991; GA Res.
                                                   - 72 -
      49/168, 24 February 1995), and at the increasing connection between drug trafficking
      and terrorism (e.g., GA Res. 44/142, 15 December 1989; GA Res. 45/149, 18 December
      1990; GA Res. 46/103, 16 December 1991; GA Res. 47/102, 16 December 1992; GA
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      Res. 48/112, 20 December 1993).
118               In 1990, a Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action were
      adopted at the seventeenth special session of the General Assembly, which was devoted
      to the control of illicit drug use and trafficking. The Political Declaration states:
                       We, the States Members of the United Nations,
                      Assembled at the seventeenth special session of the General Assembly
                  to consider the question of international co-operation against illicit
                  production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs
                  and psychotropic substances,
                      Deeply alarmed by the magnitude of the rising trend in the illicit
                  demand, production, supply, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs
                  and psychotropic substances, which are a grave and persistent threat to the
                  health and well-being of mankind, the stability of nations, the political,
                  economic, social and cultural structures of all societies and the lives and
                  dignity of millions of human beings, most especially of young people,
                                                 ...
                       Deeply concerned about the violence and corruption generated by the
                  illicit demand, production, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and
                  psychotropic substances and the high human, political, economic and social
                  costs of drug abuse and of the fight against the drug problem, entailing the
                  diversion of scarce resources from other national priorities, which in the
                  case of developing countries includes development activities,
                                                 ...
                      Recognizing the links between drug abuse and a wide range of adverse
                  health consequences, including the transmission of human
                  immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and the spread of acquired
                  immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS),
                      Recognizing also that illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and
                  psychotropic substances is a criminal activity and that its suppression
                  requires a higher priority and concerted action at the national, regional and
                  international levels by all States, . . .
                                             - 73 -
                 Noting that the large financial profits derived from illicit drug
            trafficking and related criminal activities enable transnational criminal
            organizations to penetrate, contaminate and corrupt the structure of
            Governments, legitimate commercial activities and society at all levels,
            thereby vitiating economic and social development, distorting the process
                                                                                               1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
            of law and undermining the foundations of States,
                                           ...
                 Alarmed at the growing link between illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs
            and terrorist activities, which is aggravated by insufficient control of
            commerce in arms and by illicit or covert arms transfers, as well as by
            illegal activities of mercenaries,
                                           ...
                Agree on the following:
                 1. We resolve to protect mankind from the scourge of drug abuse and
            illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances;
                2. We affirm that the fight against drug abuse and illicit trafficking in
            narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances should be accorded high priority
            by Governments and by all relevant regional and international
            organizations;
                                           ...
                8. We condemn the crime of illicit drug trafficking in all its forms and
            reaffirm our political commitment to concerted international action. . . .
            [Emphasis added.]
            (GA Res. S-17/2, 23 February 1990, Annex)
Most recently, a resolution adopted in January 1998 states that the General Assembly is:
                Gravely concerned that, despite continued increased efforts by States
            and relevant international organizations, there is a global expansion of illicit
            demand for, production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
            substances, including synthetic and designer drugs, which threatens the
            health, safety and well-being of millions of persons, in particular young
            people, in all countries, as well as the political and socio-economic systems
            and the stability, national security and sovereignty of an increasing number
            of States,
                 Deeply alarmed by the growing and spreading violence and economic
            power of criminal organizations and terrorist groups engaged in drug
            trafficking activities and other criminal activities, such as money laundering
                                                   - 74 -
                  and illicit traffic of arms and precursors and essential chemicals, and by the
                  increasing transnational links between them, . . .
                                                 ...
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                      Fully aware that States, the relevant organizations of the United Nations
                  system and multilateral development banks need to accord a higher priority
                  and political determination to dealing with this scourge, which undermines
                  development, economic and political stability and democratic institutions,
                  and the combat against which entails increasing economic costs for
                  Governments and the irreparable loss of human lives. . . . [Emphasis added.]
                  (GA Res. 52/92, 26 January 1998)
119               To traffic in dangerous illicit drugs is to commit a very grievous crime with
      very serious social consequences in Canada and throughout the world. In light of the
      grave international consequences it would be reasonable to expect the United Nations
      to have considered and studied the problem. The foregoing review confirms that those
      expectations have been met. The studies conducted by the United Nations have
      confirmed the gravity of the crime and the continuing tragedy of its consequences.
      These studies and the pronouncements of the United Nations concerning drug trafficking
      indicate that the crime can indeed be considered to be contrary to the purposes and
      principles of the United Nations.
      D. Application to the Case at Bar: Is Illicit Drug Trafficking an Act Contrary to the
         Purposes and Principles of the United Nations?
                  (1) How Should A Court Or Tribunal Determine What Constitutes An Act
                      Contrary to the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations?
120               On occasion, the United Nations itself has expressly declared a certain
      activity to be contrary to its purposes and principles. In those cases, the declaration
      depending on its legal status may compel a domestic court to find that the act is contrary
      to the purposes and principles of the United Nations, or at least persuade it to make such
                                                    - 75 -
      a finding. This is the situation which pertains to enforced disappearance, torture and
      international terrorism. The Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being
      Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      (GA Res. 3452 (XXX), 9 December 1975, Article 2) states that “[a]ny act of torture or
      other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is an offence to human
      dignity and shall be condemned as a denial of the purposes of the Charter of the United
      Nations. . . .”
121                The Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
      Disappearance (GA Res. 47/133, 18 December 1992, Article 1(1)) contains similar
      language with respect to enforced disappearance. The Declaration on Measures to
      Eliminate International Terrorism (GA Res. 49/60, 17 February 1995, Annex, Article 2)
      and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
      International Terrorism (GA Res. 51/210, 16 January 1997, Annex, Article 2) both state
      that the acts, methods and practices of terrorism are contrary to the purposes and
      principles of the United Nations. These declarations are persuasive evidence that the
      acts stated to be contrary to the purposes or principles of the United Nations should be
      treated as such, inter alia, for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.
122                It does not follow, however, that the category of acts contrary to the purposes
      and principles of the United Nations should be restricted to those expressly declared to
      be so. A domestic tribunal is entitled, upon considering the relevant material, to find that
      the phrase includes other types of acts. On this appeal two other categories were put
      forward as an indication of the kind of acts which should also be considered contrary to
      the purposes and principles of the United Nations: namely international crimes and
      “crimes of international concern”. While these categories may be useful guides, they
                                                    - 76 -
      should not, I think, be considered to be conclusive in determining the scope of acts which
      should be included.
                                                                                                      1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
123               The category of acts which are agreed to be true international crimes is, at
      least at the present time, a very limited one. These crimes would be considered acts
      contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations, but I do not think they
      constitute the only acts contravening the UN’s purposes and principles. On the other
      hand, the category of “crimes of international concern”, which it is suggested includes
      those crimes which are the subject of international conventions providing for
      international cooperation in prosecuting offenders, is a very broad one. (See, e.g., M.
      C. Bassiouni, International Criminal Law, vol. 1, Crimes (1986), at pp. 135-36.) He
      would include some activity which it would be inappropriate to label as “contrary to the
      purposes and principles of the United Nations”. Actions which do come within this
      description will have serious consequences. It follows that in the context of defining the
      scope of exclusions to the Refugee Convention, they should not be too broadly defined.
124               Similarly, it cannot be that every initiative of the United Nations is so central
      to its purposes and principles that any act which violates or undermines those initiatives
      is “contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations”. It is true that one of
      the purposes of the United Nations as expressed in its Charter is “[t]o achieve
      international cooperation in solving international problems” (Charter of the United
      Nations, Can. T.S. 1945 No. 7, Article 1(3)). However in light of the expansive, and
      expanding scope of the areas in which agencies of the United Nations are active, it would
      not be appropriate to use this wide range of activity to define the exclusion at issue here.
125               Nevertheless, there are some matters which are the subject of such grave
      concern and such intense and continuing activity that it may be inferred that they are
                                                   - 77 -
      fundamentally connected to the goals of the UN. It is not merely the extent of the
      concern and activity that will indicate which initiatives are central to the purposes and
      principles of the UN, but also the nature of the problem and its relationship to the
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      purposes and principles as they are expressed in the Charter. Some problems have been
      recognized by the international community as being so serious and of such a nature that
      they pose a threat to the entire international community and the principles of its social
      order. Conduct which directly or significantly contributes to these problems or which
      violates agreed principles or obligations with respect to them should, in appropriate
      cases, be considered as contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
      In my view trafficking to a significant extent in a dangerous drug such as heroin should
      be included in this category of conduct.
126               While I agree with Bastarache J. that serious or systematic violation of
      human rights would be conduct that is contrary to the purposes and principles of the
      United Nations, with respect, I do not see that it is the only conduct that should be
      considered in interpreting Article 1F(c) of the Refugee Convention. The promotion of
      respect for human rights is one of the fundamental purposes of the United Nations.
      There are, however, other purposes and principles which can be violated by the actions
      of an individual or a state. It may be useful to review the purposes and principles of the
      United Nations set out in the Charter:
                                               Article 1
                       The Purposes of the United Nations are:
                       1. To maintain international peace and security, and to that end: to take
                  effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the
                  peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the
                  peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the
                  principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of
                  international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the
                  peace;
                                            - 78 -
               2. To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the
           principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and to take other
           appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace;
               3. To achieve international cooperation in solving international
                                                                                              1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
           problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and in
           promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental
           freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion; and
                4. To be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the
           attainment of these common ends.
                                       Article 2
               The Organization and its Members, in pursuit of the Purposes stated in
           Article 1, shall act in accordance with the following Principles:
                1. The Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign equality
           of all its Members.
               2. All Members, in order to ensure to all of them the rights and benefits
           resulting from membership, shall fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed
           by them in accordance with the present Charter.
                3. All Members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
           means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice,
           are not endangered.
               4. All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the
           threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
           independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
           Purposes of the United Nations.
                5. All Members shall give the United Nations every assistance in any
           action it takes in accordance with the present Charter, and shall refrain from
           giving assistance to any state against which the United Nations is taking
           preventive or enforcement action.
               6. The Organization shall ensure that states which are not Members of
           the United Nations act in accordance with these Principles so far as may be
           necessary for the maintenance of international peace and security.
                7. Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the United
           Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially within the domestic
           jurisdiction of any state or shall require the Members to submit such matters
           to settlement under the present Charter; but this principle shall not prejudice
           the application of enforcement measures under Chapter VII.
These principles are reiterated and developed in the Declaration on Principles of
International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States in
                                                     - 79 -
      Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations (GA Res. 2625 (XXV), 24 October
      1970, Annex).
                                                                                                       1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
127                 The determination of what constitutes an act contrary to these purposes and
      principles need not be limited to the consideration of one purpose, the protection of
      human rights, notwithstanding the fact that it is important and that the Refugee
      Convention is a human rights instrument. Although the purpose of the instrument will
      be taken into account in interpreting its provisions, I do not see that in this case it must
      restrict the content of the exclusion so as to limit it to conduct relating directly to human
      rights. All of the purposes and principles should be considered. Furthermore, some
      types of conduct may indirectly but significantly contribute to the violation of human
      rights; I would include participation in large scale illicit drug trafficking in that category
      of conduct.
128                 The Refugee Convention should be interpreted so as to provide the greatest
      protection of human rights. Yet, it cannot be the case that the interpretation of an
      exclusion must be forever restricted. As international law develops, the content of a
      phrase such as “acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations” must
      be capable of development. The expansion of the exclusion set out in Article 1F(c) of
      the Refugee Convention should not be undertaken lightly, but where there is compelling
      evidence suggesting that it should be interpreted in a certain way, a court is not
      precluded from adopting that interpretation.
129                 International law is developing continuously. Courts should recognize that
      the guidance provided by interpretive aids such as the travaux préparatoires and
      subsequent practice must be considered in the light of the current state of the law and
      international understandings. The travaux préparatoires should be taken into account,
                                                     - 80 -
      yet this does not mean that courts are restricted to a precise interpretation of that
      material. Rather, consideration should be given to the underlying principles and
      concerns that they express with the aim of giving them a contemporary meaning.
                                                                                                       1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      Similarly, with regard to state practice, some consistency should be maintained with the
      line of interpretation revealed by the practice of state parties, but that interpretation must
      be adjusted to take into account evolving ideas and principles in international law. The
      interpretation of international legal instruments is a dynamic process which must take
      into account the contemporary conditions. To put it another way, the interpretation must
      respond to the contemporary context.
                   (2) Can a Private Individual Be Guilty of Acts Contrary to the Purposes and
                       Principles of the United Nations?
130                The position, that illicit drug trafficking activities may constitute acts
      contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations, assumes that private
      individuals can commit such acts. Although those involved in trafficking will sometimes
      hold public office or other positions of power, it is unlikely that they would be engaging
      in illicit trafficking in their capacity as state actors. More often the traffickers will be
      private individuals with no direct connection to state authority.
131                To hold that a private person who is not acting on behalf of or as agent of a
      state, could commit an act that is contrary to the purposes and principles of an
      international organization of nation states is, admittedly, contrary to the traditional
      position. Traditionally it was thought that the purposes and principles of the United
      Nations, like international law generally, are addressed only to states, and can be violated
      only by state actors. This is the position reflected in the portions of the travaux
                                                    - 81 -
      préparatoires and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees’ Handbook on
      Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status referred to by the appellant.
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
132               However, the status of private individuals in international law has evolved
      in recent years. It is now generally accepted that an individual acting in his or her
      private capacity can commit acts which constitute violations of international law.
      Although the scope of international criminal responsibility for private individuals is
      limited, it does exist. Some of the acts covered by Article 1F(a) can be committed by
      individuals who are not acting as officials or agents of a state. It follows that
      Article 1F(c), could also apply to individuals. For example the actions of a kidnapping
      or murdering terrorist; the illicit sale of arms by an arms dealer; or the trafficking in
      heroin in a large scale which might fund the acts of the terrorist or arms dealer could all
      contravene the aims and principles of the United Nations.
133               Furthermore, some of the acts which have been explicitly recognized as
      contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations are also recognized to be
      committed, at least in some cases, by private individuals. The Declaration on Measures
      to Eliminate International Terrorism implies that terrorist acts may be committed with
      or without official state involvement. This is apparent from the Preamble that refers to
      “acts of international terrorism, including those in which States are directly or indirectly
      involved” (emphasis added).
134               The position adopted by my colleague, Bastarache J., that “acts contrary to
      the purposes and principles of the United Nations” should be interpreted, for the
      purposes of the Refugee Convention, as meaning serious violations of human rights or
      persecution, also implies that private individuals could be guilty of these acts. Indeed
      this Court held in Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689, that
                                                    - 82 -
      persecution could, in some cases, include acts by private individuals without any state
      involvement (at pp. 713-17).
                                                                                                      1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                  (3) Is Trafficking in Illicit Drugs an Act Contrary to the Purposes and
                      Principles of the United Nations?
135               In my opinion significant trafficking in a dangerous illicit drug can constitute
      an act which is contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. It would
      thus form the basis of exclusion from refugee status pursuant to Article 1F(c) of the
      Refugee Convention. Although I accept the result arrived at by the courts below and
      suggested by the respondent, I arrive at that result by somewhat different reasoning.
136               At the outset it is important to set out certain propositions which do not form
      the basis for my position. I do not proceed on the basis that refugee status is a privilege
      or exceptional entitlement and that therefore any doubt in interpretation may be resolved
      against the potential claimant. To the extent that this was the basis underlying the
      reasons of Strayer J.A. in the Court of Appeal, I cannot with respect agree with that
      view. The right to claim refugee status constitutes an important right, and any exclusions
      from that right must be interpreted in accordance with accepted principles.
137               Next, the rationale for including illicit drug trafficking in the 1F(c) exclusion
      is not that Canada should be able to exclude from the refugee determination process
      persons who might be considered “undesirable” or who have, without more, committed
      crimes in Canada. These cases must be dealt with, if at all, according to the provisions
      for refoulement as they are incorporated into the Immigration Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-2.
                                                     - 83 -
138                It is also not, as the respondent suggested, a question of helping in some way
      in the “war against drugs”. Canada’s obligations do not require it to deny refugee status
      to those involved in the drug trade. Rather, the interpretation of the exclusion to include
                                                                                                        1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      drug trafficking reflects the harsh reality that this activity is recognized, both legally and
      practically, as an activity that not only is a domestic criminal offence, but occasions very
      serious and significant harm in the international community. It is because it gives rise
      to such grave consequences that it can and should form the basis of an exclusion. This
      conclusion arises from the consideration and application of the same rationale that
      prompted the international community to determine that certain persons should not,
      because of the nature of their actions, be permitted to make the claim to refugee status
      that they would otherwise be entitled to make.
                   (4) Illicit Drug Trafficking as an International Crime
139                Trafficking in illicit drugs is clearly a “crime of international concern”. The
      Illicit Traffic Convention explicitly recognizes that “illicit traffic is an international
      criminal activity, the suppression of which demands urgent attention and the highest
      priority” (Preamble). It requires all states who are parties to cooperate in the prevention
      and prosecution of trafficking offences. General Assembly resolutions have also referred
      to illicit drug trafficking as a criminal activity, which requires international cooperation
      to suppress (e.g., GA Res. 39/141, 14 December 1984, Annex; GA Res. 41/127, 4
      December 1986).
140                The legal status of illicit trafficking as an “international crime” is less clear,
      in large part because there is little agreement on what constitutes a true international
      crime (J. F. Murphy, “International Crimes” in C. C. Joyner, ed., The United Nations and
      International Law (1997), 362, at pp. 362-63). According to one author, “[i]n light of
                                                    - 84 -
      [the Illicit Traffic Convention] and the other earlier multilateral efforts a good argument
      can be made that international drug trafficking is a crime under customary international
      law” (ibid., pp. 369-70). However, it does not yet seem to be established that universal
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      jurisdiction exists for drug trafficking crimes. The latest version of the International Law
      Commission’s Draft Code of Crimes Against the Peace and Security of Mankind (Report
      of the International Law Commission on the work of its forty-eighth session, UN Doc.
      A/51/10, chapter 2) does not contain provisions on narcotics trafficking although they
      had been included in an earlier draft (Draft Articles on the Draft Code of Crimes Against
      the Peace and Security of Mankind, UN Doc. A/46/405, 11 September 1991, at p. 25).
      The commentary to the recent draft, however, indicates that this omission is not to be
      construed as precluding further discussion and perhaps the eventual inclusion of those
      provisions (Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its forty-eighth
      session, supra, at para. 40).
141               All of these elements may be considered in determining whether trafficking
      in illicit drugs is an act contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
      However, I do not think that the categorization of an act as an international crime or
      crime of international concern is determinative of the question. Rather it is necessary
      to consider the question in the context of all the relevant factors.
                  (5) Nature and Gravity of the Harm Caused by Illicit Drug Trafficking
142               The concern of the appellant and the intervener on this appeal was to
      establish some rational basis for identifying those “crimes of international concern” or
      activities contrary to some United Nations programme or initiative that could properly
      be called “acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations”. In my
      view, the additional factor which distinguishes illicit drug trafficking from some other
                                                    - 85 -
      “crimes of international concern” or United Nations initiatives is the nature and gravity
      of the harm to people in countries around the world and to the international community
      as a whole that results from this activity. An analysis of the nature and severity of the
                                                                                                      1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      harm provides a rational basis for drawing the necessary distinctions.
143                 The insidious and widespread effects of drug use and trafficking have
      already been described. Beyond any doubt the harm caused by the illicit traffic in drugs
      is of the utmost severity. This illicit traffic takes a dreadful toll on the lives of
      individuals, families and communities. It destabilizes and retards the development of
      whole nations and regions. Clearly the grave concern that has been consistently
      expressed by the international community is well merited. Nor can there be any doubt
      that the severity of the problem and the international concern for its consequences is
      increasing.
144                 Drug trafficking has, throughout this century, been an international
      enterprise and hence an international problem. However, the ever increasing scale of the
      traffic, the apparent efficiency of organization and sophistication, the vast sums of
      money involved and the increasing links with transnational organized crime and terrorist
      organizations constitute a threat which is increasingly serious in both its nature and
      extent. Illicit drug trafficking now threatens peace and security at a national and
      international level.     It affects the sovereignty of some states, the right of
      self-determination and democratic government, economic, social and political stability
      and the enjoyment of human rights. Many of the purposes and principles expressed in
      the UN Charter, are undermined, directly or indirectly, by the international trade in illicit
      drugs: for example, international peace and security (Article 1(1)), self-determination
      (Article 1(2)), solving economic, social, cultural or humanitarian problems (Article 1(3)),
      protection of human rights (Article 1(3)), sovereignty (Article 2(1)) and refraining from
                                                     - 86 -
      the use of force (Article 2(4)). It is on this basis that I find that at least some individuals
      who participate in and contribute to this activity must be considered to be committing
      acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
                                                                                                        1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                   (6) Explicit Statements Regarding Illicit Drug Trafficking by the United
                       Nations
145                The statements on this subject by the international community, including the
      relevant conventions and General Assembly resolutions, reflect an acute awareness of
      the nature and gravity of the problem, and a severe condemnation of the activities that
      give rise to the problem. It was contended by the intervener Canadian Council for
      Refugees that the silence of the United Nations on illicit drug trafficking, in contrast to,
      for example, torture and international terrorism, indicated that trafficking should not be
      considered contrary to its purposes and principles. Yet, in reality, the United Nations has
      been anything but silent with respect to its concerns about the international traffic in
      illicit drugs and its effects.
146                It is true that, the United Nations has never specifically declared that drug
      trafficking is “contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations”. However
      it has clearly and frequently recognized and denounced the evils of drug trafficking. See
      for example:
                        Trafficking in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances is a grave
                   international crime against humanity.
                   (Draft Convention against Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
                   Substances and Related Activities, GA Res. 39/141, 14 December 1984,
                   Annex, Article 2)
                   [The General Assembly] [c]ondemns unequivocally drug trafficking in all
                   its illicit forms. . . .
                                                  - 87 -
                  (GA Res. 41/127, 4 December 1986, Article 1)
                      We condemn the crime of illicit drug trafficking in all its forms. . . .
                  (Political Declaration, GA Res. S-17/2, 23 February 1990, Annex, Article
                                                                                                 1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                  8)
                  [The General Assembly] [s]trongly condemns the crime of drug trafficking
                  in all its forms. . . .
                  (GA Res. 45/149, 18 December 1990, Part I, Article 1; GA Res. 46/103, 16
                  December 1991, Part I, Article 2)
                  [The General Assembly] [r]eiterates its condemnation of the crime of drug
                  trafficking in all its forms. . . .
                  (GA Res. 47/102, 16 December 1992, Part I, Article 2; GA Res. 48/112, 20
                  December 1993, Part II, Article 1)
147               There are also many statements reflecting an awareness that trafficking
      threatens essential aspects of the purposes and principles of the United Nations. Drug
      trafficking has been recognized as a threat to:
                  health and well-being (e.g., GA Res. 36/132, 14 December 1981; GA Res.
                  39/141, 14 December 1984, Annex; GA Res. 40/122, 13 December 1985;
                  GA Res. 41/127, 4 December 1986; GA Res. 44/142, 15 December 1989;
                  GA Res. S-17/2, 23 February 1990, Annex; GA Res. 49/168, 24 February
                  1995; GA Res. 51/64, 28 January 1997; GA Res. 52/92, 26 January 1998);
                  political, economic, social and cultural structures (e.g., GA Res. 42/113, 7
                  December 1987; GA Res. 43/122, 8 December 1988; GA Res. 44/141, 15
                  December 1989; GA Res. 44/142, 15 December 1989; GA Res. S-17/2, 23
                  February 1990, Annex; GA Res. 45/149, 18 December 1990; GA Res.
                  49/168, 24 February 1995; GA Res. 51/64, 28 January 1997; GA Res. 52/92,
                  26 January 1998);
                  development (e.g., GA Res. 38/122, 16 December 1983; GA Res. 39/141,
                  14 December 1984, Annex; GA Res. 40/122, 13 December 1985; GA Res.
                  41/127, 4 December 1986; GA Res. S-17/2, 23 February 1990, Annex; GA
                  Res. 49/168, 24 February 1995; GA Res. 52/92, 26 January 1998);
                  political and economic stability (e.g., GA Res. 40/122, 13 December 1985;
                  GA Res. 44/142, 15 December 1989; GA Res. 45/149, 18 December 1990;
                  GA Res. 49/168, 24 February 1995; GA Res. 51/64, 28 January 1997; GA
                  Res. 52/92, 26 January 1998);
                                                    - 88 -
                  national security (e.g., GA Res. 36/132, 14 December 1981; GA
                  Res. 38/122, 16 December 1983; GA Res. 40/122, 13 December 1985; GA
                  Res. 41/127, 4 December 1986; GA Res. 42/113, 7 December 1987; GA
                  Res. 43/122, 8 December 1988; GA Res. 44/142, 15 December 1989; GA
                  Res. 45/149, 18 December 1990; GA Res. 49/168, 24 February 1995; GA
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                  Res. 51/64, 28 January 1997; GA Res. 52/92, 26 January 1998);
                  sovereignty (e.g., GA Res. 39/141, 14 December 1984, Annex; GA
                  Res. 40/121, 13 December 1985; GA Res. 44/142, 15 December 1989; GA
                  Res. 45/149, 18 December 1990; GA Res. 49/168, 24 February 1995; GA
                  Res. 51/64, 28 January 1997; GA Res. 52/92, 26 January 1998);
                  human rights (e.g., GA Res. 44/39, 4 December 1989; GA Res. 49/168, 24
                  February 1995);
                  and
                  democratic institutions (e.g., GA Res. 40/121, 13 December 1985; GA Res.
                  41/127, 4 December 1986; GA Res. 42/113, 7 December 1987; GA Res.
                  43/122, 8 December 1988; GA Res. 44/141, 15 December 1989; GA Res.
                  49/168, 24 February 1995; GA Res. 51/64, 28 January 1997).
148               As a basis for comparison, the Article of the Declaration on Measures to
      Eliminate International Terrorism that declares the acts, methods and practices of
      terrorism to be contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations states that
      these “may pose a threat to international peace and security, jeopardize friendly relations
      among States, hinder international cooperation and aim at the destruction of human
      rights, fundamental freedoms and the democratic bases of society” (Article 2). Since the
      United Nations has explicitly recognized that the traffic in illicit drugs may pose a
      similar threat, I think it is reasonable to infer that this activity is also contrary to the
      purposes and principles of the United Nations.
149               This conclusion is strengthened by the recognition that illicit drug trafficking
      is, to an increasingly significant extent, linked to other acts which are contrary to the
      purposes and principles of the United Nations. That organization has recognized that
      trafficking in illicit drugs is directly and indirectly responsible for grave human rights
      violations. Its growing links to international terrorism clearly indicate that drug money
                                                    - 89 -
      is used to support terrorist activity.      The international community has recently
      recognized this in the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to
      Eliminate International Terrorism by stating that:
                                                                                                     1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
                      2. The States Members of the United Nations reaffirm that acts,
                  methods and practices of terrorism are contrary to the purposes and
                  principles of the United Nations; they declare that knowingly financing,
                  planning and inciting terrorist acts are also contrary to the purposes and
                  principles of the United Nations. . . . [Emphasis added.]
150               The statements of the United Nations and the international community lead
      inexorably to the conclusion that those engaged in trafficking in illicit drugs are
      responsible, directly or indirectly, for harms that are so widespread and so severe that
      they undermine the very purposes and principles upon which the United Nations is
      based. It follows that their actions must be considered “acts contrary to the purposes and
      principles of the United Nations” and thus come within the exclusion set out in Article
      1F(c) of the Refugee Convention.
151               There remains the problem of distinguishing which acts within the broad
      category of illicit drug trafficking constitute acts contrary to the purposes and principles
      of the United Nations. The UN General Assembly has condemned “drug trafficking in
      all its illicit forms”, including production, processing, marketing and consumption (e.g.,
      GA Res. 41/127, 4 December 1986). However, I believe it is necessary to draw some
      distinctions based on the type and scale of activities. It is those actually engaged in
      trafficking who reap most of the profits, cause the greatest harm and therefore bear the
      greatest responsibility for perpetuating the illicit trade. Those who are merely consumers
      are often victims themselves and do not bear the same responsibility. The Illicit Traffic
      Convention recognizes this distinction by treating production, processing, distribution
                                                    - 90 -
      and sale differently from possession, purchase or cultivation for personal consumption
      for the purposes of offences and sanctions (Article 3).
                                                                                                      1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
152               The Illicit Traffic Convention also provides some guidance with respect to
      distinguishing particularly serious trafficking offences. Article 3(5) outlines a number
      of “factual circumstances which make the commission of the offences established in
      accordance with paragraph 1 of this article particularly serious”:
                      (a) The involvement in the offence of an organized criminal group to
                  which the offender belongs;
                      (b) The involvement of the offender in other international organized
                  criminal activities;
                      (c) The involvement of the offender in other illegal activities facilitated
                  by commission of the offence;
                       (d) The use of violence or arms by the offender;
                       (e) The fact that the offender holds a public office and that the offence
                  is connected with the office in question;
                       (f) The victimization or use of minors;
                      (g) The fact that the offence is committed in a penal institution or in an
                  educational institution or social service facility or in their immediate vicinity
                  or in other places to which school children and students resort for
                  educational, sports and social activities;
                      (h) Prior conviction, particularly for similar offences, whether foreign
                  or domestic, to the extent permitted under the domestic law of a Party.
153               To this list of factors to be considered, I would add the nature and quantity
      of the drugs involved. The International Law Commission’s draft code that included
      illicit traffic in narcotics as an international crime (Draft Articles on the Draft Code of
      Crimes Against the Peace and Security of Mankind, Article 25(1)) referred to trafficking
      on a large scale; of course it will be a question of interpretation in each case whether the
      trafficking at issue is “on a large scale”. The commentary of the International Law
                                                   - 91 -
      Commission on this article distinguishes between “isolated or individual activities of
      small dealers” and “large-scale, organized operations” (Report of the International Law
      Commission on the work of its forty-second session, UN Doc. A/45/10, in the Yearbook
                                                                                                    1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      of the International Law Commission 1990, vol. II, Part Two, 1, at p. 30).
154               In this case, the appellant was a participant in an organized group trafficking
      in heroin. Heroin is thought to be the most harmful of illicit narcotic drugs (World Drug
      Report, supra). Obviously its use and trafficking are a matter of particularly grave
      concern. At the time the arrests were made, the group with which the appellant was
      associated held heroin with a street value of approximately $10 million. This was clearly
      a major operation, and the appellant was an important participant in that operation.
      These facts, in my opinion, clearly indicate the seriousness of the appellant’s crime.
      Therefore, while not every domestic narcotics offence will provide a basis for exclusion
      under Article 1F(c) of the Refugee Convention, this appellant should, as a result of his
      actions, be excluded. He trafficked on a large scale in the most debilitating of drugs. He
      abused his status in Canada and jeopardized the lives, health and welfare of many. There
      is no reason why Canadians should be burdened with his continued presence. He has
      demonstrated his danger to Canadian society and indeed to the international community.
      He should not remain in Canada.
                  (7) Remedies Available Prior to Deportation
155               During the appeal, concern was expressed that the appellant or another
      individual excluded by Article 1F could face a risk of torture, execution or other serious
      human rights violation upon being deported to his country of origin. It was said that no
      effective remedy was available to prevent his deportation should such a risk exist. It was
      suggested that the absence of a remedy, would give rise to a serious injustice and would
                                                   - 92 -
      involve Canada in a breach of its legal obligations under various international
      instruments. In particular, Canada would be failing to meet its obligations under the
      Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
                                                                                                   1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      Punishment, Can. T.S. 1987 No. 36, not to expel or return a person to a state where there
      are substantial grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger of being subjected
      to torture (Article 3(1)) and similar obligations in the Principles on the Effective
      Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions
      (E/RES/1989/65, 24 May 1989, Article 5) and the United Nations Declaration on the
      Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, Article 8.
156               Although these issues are a valid cause for serious concern, they do not
      directly arise in this appeal. It was suggested to the Court that these concerns could be
      dealt with by adopting a “balancing” approach to the exclusion clauses in Article 1F.
      Such an approach would not be appropriate in light of the nature and wording of that
      article.
157               In the context of the present appeal, it is neither necessary nor desirable to
      examine in detail the remedies that are presently available to an individual facing
      deportation nor to suggest the particular form that such a remedy should take. However,
      it would be unthinkable if there were not a fair hearing before an impartial arbiter to
      determine whether there are “substantial grounds for believing” that the individual to be
      deported would face a risk of torture, arbitrary execution, disappearance or other such
      serious violation of human rights. In light of the grave consequences of deportation in
      such a case, there must be an opportunity for a hearing before the individual is deported,
      and the hearing must comply with all of the principles of natural justice. As well, the
      individual in question ought to be entitled to have the decision reviewed to ensure that
      it did indeed comply with those principles. These protections should be available
                                                 - 93 -
      whether or not the individual is excluded from claiming status as a refugee, to avoid
      unacceptably harsh consequences arising from the exclusion.
                                                                                              1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
      III. Conclusion
158              In the result I would dismiss the appeal.
 Appeal allowed, CORY and MAJOR JJ. dissenting.
Solicitors for the appellant: Waldman & Associates, Toronto.
                                                               1998 CanLII 778 (S.C.C.)
Solicitor for the respondent: George Thomson, Toronto.
Solicitor for the intervener: David Matas, Winnipeg.
                             COURT OF APPEAL OF ALBERTA
                                          MEMORANDUM
                                                                  December 28, 2007
  TO:              Distribution List
  FROM:            W•ttson J.A.
  RE:             Siksika First Nation     Alberta (Director Southern Region
                  2007 ABCA 402
                                        v.                                   Environment),
                  Docket: 0601-0319-AC
                  Date Filed: December 12, 2007
                                            CORRIGENDA
          Paragraph   14 has been replaced  with:
 [14]     Following   the submissions of counsel at the hearing of the appeal, the Court expected
 that the  appellant would sock judicial review of the Minister's decision before release of thc•e
 reasons.   The Court in allowing this appeal and in returning the matter to the Court of Queen's
 Bench therefore made a direction to consolidate the revived earlier motion to that Court
                                                                                                with
 what was expected to be an extant motion for judicial review of the Minlster*s
                                                                                           decision.
 Subsequent to the reasons of the Court being released, counsel for all the parties advised the
 Court that the appellant had not applied for judicial review of the Minister's decision.
                                                                                              Under
 those circumstances, the matter is simply returned to the Court of Queen's Bench for
 disposition on the basis of the reasons herein set out.
         Please replace  pages 3 and 4 in your hard copy oftbe  judgment.
Encl.
                                     In the Court of            Appeal      of  Alberta
   Citation: Siksika First Nation               Alberta (Director Southern Region
   ABCA 402                                v.
                                                                                                  Environment),      2007
                                                                                                        Date: 20071212
                                                                                               Docket: 0601-0319-AC
                                                                                                     Registry: C•lgary
  ]]etweeu:
                                            The Siksika First Nation
                                                                                                              Appel/ant
                                                                                                            (Applicant)
                      The Director Southern Region (Alberta
                           the Alberta Environmental Appeals Board
                                                                              Environment),
                                                                                       and
                                         The Town of Strafhmore
                                                                                                         Respondents
                                                                                                       (Respondents)
                 Corrected    judgment:  A    corrigendum        issued
                 the corrections have b•n made              was         on December 28,  2007;
                 to th•s juclgment.                 to the text and the corrigendum is appended
The Court:
                    The    Hononrable Madam Justice Elizabeth McFadyen
                             The Honourable Mr. Justice Keith Rifler
                             The Honourable Mr. Justice Jack Watson
         Reasons for Judgment Reserved of The Honourable
               Concurred in by The Honourable Madam Justice                     Mr. Justice Wagon
                    Concurred in by The Honourable Mr. Justice McFadyen             Ritter
                                       Appeal from the Ortter by
                             The Honourable Mr. •r•dce p.J. Mc•tyre
                                Dated the 6th day of September, 2006
                              Filed on the 6th day of November, 2006
                                        (Docket:      0601-06100)
                                                                                                                               Page:   3
        filed   an   Operational Plan which, according        to the   appellant,
                      about discharge.                                                 still failed    to  adequately     address its
        concerns
       [9]         Were this case exclusively within the boundary
       would be merit in the submission that the                              of the Director's original decision, there
      appellant's motion to the chambers judge sought declarationsis moot. However, as noted above, the
                                                            present    appeal
      and whether or not that duty could be                                         as to the extent of the duty to consult
                                                      met by the legislative scheme under the EPEA.
      [ 10] For the appellant, these questions did not
                                                                  rest solely on the terms of the l)ireetur's decision,
      nor the terms of any decisions by the EAB                     the Minister. Ia light of•. I1 and 16
     ,•dmmtstrattve Procedures andJurtsdict•onAct,orR.S.A.                  2000,                                             of the
     not have jurisdiction to decide                                                c.   A-3,  the  Director     and  the  EAB    did
                                               a "question of constitutional law". They could
     cortst•tUtlonal law nor tranzcend the junsdictaon                                                        not  therefore    state
            unlikely                                            gaven to them by the EPEd. Moreover, the Minister
     was                 to do more than presuppose the cortstitutionality of his
                                                                                              decision.
     [11 ] It was for the chambers judge to consider whether the
    EAB, or the Minister, or a remedy issued by any of them, might                process followad by the Directer, the
                                                                                     be relevant to consultation might
    meet the requisites of consultation. Neither folIowlng the                                                            or
    to a declaration respecting the scope of the duty
                                                                              process nor granting a remedy amourtt•
                                                               to consult, nor a declaration that the duty
   could or could not be met by following the procedural                                                                to consult
   of the chambers judge [FI9-F20] sets out that he                      steps  set out in the EPEd. The formal order
                                                                     made no decision on these contentions
   consultation. In addition to addressing the appellant's contentions,                  it was open to the chambers judge
                                                                                                                              as to
   to   decide     that it was not possible to fairly evaluate the consultative
   at the stage it had reached. However, had he done
                                                                                          capacity of the statutory process
                                                                      so,  that  would       amount to a dismissal of the
   appellant's argument that such a decision could be made
                                                                            on the face of the statutory structure, not
  a finding that the appellant's arguments
                                                       were premature,
  [12] It follows that the appollant's motion for declarations, argued,
  the stage of the legislative process. The appellant                              as              was not dependent upon
                                                                 contended that the duty to consult in tiffs context
          on •o•uraota {Minister 011, orests), 2004 SCC 73, [2004J 3 S.C.R.
 Nation v. Canada, 2005 SCC 69, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 398                                           511 and Mikisew Cree First
                                                                       at paras. 63 to 69, where the Supreme Court
  held that "It]he determination of the content of the duty
                                                                             to consult will, as ltalda suggests, be
 governed by the context."
 [13]         In   allowing     the appeal and returning the matter to the Court of Queen's
 ruling                 of  the   merits oftbe appellant's position in this regard. We
                                                                                                           Bench, we are not
             on any
 that the appellant's contentrons raised live and significant                                     are,   however,    persuaded
                                                                              issues, independertt of the procedural
 slage governed by the legislation. They were therefore within the chambers judge's
determine                          another.
                                                                                                                jurisdiction to
                   one  way    or
[14]          Following      the submissions of courtsel at the hearing of the          appeal, the Court expected
the     appellant would         seek judicial review of the Minister's decision                                              that
                                                                                         before release of those       reasons.
                                                                                                      Page:    4
  The Court in allowing th/• appeal
                                           and in rettuming the matter
  therefore made a d/recdon to consolidate                                 to the Court of Queen's Bench
                                                 the revived earlier mot/on to that
  expected to be an extant motion for judicial rev/ew                                  Court vdth what
                                                             of the Minister's decision. Subsequent was
  reasons of the Court being rele•ed, counsel for                                                      to the
 .had.                                                 all the parti• advised the Court that
       not applied for judicial review of the Minister's                                       the appellant
                                                          decision, Under those circumstances, the
 Is stmply returned to the Court of Queen's                                                           matter
                                                Bench for disposition on the basis of the
 set out.                                                                                    reasons herein
 Appeal heard    on  October 12, 2007
Reasons filed at Calgary, Alberta
this 12th day of December, 2007
                                                                           "Watso•kJ.A."
                                                                                              Watson J,A.
                                         I
                                                          Authorized to  sign for:        McFadyen    J.A.
                                        Iconcur;                          "•erJ-A."
                                                                                               •RerJ.A.
                                                                                                        Page:  6
                          Corrigendum     of the Reasons for Judgment Reserved
                                                                                        of
                                    The Honourable Mr. Justice Watson
  Paragraph     14 of the judgnaent  has been  replaced with the following:
  [14]     Following    the submissions of counsel at the hearing of the
 the   appellant  would seek judicial review of the Minister's decision
                                                                            appeal, the Court expected that
 The Court in allowing this appeal and in                                   before release of these
                                                   returning
 therefore made a direction to.consolidate the revived
                                                               the matter to the Court of Queen's reasons.
                                                                                                      Be•ch
                                                               earlier motion to that Court with what
 expected to be an extant motion for judicial review of the Minister's                                    was
reasons    of th,b Court being released,                                       decision. Subsequent to the
                                           counsel for all the parties •lvi•d the Court that
had not appli• for judicial review of the Minister's                                           the appellant
                                                           de•ision. Under those eiremnstanees, fine
is simply ret•-ned to the Court of Queen's Bench                                                      matter
                                                         for di•pesition on the basis of the          herein
set out.                                                                                     reasons
                            In the Court of        Appeal    of Alberta
Citation: Siksika First Nation    v.  Alberta   (Director Southern Region Environment),      2007
ABCA 4O2
                                                                                 Date: 20071212
                                                                         Docket: 0601-0319-AC
                                                                               Registry: Calgary
Between:
                                     The Siksika First Nation
                                                                                        Appellant
                                                                                      (Applicant)
                   The Director Southern Region (Alberta Environment),
                       the Alberta Environmental Appeals Board and
                                     The Town of Strathmore
                                                                                     Respondents
                                                                                   (Respondents)
The Court:
                   The Honourable Madam Justice Elizabeth McFadyen
                          The Honourable Mr. Justice Keith Rifler
                          The Honourable Mr. Justice Jack Watson
          Reasons for Judgment Reserved of The Honourable Mr. Justice Watson
                Concurred in by The Honourable Madam Justice McFadyen
                    Concurred in by The Honourable Mr. Justice Rifler
                                     Appeal from the Order by
                           The  Honourable    Mr. Justice P.J. Mclntyre
                             Dated the 6th day of September, 2006
                            Filed on the 6th day of November, 2006
                                       (Docket: 0601-06100)
                                   Reasons for Judgment Reserved of
                                 The Honourable Mr. Justice Watson
[1]      The appellant Siksika First Nation challenges the chambers judge's decision dated
September 6, 2006, declining to make a judicial review order against a decision of the respondent
Director of the Southern Region of Alberta Environment ("Director"), made under the
Environmental Protection and Enhancement Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. E-12 (EPEA).
[2]      In November, 2005, the Director approved an application by the respondent Town of
Strathmore ("Stmthmore") for a pipeline that would discharge waste water into the Bow River,
which passes through the appellant's reserve. The chambers judge concluded that the motion for
judicial review of the Director's decision was moot as, according to the review process established
under the EPEA, that decision was subject to further appeal to the Alberta Environmental Appeals
Board ("EAB"), and ultimately subject to a decision of the Minister of Environment ("Minister").
Given his determination of mootness based on the prematurity of the appellant's application, the
chambers judge did not exercise any discretion he may have had to consider the merits of the
appellant's challenge   to the Director's decision. In failing to do so, he erred.
[3]      The appellant not only sought judicial review of the Director's decision, but also sought
declaratory relief. That motion for declaratory relief was not rendered premature or otherwise moot
by reason of there being an internal appeal available from the Director's decision.
[4]      The appellant challenged the entire process, from the Director through to the Minister, as
being  an insufficient form of legal consultation for addressing what are, in the appellant's view, its
"interests and existing and claimed Treaty 7 and Aboriginal rights". The appellant sought
declarations as to the extent of the duty owed, and as to whether the statutory system was sufficient
to meet that duty. The appellant contended that the rights claimed were not confined by the
legislative scheme. The chambers judge effectively accepted the Director's position that the
declaratory relief sought by the appellant should be regarded as merely ancillary to, or adjectival of,
the grounds for objection to a specific decision of the Director. In doing so, the chambers judge set
aside the appellant's broader challenge that the entire statutory appeal process was not a legally
adequate form of Crown consultation.
 [5]     The chambers judge opined that the legislated review process about pipeline approval was
not"complete" (A.B.D., F7/26). In his view, it was premature to decide the question of consultation
because the later steps in the process might adequately address the appellant's concerns, either by
providing a form of consultation legally sufficient to meet the appellant's contentions, or by
providing a conclusion as effective as if there had been consultation legally sufficient to meet the
appellant's contentions. He was also concerned about the ramifications of litigation by instalments.
He was not persuaded that it was in the litigants' or the public's interest to offer an opinion on the
subject of consultation on the record before him, and divorced that issue from the appellunt's
substantive complaints about the handling of Stmthmore's waste water.
                                                                                                              Page:  2
[6]       Nonetheless, the chambers judge did offer              an opinion about significant points. Not only did
he consider       judicial    review of the Director's decision         prematurely moot, and suggest that any
consultation defect         exisfmgprior      to a  Director's  decision might be cured through later procedural
steps, if allowed, under the overall EPEA process, he also ruled                as follows:
          Counsel      on   behalf of Siksika argues that the duty to consult is a separate question,
          different than the kinds of questions that we often see in administrative cases that
          deal with mootness, prematurityand exhaustion o fremedies; that the EAB itself does
          not have the ability to assess the constitutinna[ validity ofanyconsultations; and that
          that is   only   for the Court; and that now is the time for the Court to      set out guidelines,
          to   make     a declaration, to make it clear what obligations there            are in relation to
          consultation with this First Nation and other First Nations.
          For me, this argument is not of assistance because it suggests that there is a duty to
          consult at large, no matter what the result of the Minister's decision may be. In other
          words, even though the Minister may overturn the decision of the Director, there still
          has been a breach of the duty to consult; a breach, it is said, of the honour of the
          Crown.
          I do not agree with the concept that this duty to consult can be looked at
          independently of a result. We do not have the result yet the final result- and we
          will not have it for some period of time. So, even though the decision may be said
          to be a final decision of the Director, it is subject to appeal, as I say, and it has been
          appealed. (A.B.D., F8/9-F9/8) [Emphasis added]
[7]       The chambers         judge described the consultation issue      as a factual question,  with both factual
and   legal   ramifications. He later added the following:
          One of the legal issues is whether this duty to consult is fixed in time; that is to say,
          did the consultation have to be adequate in relation to and only up to the time of the
          Director's decision? Or can, for example, a failure to consult be cured by subsequent
          actions, subsequent meetings, subsequent discussions?
          In   fact,  the EAB       itself, although it does   not  have the jurisdiction to decide issues
          relating to     consultation, can, it seems to       me, and counsel have argued to me, order
          that there be consultation. So there may well be issues about whether any failure, if
           there was one, to consult, can be cured. (A.B.D., F9/17-F10/2) [Emphasis added]
[8]        The chambers          judge    was correct that there was further activity to come in the statutory
process.     Subsequent       to  his  decision,   the EAB heard the appellant's appeal in February, 2007 and
issued a     Report and       Recommendations to the Minister on April 18, 2007. On May 18, 2007, the
Minister issued Ministerial Order No. 11/2007, which amended the Director's order largely in
accordance with the EAB's Report and Recommendations. The respondent Town of Strathmore then
                                                                                                             Page: 3
filed   an    Operational Plan which, according          to the appellant,   still failed to adequately  address its
concerns about discharge.
[9]        Were this case exclnsively within the boundary of the Director's original decision, there
would be merit in the submission that the present appeal is moot. However, as noted above, the
appellant's motion to the chambers judge sought declarations as to the extent of the duty to consult
and whether or not that duty could be met by the legislative scheme under the EPEA.
[10]       For the    appellant,    these questions did not rest solely on the terms of the Director's decision,
nor    the terms of any decisions by the EAB or the Miinster. In light ofss. I1 and t6 of the
Administrative Procedures and Jurisdiction Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. A-3, the Director and the EAB did
not have jurisdiction to decide a "question of constitutional law". They could not therefore state
constitutional law nor transcend the jurisdiction given to thembytheEPEA. Moreover, the Minister
was unlikely to do more than presuppose the constitutionality of Iris decision.
[1 I]      It  was  for the chambers      judge to consider whether the process followed by the Director, the
EAB, or the Minister, or a remedy issued by any of them, might be relevant to consultation or might
meet the requisites of consultation. Neither following the process nor granting a remedy amounts
to a declaration respecting the scope of the duty to consult, nor a declamtinn that the duty to consult
could or could not be met by following the procedural steps set out in the EPEA. The formal order
of the chambers judge [FI9-F20] sets out that he made no decision on these contentions as to
consultation. In addition to addressing the appellant's contentions, it was open to the chambers judge
to decide that it was not possible to fairly evaluate the consultative capacity of the statutory process
at  the   stage it had reached. However, had he done              so, that would amount to       a dismissal of the
appellatu's argument that such a decision could be made                on  the face of the statutory structure, not
a finding that the appellant's arguments were premature.
[12]       It follows that the       appellant's  motion for  declarations, as argued, was not dependent upon
the   stage of the legislative process.        The  appellant contended that the duty to consult in this context
was comparable to the duty to consult recognized in the "taking up" cases offtaida Nation v.
British Columbia (Minister of Forests), 2004 SCC 73, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511 andMildsew Cree First
Nation v. Canada, 2005 SCC 69, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 388 at pro-as. 63 to 69, where the Supreme Court
held that "It]he determination of the content of the duty to consult will, as llama suggests, be
governed by the context_"
[13]       In   allowing    the appeal and returning the matter to the Court of Queen's Bench, we are not
ruling    on any    of  the   merits of the appellant's position in this regard. We are, however, persuaded
that the appellant's contentions raised live and significant issues, independent of the procedural
stage governed by the legislation. They were therefore within the chambers judge's jurisdiction to
determine       one  way    or  another.
[14] By the time the matter reached us, the appellant had applied for judicial review of the
Minister's decision. We will therefore refrain from re-invigorating the current motion as a separate
                                                                                               Page:   4
motion for judicial review of the Director's decision, and instead direct that the current motion be
revived but consolidated, for hearing purposes, with the motion for judicial review of the Mir6ster's
decision. The appellant is therefore at liberty to make the contentions referred to in these reasons
by way of challenge to the decisions of the Director, the EAB and the Minister.
Appeal   heard on  October 12,  2007
Reasons filed at  Calgary, Alberta
this 12th day of  December,    2007
                                                                                         Watson J.A.
                                                      Authorized to  sign for:        McFadyen    J.A.
                                       I COliC ILr•.
                                                                                           Ritter J.A.
                                                                   Page: 5
Appearances:
L.D.  Andrychuk, Q.C. and    R.G. Jeerakathil
         for the Appellant
J. Moore and S. Folkins
         for the Respondent, Alberta Environment
A.  Sims, Q.C.
         for the Respondent,  Alberta Environmental Appeals Board
S. Shawa
         for the Respondent,  The Town of Strathmore
