                                                                                                                   ___
                                                                                                                            ___
                                                                                                                                      ___
                                                                                                                                              ___
                                                                                                                                                       ___
                                                                                                                                                               _
uo1io/Zflt)      WI()     £0: 33        FAX 604 775 58L4 Indian & Nozthrfl AffairS                                                                            l00I/0O1
                                                         National Energy                                Office national
                                                                      Board                             do lénergie
                                                                                                                                       ?jtjnt 7, JIlt)
           \Vc   sLut ias I   Enerv       ne.
                                                                                                                                       I’i(:W 02—2tt 11—02 (1
           i)awsin (‘rotect
           31 May 21)11)                                                                                                                  7Pn    IT     I I—,
          Pttrsnaiit ti the Regulations
                                                     Re.cpeci/iiç’ the ( idU,itioii by (tderal
                                                                                                            .t/th?Hts jP:iivirnntciictl
         I vsucinenr I>)otc’(/ii,es anti Requiiem
                                                                eiit.c (Regulations). please indicate hi
         Board) I 02 .InI 2010 whether your                                                                            the National Energy Utlaid (the
                                                                  DeparimentiAgene (please check cli the ppiti
                                                                                                                                    pri:iIe hox):
                  is likely in require an elivIronmenlilL
                                                                      assessment it lie project(s) tinder Seeiini’ il
                 Lntuon,nenlui.4sse.tw,e,n .4rt (UFA                                                                              5     (lie (uic;cfinii
                                                                        Act):
                 NO                      YES                      II YES. please incHeate he (EA Act Irigg
                                                                                                                             et(s):
        1riger:
                        ;ec!Iv eqisIaIc an( Secn;. to
                IS fl I)5SC55iOO ii! specialis
                                                        t or expert ifflOriliOtItiTi      or knoWledge Pint is necessary in conduct the
               clivironmenia] assessniciti of
                                                           (lie project(s).
               NO                       YESC
       c)      requires       additional inlormalion to make                   determination referred        ti in a) or   Ii) ahli\C.
               No                       YES                     ri YES to (c). please 1 irward the
                                                                                                               recIctust w thin III husitiess days
                                                                alter reeeivint this nolshcatit’n as per soht
                                                                                                                           seclton f(2) ut the
                                                                Regu   I at it  is
       PIeds advise what rvle your J)upartmcnt or Agi_
                                                                                acy
       HESPONSEto the Secretary ot the ftoar4snn pUns to pJ4y in flus ri_view by PAZING THIS
                                                                                e-Marle EHd*son it 4O3.2945P or L.$77.28
      Please próvidøTheibliowingconiaci intbniiajioiE::. :.:
                                                                                   .                                                                8 8803
                                                                                                            ::. ; :..::: *:..*ThJ:
                                                                                              ;‘:::::                                   :;..;
      Name:
                                           7)            17   C’?       /14 b
      Title
             Departinew
      Adtttess.
                                                  , v’ c’                        e. n i—n / fr_i /i s A
      Icteplicine:
                                                            /j               p     4                  7/c
                                          f/d0L<,44                                   Faesiniitc:       a/
                                                         .
                                                                                                                    77          -
                                                                                                                                  77—99
                                               f
                                               n
                                               4    hC     l  L4      f  LLl          24cL       L      unrL             L CXZC                J    L_
     a;    Jng
     l)itie,\tittiirizet!
                                                                                     Sigliitlurt: lot Rcsjioout:tig l)epartttiertt or Agenc
                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                       Canada                    a.’
 JUN—16—2010           12:38                                     604 775 5814                                                                            P.001
 JUN—21—2010 OS:47   DEN. SER.                              1 2507843201 P.001
                Anne    -                     cVs
                                              m
                                              1o            QGecyoWLcc(
                          Cc-Qocv
                   cL k (cc
                                        jn
                                                 e     2-4-7-1
                                                   ,\J cttt7z o4mN.
                                             0 Ccç   Co c\ £
JUN—21—2010  10:40             P.R.R.D. D.C.            97Y              9.001
  JUN—21—2010      09:47            0EV. SER.                                        1 2507643201          P.002
      PROPOSED DAWSON CREEK           — SPECtRA GAS PLANT                          June 16. 2010
      LOCATED ON North ‘/a Sec. 26, Twp. 78, Rge. 17, W6M.
      We, George and Debbie Kunz would prefer that Spectra Energy chose a different location for
      this proposed Gas Plant based on the following concerns:
           -  This site is only 800 metres from our residential homesite this is too close.
                                                                            -
           -  The site is 400 x 480 metres in size and is located directly on productive farm land    -
              uncultivated and poorer classed agricultural lands should be utilized for such products in
              order to preserve our ‘foods land’!
           -  Environmental and social impacts directly to affect our quiet rural life style, will include
              increased traffic in the immediate area, and an increase of noise, dust and emissions.
          -   If this site is approved —berming should be required around the site to minimize noise
              impacts, in addition to tree growth should be kept as a natural buffer.
          -   Accumulative impacts from pipelines, gas wells and plant site will negatively affect this
              rural residential area directly.
          -   Spectra Energy conducted a noise monitoring session at our homesite on April
              2010. This test was conducted on a y windy day and into the evening (30+ km winds).
             We contacted Spectra to ask if they could re-peat the noise monitoring test for a more
             typical sample, but have had not replied to date. It is understood that they only conduct
             one test prior construction and the other test after operations begin.
          -  We are not satisfied with Spectra’s noise quality monitoring procedure to date.
     We would request that NEB require that a Public Hearing process for this proposed Gas Plant,
     rather than a Non-Hearing process.
     Sincerely
     George and Debbie Kunz Cgdkunz@hotmail.com)
     Owners of NW 3 Sec. 24, Twp. 78, Rge. 17, W6M. (Home address 48654 239 Rd)  -
     4o)%q-r7ctq cn)
   t2Az)1t’4 -3&i lbc-fi)
                                                                                                        TOTAL P.002
JUN—21—2010      10:40                       P.R.R.D. D.C.                                                P.002
 Too.d                      Z96                    6L 999 tOg                      tO:9T  OTO—T—f{flp
          Environment                   Environriement
 I        Canada                        Canada
  FROM:                    Jennifer Wilson
                           Environment Canada
                           201 401 Burrard Street
                                -
                           Vancouver, B.C. V6C 3S5
                           Fax: 604-666-7294
  TO:                      Anne-Marie Erikson
                           National Energy Board
                           444 Seventh Avenue SW
                           Calgary, Alberta T2P OXB
                           Fax: 403-292-5503
  DATE:                    June2l,2D10
  #OFPAGES:                2
  RE:                      NEB Federal Coordination Notice for the Dawson Project
   MESSAGE:
   Following is Environment Canadas detemiinatiort with respect to the above project Please feel
   free to contact rue it you have any questions.
   Yours sincerely,
   Mnnifer Vson
   Environmental Assessment Officer
    CanacTh
toOIj                                  VGYNV3 LNaT{MoIANa           V6L 999 P09 XVd o:tI 0t0Z/T/90
                                                                                            8L 999 O9                                                             VO:9J          oiO—T—NflL’
 JUN—7-’tø
                                     ?.:.                           ,,                        :•
                                                                                                               :;,
                                                                                                                   :[.•   :;::;                           403 295 19
                                                                                                  .•.‘     :‘
                                                                                                                                        ..:.•‘                                         P 05,06
                                                      Natonal Energy                                               Office naton
                                                                        Board                                      d,lSneiqie
                                                                                                                                                          7 June 7 2010
          Wc.s[c,ojst Energy      bit                                                                                                                      tiW:WLOz-20(-Q2hl
                                                                                                                                                                                          “
          I) iwson hojcct                            —
                                             4.,      ‘‘‘‘‘
                                                                                                        ‘,
                                                                                                                                         ,“
        Pur\udnt 10 tilt     Re’gutanon’c Rspcxrrnç the
                                                                                  nh’cso!T
       4,p%smen(        f’rr,cpdur€       win 1z
                                               R  arc,ec   nenrs (Reglil iuow.) pieisc ;ndvL                                                                    z
        Boar)hy 02 July 201 0whetbr                                                                                               to ti. Netidn hi Enuy Board çtk
                                                        youe,Dcpärtrnent/ gcy
                                                                                                           (R:e titf,ibs apptnpriate box);.”,
       4)      s ILkL.Iy tn requ4re an tn’ftonm
               LnwronrnentalAswçsnienlAu WEA
                                                             onbli LLSCSSLTRflI ciL lhc projec4(s) undcr
                                                                         AC),.
                                                                                                                                       Sucttn Sot            ifat4c1zcr;
               NO                  YflS    Q                     Li YE pJase                    ‘ndidt        lilt tTh 4u tT()
                                               4!  ,, , a,,,
                   pflJy r.’rn’w, nc1 5drD4  N
      hi      n in YSSLS1Ofl oi sptciaiist or upc.r1 rnlor
              cnvironmtntd dsscJneoL ol ilit
                                                                                   mauon         (Jr   knOwLdgc. uliat s ncsc%sarv                       lo tonductie
                                                                proi.sL()                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                        0
     i..)     reqinrts additional Intorm4L4on
                                                              to n]4ke        d tJ4LOrmlrlatlGn rLkrn-$ (Gina)                                                                              “p..,
                                                                                                                                        ni   h) abov.
              NO                  ES                            h YES Lu (cJ pIase torwrcI Lh rqu
                                                                                                                                    esl w,!hjn 10 u%ln th>s
                                                                1cs rccrqtig Fhn t’t,tzfkiLnc,n                           4 pOt MJllstctIon u3(2) ol
                                                                Jtegiiacions                      ,
                                                                                                                                         “
                                                                                                                                                                  tbc
                                                                                         .,,,4
                                                                                                                                     H,                       .,
                                                                                                                                 :‘
    ‘4
  •
                .:
                                                                                                                                                                                “,*/L’
                                                                                                                                                                   4’
                                                                                                              ‘::‘*
                                   £nvrr
                                                  .n rn
                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                 Cm             ±,’
                                                                                                                                 S                      cM
                                                            ‘4
                                                                                                                                                                                .4
 0
 1  3h          I)SjZcd
                                                                                                                                     DepailthctiL or A,eni.y
                                                                       ‘
                                                                          Canad
                                                                                  ‘l’c                                       “
                                                                                                                                                                             ‘4
                                   , ,  ,
                                                        .‘
                                                                         , •:4
                                                                                ,      C                                ‘
                                                                                                                                  4            4 p,   ‘
                                                                                                                                                              ..
                                                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                                      ‘  .‘        , ,
                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                               ‘p
                                                                                                                                                    4                           —
zooI                                                            VGV?W3 LN3MNOUIANS                                                  t’6tL 999 t09 Xvi                       so:vI    otot/U/90
   TOO’d                                                             3O8299tO8                               O86O     OtO—€—MftQ
                                                                                                     ‘t3S 7S2..               SSoES
                                                                  *
                                         National Energy                     Office national
                                                   Board                     dol’en.rgie
                                                                                                   7iune 7,2010
                                                                                                    Pile: Wl0Z-2010-O2 01
 Westcoast Energy Inc.
 Dawson Project
 31 May 2010
Pursuant to the Regitlaricns Respecting the Coordininion by Federal Authorities of Environinenwi
Assessment Procedures end Requirements (Regulations), please indicate to the National Ener Board
                                                                                                                     ttbe
Board) by 02 July 2010 whether your Depai-tmemt/Agency (please check off the appropriate box):
a)    is likely to roquire adenvirunmental assessment of the project(s) under Section 5 of the Canadian
      EnWronnzentatAssess,nentAct (CEA Act):
      NOV                    YESU               If YESI please indicate the CEA Act irigget(s):
Trigger:
          (Sp.city Igi&aioiiiid Sed. N.)
b)    is in possession of specialisi or expert information or knowledge that is necessary to coiiduct the
      environmental assessnent of the project(s).
      NOQ                    YES   Q
c)    requires additional information to make a determination referred to in a) orb) above.
      NOV                    YES  Q             If YES to (c), please forward the request withinl() business days
                                                after receiving dtis notification as per subsection 6(2) of the
                                                Regulations.
Please advise whaL role your Department or Agency plans In play in this rdview by FAXING THIS
RESPOSSE to the Seerebry of *1w Board, Anme-Made Erlebon, at 403-2924503 or 1-877-288-9803.
Please provide the following contact informailon
Name:
                                             a—
Title/Department:
                                0        Or c n..1:s-owna#a-nL                        Ca
Mdress:
                                   Em 2-0   - %OO            ---S              c-      si o.-..cnj n-..
Telephone:                      (Wfi          1
                                              -S9
                                              °     ,           Facsinile:       (&j      ‘,- so2
E-mail:
                                   oo—a          do       e.i-t€-C-o                C-Ca-
  &n ZI 2.oiO                                                                              _1€___
Date Authorized                                                 Signature for Responding Department or Agenc            C’)
                                                                                                        —       c—
                                                                                                        —
                                                                                                        rt”1
                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                        c       %j
                                                                                                         --      >
                                                        Canad’S.                                                 cii
                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                         -  -
                              saossssos                  seotAjas         {euawUOJtAU3                     sT:s     oio       Unr ce
07/08/2010 14:54 FAX 250 561 5534                          DFO PR GEe                                                   looi
                                                                                                   4e3 299 3$19      P.ø5’6
                                                                 a
   3LN—7—2ø1e        lit 22            €B QI’E
                                         Natkmnal Energy                      Office national’
                                                     Board                    de I’enerIe
                                                                                             20!O  7Jun€7,
                                                                                                     le: WI0Z-2010-02 (11
         WesLcsast Energy Tim.
         Dawson Project
         31 May 2010
                                                                                Autiu’rifiecqfEhu!roflfllenCa(
        Pursuant to the kdgidarionx Ca5pecPngiheCooEditflatIonojFedcJki
        Ascesszneilt i’rocedtfrcs aMRequiretncn (Rgulatlôns, please indicate La t1c NaLioJwil EnergyAoaçcl        (‘nc
        Board) by 02 July 2010 whether your PepartmeniJAgncy (pleaie cheCk nit the appropriath box):
        ii)   is Iikly to require an nvironmenLnl assessrncnt of the pyojeei(s) under Seeiion S of the Cuhadiern
              EniLronmt,, La! AssessinepsAci (CEA Act);
               NOE             YES  lEt           ti’YES. pIcasindicaLetl1 CEA Act Irigg.r(s);
        b)    is in possession of speciaJist or npcrt infnnnadnn    or knowleiigc that is ntceiary La eoiduct the
               environmental ssesu1leqt o( tha projcct(s).
               ‘NOj            YESC
         c)    requi?es additional information to malta a &terminarion zefcrrcd e in alair b) bovc,
               NOV             YES   D            IL VE$ to (c) please tbrward the request withinlO business days
                                                  after receiving Ihis nauficaizon as pc: stthsect!qn 5(2) ef the
                                                  K gu I a eio ns
         Titio/Dcpaflrnertt
                                                                 L  OCA9cNJS                  &kt.1k:tA
                                  %‘1o              &%G 4y                   tQv6 Q*LC ecek
                                                                                   -
         Addrtss
         Tekphune:               j2S                                              pco                    ( .3L{
         E-mail;                    by flzf\ &Urht   4              bLJ      .co        tA&no
        S                                                                                  I
          Dnc Aulhoritod                                           S&wtuTcp:w.Rvpondrn$ Deparluienc nrAgncy
         Srv                VIA            WOL                    H2flO3
                                                                            I—I
                                                            Canada
 JUL—09—2010       15:55                            250 561 5534                               96z                     P.001
Safe Environments Programme
British Columbia Region
#400 – 4595 Canada Way
Burnaby, BC V5G 1J9
July 9, 2010
Usha Mulukutla
Environmental Specialist
Applications Business Unit
National Energy Board
444 Seventh Avenue SW Calgary, AB T2P 0X8
Sent by e-mail to
Re: Proposed Westcoast Energy Project
Thank you for your letter dated June 7, 2010, inquiring about Health Canada’s role in the environmental
assessment of the aforementioned project under the Federal Coordination Regulations.
Based on the information provided, Health Canada has determined that it is not a Responsible Authority (RA)
under Section 5 of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (the Act) with regards to the present scope of the
project.
In the context of subsection 12(3) of the Act, Health Canada currently has expertise in the following biophysical
areas related to human health that may apply to the project:
     •   Air quality health effects
     •   Contamination of country foods (e.g. fish, wild game, garden produce, berries, etc)
     •   Drinking and recreational water quality
     •   Radiation effects
     •   Electric and magnetic fields
     •   Noise impacts
     •   Health risk assessment and risk management,
     •   Federal air, water, and soil quality guidelines/standards used in human health risk assessments; and
     •   Toxicology (multimedia - air, water, soil)
Should a Responsible Authority identify any specific human health concerns with respect to the aforementioned
project, Health Canada would provide expertise as a Federal Authority, pursuant to subsection 12(3) of the
CEAA, if requested.
Note that Health Canada requires a written request prior to providing any expertise in its possession. Preferably, a
request should specify the advice required. However, a less-specific request for advice within the mandate and
expertise of Health Canada is also acceptable, recognizing that the RA may not have sufficient expertise or
information to identify all the potential human health issues that may arise from the project. Health Canada
encourages the RA(s) or FEAC to send any request for participation in the project early in the EA process so that
we can assist in ensuring that human health issues are adequately addressed from the beginning of the project.
 Your request for expertise should be forwarded to the attention of the Regional Environmental Assessment
Coordinator, Christie Nelson, by email at christie.nelson@hc-sc.gc.ca or by fax at (604) 666-5741.
If you have any questions regarding Health Canada’s response, please do not hesitate to contact me by phone at
(604) 666-5720.
Sincerely,
Christie Nelson
Regional Environmental Assessment Coordinator, BC Region
Ph: (604) 666-5720; Fax (604) 666-5741
e-mail: christie.nelson@hc-sc.gc.ca
cc:     Jack Nickel Health Canada (by e-mail)
AUG—03—2010    12:41           a.UEERv FIRST NATION                                    0 630 25B                  P.02
                                                                                            Tel: (250) 630-2584
                                                                                           Fax: (230) 6302588
                         7ceza Ztec’ont rt
                                                                                    Tea Free: 1-8-988-3533
                                                                                                  P.O. 0ox3009
                                                                                     Buidc Creek. BC VOC 2R0
         Anne-Marie Erickson
         Secretary of the Board                                                                      I-,      U,
         National Energy Board                                                                       0
                                                                                                     0
         Calgary, Alberta                      By Fax: 1-403-292-5503
                                                                                                      C
                                                                                           rn         C,
        July30, 2010
                                                                                           2:         -o
        Dear Ms. Erickson:
                                                                                                      a:,
                        Re: Dawson Project-File OF-Fac-Gas-WI 02-2010-02 01 as proposed
                        By Spectra Energy Transmission
        We are writing with respect to the above-noted application which you notified us of on
        July 13
              1h,
                   2010 and was received in our office on July 26, 2010.
        The Blueberry River First Nation (haBRFNi) is extremely concerned about this
        application. This project has the potential to constitute an infringement of our hunting,
        fishing and trapping rights protected by Treaty 8.
        Please note that oil and gas development within our Traditional Territory has not only
        infringed on our hunting, fishing, and trapping rights, but it has also caused a number of
       environmental and health concerns as well.
       We believe that the cumulative impacts of existing and pending oil and gas projects
       affecting Our traditional lands must be assessed. An assessment of cumu’ative impacts is
       required so that the BRFN can properly assess the impacts of this project on hunting,
       trapping and fishing rights and the environment. We arc concerned that the cumulative
       impact of logging, mining, oil and gas and other activities will render our Treaty Rights
       meaningless, especially if Spectra’s Application is reviewed and approved in isolation.
       No cumulative impact assessment has yet been done on our Territory.
       Sc) far as we are aware, there have been no studies in terms of the effect of oil and gas
       development and associated drilling, including the construction of access roads and
       processing facilities, on the environment and wildlife/habitat within our Traditional Area.
       We are concerned that the Regulators may not have sufficient information in order to
       make a decision on this application, especially in tems of its effect on our treaty rights
       and way of life and the ability of our I3RFN members to sustain themselves within our
       Traditional Territory.
       We are also concerned that there has been no consuliation with us by Spectra or any
       crown agency, especially at th.e pre-tenure stage in respect of this project.
AUG—03—2010    13:45                      HEAD OFFICE                                                           P.002
  AUG—03—2010    12:41           a.L.ERRY FIRST NATION                                 250 630 25       P.03
         The particulars of BRFN’ objection to this project are:
                  the absence of any consultation by the Proponent on the Application ;or by the
                 Province at the pre-tenure (land sale) stage prior to this Application;
         -       the absence of any assessment of the cumulative effects of this project considered
                 together and in the context of past and future developments within the same part
                 of our Traditional ‘Ierritory;
         -       the likelihood of infringement of’hunung, fishing and trapping rights protected by
                 Treaty 8 by reason of those cumulative effects and contrary to the Constitutional
                 guarantees and common law
        We request that you do not approve the Application until Spectra and the Crown have
        undertaken the legally rcquired consiihation, including consultation with respect to the
        cumulative impacts of this and other projects within our Traditional Territory. We are
        committed to consult with Spectra and the Crown
        Sincerely yours,
        Chsasn
        Blueberry River First Nation
        c.BRFN Council
           Spectra Energy.. .Fax: 1-250-960-2080
                         c-mail:shendersonspedxaenergy,com
           Deni Paquette,NE[3,
                          e-mai1:deni.paquette(tncb-one.gc.ca
                                                                                                  T0T. P.03
AUG—03—2010    13:46                        HEAD OFFICE                        lOX                  P.003
 ALI3—03—2@10        12:41                    BLUEBERRY FIRST I4TI0N                                                      250 530 2588              P.01
                                                                      Fax
              To:                                                          om4
                                                                                       p
              Fez;                  —
                                                                                               (iflCIudngver sheet)
              Phonr                                                       De:                                            QOiQ
              R
                               ‘w’
                         E Urgent fl For Review                           Please epIy              fl As Requested
              Comments:
              im                                                                                                           rCC
                  CJxGthVt)crF-,O        ‘         0
             The  attch.d mu’tt,ial is irtcidod for the use of the indiidjal of institution to which the telecopy Is addts&td arid wtay
                  b distnbted. copied.      or dscIcsed to the unauthorized per5os11). This satorial n.ay contain cenflderitiel or
             porsonal information which may be subjcct to the proiwisions of the f,eedaM         of Inforft,orIan end Pnwacy ACt. If mu I
             receive this ttans,Ii:sion in error, please caii irnmeditely ty teltphone at 2SO-63C-218. Th;nk VOLI for your
             cooperation.
                          1 espeeia[Iy at the pie-tenure stage in
                 crown a.gcncy                                                        reptct at this projett.
     Al7fl—ñl—2fl1fl    11:27                               HEAD GPPICE                                       s0,t                        P.00 1
AUG—03—2010         13:44                                  HEAD OFFICE                                             S AZ                          P.001
Environmental Protection Operations
Environmental Stewardship Branch
Pacific and Yukon
201 - 401 Burrard Street
Vancouver, BC V6C 3S5
October 18, 2010                                                           CEAR: 10-01-55686
                                                                           ECPT: 10-0607
Anne-Marie Erickson
Secretary of the Board
National Energy Board
444 – 7th Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2P 0X8
Dear Ms. Erickson:
Re:       Environmental Assessment of the Proposed Dawson Gas Processing Plant Project
          Hearing Order GH-3-2010
          Environment Canada Comments
Environment Canada has reviewed the application for the proposed Dawson Gas Processing Plant
Project (the Project), which was filed by Westcoast Energy Inc. (the proponent), with the National Energy
Board (NEB). Environment Canada focused its review on the Environmental and Socio-Economic Impact
Assessment (ESA), which supports the application, and the proponent’s responses to other departmental
Information Requests. Based on the information provided, Environment Canada has made the following
determination in accordance with the Regulations Respecting the Coordination by Federal Authorities of
Environmental Assessment Procedures and Requirements:
    •     The department is not likely to be a Responsible Authority for this project under the Canadian
          Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA). The department is in possession of specialist or expert
          information or knowledge that could be relevant to the environmental assessment required by
          NEB.
    •     As such, Environment Canada is prepared to participate in the environmental assessment as a
          Federal Authority, and provides the following advice (attached) with respect to wildlife, migratory
          birds, species at risk, water quality, and wetlands:
               o Environment Canada Wildlife Advice for Environmental Assessments
               o Environment Canada Interim Guidance for Addressing Water Quality for Work In and
                   Around Water
               o Federal Wetland Policy
As an expert federal authority, Environment Canada offers the following specific comments concerning
wildlife and wildlife habitat, and air quality in accordance with section 12(3) of CEAA.
WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT
(A) MIGRATORY BIRDS
Incidental Take
Incidental take refers to the killing of migratory birds, and/or the disturbance or destruction of their nests
or eggs resulting directly or indirectly from human activities, where the primary objective of the activity is
not the killing of migratory birds and/or the disturbance or destruction of their nests or eggs. Under
federal jurisdiction, and within the mandate of the Canadian Wildlife Service of Environment Canada,
migratory birds are those species identified in Article I of the Migratory Birds Convention. The Migratory
Birds Convention Act, 1994 (MBCA) and the Migratory Birds Regulations (MBR) include prohibitions to
address the conservation and protection of migratory birds in Canada. The MBR contain a blanket
 prohibition against the disturbance, destruction or take of the nests, eggs, nest shelter, eider duck shelter
or duck box of migratory birds (subsection 6(a)).
Environment Canada recommends that industry avoid activities that will result in the disturbance or
destruction of active migratory bird nests. Where the proponent determines its activities will unavoidably
overlap with the breeding bird season, Environment Canada recommends that the proponent employ an
Active Migratory Bird Nest Survey (AMBNS) to reduce the likelihood of disturbing or destroying active
nests. Doing so in turn reduces the likelihood that the proponent will be in contravention of the MBCA.
The migratory bird breeding season varies between regions across British Columbia. The period from
March 15th to August 15th will generally include breeding activity for most, though not all, avian species
across the province. Environment Canada can advise on more specific breeding periods on a project-by-
project basis. Environment Canada recommends that an AMBNS be employed if potentially harmful
activities are proposed for a period immediately before, during or immediately after the general breeding
bird season.
(B) SPECIES AT RISK
Overview
The purpose of the Species at Risk Act (SARA) is to prevent or reduce the likelihood of wildlife species
from becoming extinct or extirpated, to provide for the recovery of wildlife species that are extirpated,
endangered or threatened as a result of human activity, and to manage species of special concern to
prevent them from becoming endangered or threatened.
SARA was proclaimed on June 5, 2003 and affords protection to those wildlife species listed in
Schedule 1 of the Act. The prohibitions under SARA came into force on June 1, 2004, and apply to
individuals of a species, their residences (dwelling places, such as a den or nest or other similar area that
is occupied or habitually occupied by one or more individual during part or all of its life cycle), and critical
habitat (areas used or formerly used by the species to carry out their life processes that are deemed
essential for survival or recovery). Critical habitat will be identified for each listed species in Recovery
Strategies and/or Action Plans, available on Environment Canada’s Species at Risk Act Public Registry:
www.sararegistry.gc.ca.
The Canada-British Columbia Agreement on Species at Risk commits the Province to assess species
under its jurisdiction. Environment Canada may offer an opinion on the adequacy of mitigation measures
accepted by the Province of British Columbia.
The ESA’s wildlife survey confirmed that Western Toad habitat occurs within the project area (Section
7.2.7.3). Western Toad is listed as a species of ‘special concern’ on Schedule I of SARA; as such, the
responsible authority under CEAA is accountable for identifying potential adverse effects of the project on
this species, ensuring that measures are taken to avoid or lessen those effects, and ensuring that such
measures are consistent with any applicable recovery strategies and action plans. Additionally,
subsection 79(1) of SARA requires every person who is required to ensure that a federal environmental
assessment is conducted to notify the competent Minister(s) without delay if the project is likely to affect a
listed wildlife species or its critical habitat.
Environment Canada recommends the following linked document, “Best Management Practices for
Amphibians and Reptiles in Urban and Rural Environments in British Columbia” be consulted in the
design, construction and operation of this project. This manual provides guidance on maintaining the
viability of native amphibian and reptile populations in urban and rural areas of British Columbia subject to
land development activities: www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/BMP/herptile/bmpherptile.html.
                                                                                                                 2
 (C) WETLAND ECOSYSTEMS
Federal Policy on Wetland Conservation
Environment Canada is the federal department responsible for providing expert support in the
implementation of the Federal Policy on Wetland Conservation (FPWC). Wetlands are a priority for
Environment Canada because of their importance to, amongst other things, the maintenance of migratory
bird populations for which the department has a responsibility under the MBCA, and protection of species
at risk for which the department has a responsibility under SARA.
If the federal government is involved in a project in a way that triggers CEAA, it should consider the
FPWC. CEAA requires a consideration of the cumulative environmental effects likely to result from the
project in combination with other projects or activities that have been or will be carried out
(subsection 16(1) (a)). The FPWC recognizes the importance of considering cumulative effects and
tailors expected wetland protection outcomes to the level of cumulative effects experienced in an area.
AIR QUALITY
(A) APPENDIX 10: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT
6.2.4.3 Significance Evaluation of Residual Effects
Emissions During Construction and Maintenance Activities
The ESA states: “The amount of air emissions associated with the construction and site-specific
maintenance activities will be minimized by utilizing multi-passenger vehicles for the transport of crews to
and from job sites to the extent practical, as well as utilizing well-maintained equipment. This residual
effect of increased emissions during construction and maintenance activities is of low magnitude”.
Environment Canada advises that each emission source should be accompanied by relevant supporting
information to demonstrate that the emissions during construction and maintenance are in fact “low
magnitude”. For example, supporting information for combustion sources should include details on all of
the diesel combustion equipment, heavy duty vehicles, stationary sources, etc. to verify emissions
estimates and could include:
              • The number of pieces of equipment used
              • The model years of the equipment
              • The power of each piece of equipment (in units)
              • The hours of operation for each piece of equipment
              • The type and total volume of fuel used (in units)
              • Assumed emission factors and clear identification of assumptions and references
              • Models used in developing emission profiles
              • Description of any pollution control devices.
Dust and Smoke During Construction
The ESA states: “Smoke may be associated with the burning of slash during construction of the Project.
No land clearing is associated with the Plant site and limited clearing is required for the pipelines. With
the implementation of industry-accepted mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.8, this residual effect is
reversible in the short-term and is of low magnitude”.
Environment Canada advises that chipping is the preferred method to minimize air emissions as an
alternative to burning slash. If chipping is not feasible, it is suggested that burning only be conducted
when meteorological conditions allow for good dispersion of pollutants, to ensure that the nearest
residence (1.3 km away) and community (16 km away) is not adversely affected. The proponent should
follow the BC Smoke Management Guidelines/Ventilation Index. The Ventilation Index can be found
under the Smoke Control Forecast at:
www.weatheroffice.gc.ca/forecast/textforecast_e.html?Bulletin=flcn39.cwvr.
                                                                                                            3
 Note as well that the BC Ministry of Environment’s Open Burning Smoke Control Regulation (OBSCR) is
currently being revised under the BC Environmental Management Act, and may, in future include Open
Burning Sensitivity Zones and formalized smoke management plans. A guide to the current version of
the OBSCR is available at: www.env.gov.bc.ca/epd/bcairquality/reports/agttobsc.html.
Further, Environment Canada recommends that the proponent consider applicable sections of the
guidance document “Best Practices for the Reduction of Air Emissions from Construction and Demolition
Activities”, available at: www.bieapfremp.org/Toolbox%20pdfs/EC%20-
%20Final%20Code%20of%20Practice%20-%20Construction%20%20Demolition.pdf.
Finally, Environment Canada advises that the proponent’s application should also include information
regarding other potential sources of emissions during construction that are not provided/mentioned,
including:
     • Use of diesel generators for backup / site power
     • Fugitive dust from material conveyance
     • Transport of materials to and from the site.
Emissions During Operation
The ESA states: “Although the Project is a source of GHG emissions, the level of emissions are low
compared to provincial and national totals (0.1% and 0.01% respectively).”
While it is helpful to calibrate the facility emissions to the provincial and national totals, this is not an
adequate rationale for classifying GHG emissions as “low.” It is highly unlikely that a single project would
ever represent a significant portion of national or provincial GHG emissions. Environment Canada
recommends that the assessment of project-related GHG emissions include the emissions intensity of the
operation, with a comparison to GHG emissions for similar projects in this sector.
Note as well that the assessment of GHG emissions should include both on-site and off-site emissions,
including transport of materials to/from the site.
6.2.10.4 Significance Evaluation of Residual Effects
The ESA states: “...the use of well maintained equipment during construction and operation and the
scheduling of hours of work in consultation with landowners where residences are located in close vicinity
to the Project the residual effect of nuisance air emissions and noise during construction and operation is
reversible in the short to long-term term and of low magnitude”.
Please see comment under 6.2.4.3. Environment Canada recommends that the proponent’s application
provide detailed information regarding the types of equipment, hours of operation, fuel type etc. to
demonstrate that the residual effect will in fact be “low magnitude”.
Table 7.7 Emissions During Construction
Environment Canada recommends that the proponent’s application describe whether diesel-powered
light/heavy-duty vehicles and stationary construction equipment will be used during construction. If diesel
fuel will be used, additional details should be provided regarding proposed mitigation measures such as
low-sulphur fuel.
Environment Canada recommends that the application include details regarding mitigation measures to
address emissions during construction that may impact potential receptors (residence 1.3 km from site,
and community 16 km away). It is well established that pollutants can travel significant distances under
the right meteorological conditions and would not only impact nearby receptors, but would become a
portion of the contaminant burden in the region.
                                                                                                              4
 (B) APPENDIX A: AIR QUALITY TECHNICAL DATA REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DAWSON
PLANT
3.2.4 Respirable Particulate Matter
Although the 24-hour average PM2.5 concentration recorded at Beaverlodge monitoring station (based on
annual 98th percentile averaged over 3 years) was less than the 30 μg/m3 Canada-wide Standard and the
proposed 25 μg/m3 BC Ministry of Environment Interim Objective for 24-hour average PM2.5
concentrations, Environment Canada advises that the proponent’s application should describe how the
Project aligns with the provisions in the Canada-wide Standards for Keeping Clean Areas Clean (KCAC)
and/or Continuous Improvement. The Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment, including the
federal Minister of the Environment, approved the Canada-wide Standard for PM2.5 and ozone in 2000.
The provision for KCAC states: “Jurisdictions recognize that polluting “up to a limit” is not acceptable and
that the best strategy to avoid future problems is keeping clean areas clean. Jurisdictions should work
with their stakeholders and the public to establish programs that apply pollution prevention and best
management practices”.
Therefore even in the absence of predicted Canada-wide Standards exceedences, Environment Canada
encourages the proponent to adopt measures to minimize emissions of particulate matter and ozone
precursors. Environment Canada’s position is that in order to meet the provision in the Canada-wide
Standards for KCAC, decision-making authorities must require the application of best available
technologies and practices to new and existing emissions sources, and must also require that no
significant impacts to health or the environment result from the remaining emissions from such sources.
CLOSING
The proponent should be aware that Section 36(3) of the federal Fisheries Act, administered by
Environment Canada, prohibits the discharge of deleterious substances to waters frequented by fish, or to
a place where those substances might enter such waters. Therefore, the proponent must ensure that, at
all times during the project, deleterious substances are prevented from entering into fish-bearing waters
or any tributaries. Due diligence is required at all times to prevent such discharges, and adherence to the
proposed courses of action suggested in this letter does not relieve the proponent of the requirement to
comply with the Fisheries Act.
This advice does not constitute an approval. The proponent shall ensure that all work associated with the
subject project complies with the requirements of the Fisheries Act, the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999, the Migratory Birds Convention Act, the Species at Risk Act and all other applicable
laws, legislation, and best management practices.
Please consider this as fulfilling Environment Canada’s obligations under Section 12(3) of CEAA. In
order for us to evaluate the effectiveness of our advice, we would appreciate receiving a copy of your
Decision Statement. Thank you for the opportunity to review this project. If you have any questions,
please do not hesitate to contact me at (604) 666-3567.
Yours sincerely,
[Original signed by]
Jennifer Wilson
Environmental Assessment Officer
Attachments (2)
                                                                                                             5
                          ENVIRONMENT CANADA – PACIFIC AND YUKON REGION
 INTERIM GUIDANCE FOR ADDRESSING WATER QUALITY FOR WORK IN AND AROUND WATER
Introduction
The following guidelines have been prepared to provide general water quality advice for small projects
involving construction in and around marine and fresh water that may be frequented by fish, including, for
example, docks, bridges, shoreline protection, pile driving, etc.
These guidelines apply to only to Environment Canada’s areas of concern, primarily for the protection of
water quality. The proponent is advised to contact the regional Fisheries and Oceans Canada office if the
project may result in any potential harmful alteration, disruption or destruction of fish habitat.
Guidelines
1.       The proponent shall ensure that all plans and specifications relating to this project have been duly
         prepared and reviewed by appropriate professionals working on its behalf.
2.       The proponent should be aware that Section 36(3) of the federal Fisheries Act, administered by
         Environment Canada, prohibits the discharge of deleterious substances to waters frequented by
         fish. Therefore, the proponent must ensure that deleterious substances from the project are
         prevented from discharging into fish-bearing waters or any tributaries. Due diligence is required at
         all times to prevent such discharges. Adherence to the advice of this document does not relieve
         the proponent of its ongoing responsibilities in this regard.
3.       All work associated with the project involving the use of concrete, cement, mortars and other
         Portland cement or lime-containing construction materials shall be conducted so as to ensure that
         sediments, debris, concrete, and concrete fines are not deposited, either directly or indirectly into
         the aquatic environment. Any water contacting uncured or partly cured concrete or Portland
         cement or lime-containing construction materials, such as the water that may be used for
         exposed aggregate wash-off, wet curing, equipment and truck washing, etc. shall be prevented
         from entering, directly or indirectly, the aquatic environment unless this water has been tested
         and found to have a pH of between 6.5 and 9.0 and a turbidity of less than 25 NTU. Containment
         facilities shall be provided at the site for the wash-down water from concrete delivery trucks,
         concrete pumping equipment, and other tools and equipment as required.
4.       The proponent shall ensure that sediment or sediment laden waters or other deleterious
         substances are not allowed to enter the aquatic environment during the proposed work. Work
         should be conducted in accordance with best management practices, for example the sediment
         and erosion provisions of the Land Development Guidelines for the Protection of Aquatic Habitat
         (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 1993, available at http://www-heb.pac.dfo-
         mpo.gc.ca/publications/pdf/165353.pdf).
5.       An appropriate spill prevention, containment, and clean up contingency plan for hydrocarbon
         products (e.g., fuel, oil, hydraulic fluid, etc.), and other deleterious substances shall be put in
         place prior to work commencing, and appropriate spill containment and cleanup supplies shall be
         kept available onsite whenever the works are occurring. Further, all personnel working on the
         project should be familiar with implementing the spill clean up plan and the deployment of spill
         response materials.
6.       Any fuel handling or storage associated with the project should comply with the Canadian Council
         of Ministers of the Environment (CCME) Environmental Code of Practice for Aboveground and
         Underground Storage Tank Systems Containing Petroleum Products and Allied Petroleum
         Products (2003). Please be aware that Environment Canada currently has proposed Storage Tank
         Systems for Petroleum Products and Allied Petroleum Products Regulations under CEPA, 1999.
         It is anticipated these Regulations will be published and come into force during early 2008.
7.       If land-based equipment or machinery is used to conduct the proposed works, the
                                                                                                              6
     equipment/machinery should operate from the upland or operate from the intertidal foreshore within
    the footprint of the proposed works. Impacts to the intertidal foreshore outside the footprint of the
    proposed works must be prevented.
8.  All machinery used on site should be in good repair and free of excess oil and grease. Any fuelling or
    maintenance of such equipment should occur on the upland well away from the foreshore.
9.  Any material, such as rip rap, gravel, etc., placed below the higher high water mark must be free of
    silt, overburden, debris or any other substances deleterious to aquatic life.
10. A dock facility should be designed and located so as to preclude tidal grounding of any floating
    component on the foreshore.
11. No unserviced float homes or live-aboard vessels should be moored at a dock facility. Sewage
    discharges from ships must adhere to Subdivision 4 – Sewage Discharges of the Canada Shipping
    Act.
12. Under the Fisheries Act, Management of Contaminated Fisheries Regulations, the harvesting of
    bivalve molluscs, (oysters, clams, mussels) is prohibited for any purpose within 125 metres of any
    wharf, dock, platform or other structure used for vessel moorage, or any permanently anchored
    floating structure, including float homes, barges, platforms and vessels. It is the proponent’s
    responsibility to ensure commercial, recreation and First Nation shellfish harvesting opportunities are
    not hindered by placement of such structures.
13. Any timber preservatives are to be applied in a manner consistent with current best management
    practices such as Appendix 2, Requirements for Using Treated Wood, in the guidebook
    Environmentally Sustainable Log Handling Facilities in British Columbia (Fisheries and Oceans
    Canada, April 2003). Available at http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/274124.pdf.
14. General log handling operations have the potential to cause serious impacts to the local
    environment through the aquatic deposition of large amounts of secondary woodwaste (i.e. bark
    chips, etc.). To reduce the amounts of woodwaste introduced into the environment through log
    handling activities, please refer to DFO published guidebook, Environmentally Sustainable Log
    Handling Facilities in British Columbia, available at: www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/274124.pdf. For
    specific guidance information on the log bundling strand recycling initiative please contact
    Environment Canada directly.
15. If steel piles are to be used, they must be capped to prevent the entry of wildlife.
16. All demolition materials are to be disposed of upland in an authorized manner. In this regard, it
    should be noted that burning of preservative-treated timber is not permitted. Whenever possible,
    recycling of materials is encouraged.
17. Only clean, uncontaminated material may be used as fill.
                                                                                                          7
                                                 ENVIRONMENT CANADA
                                WILDLIFE ADVICE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS
Introduction
Provided herein is general advice on wildlife that fall under Environment Canada’s (EC) mandate in order
to assist proponents involved in project environmental assessments. Migratory bird environmental
assessment guidelines are available upon request from the Canadian Wildlife Service.
Migratory Birds and Incidental Take
‘Incidental take’ refers to the killing of migratory birds, and/or the disturbance or destruction of their nests
or eggs resulting directly or indirectly from human activities, where the primary objective of the activity is
not the killing of migratory birds and/or the disturbance or destruction of their nests or eggs. EC expects
due diligence be exercised to avoid harm to migratory birds.
Under the current regulatory framework pursuant to the Migratory Birds Convention Act (MBCA), EC
recommends that proponents avoid conducting project-related activities during times that have the
potential to harm migratory birds or their active nests. The migratory bird breeding season varies across
British Columbia. The period of March 15th to August 15th will generally include breeding activity for
most though not all avian species across the province of British Columbia. EC can advise on specific
general breeding periods on a project-by-project basis. Region, elevation and climate are key
considerations in identifying to the project-level the appropriate general breeding period.
In the event a proponent determines that its activities will unavoidably overlap with the breeding bird
season, EC expects due diligence be exercised to avoid harm to migratory birds, and recommends that
the proponent employ an Active Migratory Bird Nest Survey (AMBNS) program to reduce the likelihood of
disturbing or destroying active nests. Doing so reduces the likelihood that the proponent will be in
contravention of the MBCA. EC recommends that an AMBNS be employed if potentially harmful activities
are proposed for a period immediately before, during or immediately after the general breeding bird
season. Environment Canada may provide advice to the proponent in the development of an AMBNS if
the proponent makes that request.
Please contact Environment Canada for a list of technical reports, papers or other information relating to
migratory birds and their habitats within British Columbia.
Species at Risk
The purpose of the Species at Risk Act (SARA) is to prevent or reduce the likelihood of wildlife species from
becoming extinct or extirpated, to provide for the recovery of wildlife species that are extirpated, endangered
or threatened as a result of human activity, and to manage species of special concern to prevent them from
becoming endangered or threatened.
SARA was proclaimed on June 5, 2003 and affords protection to those wildlife species listed in Schedule 1
of the Act. The prohibitions under SARA came into force on June 1, 2004, and apply to individuals of a
species, their residences (dwelling places, such as a den or nest or other similar area that is occupied or
habitually occupied by one or more individual during part or all of its life cycle), and critical habitat (areas
used or formerly used by the species to carry out their life processes that are deemed essential for survival
or recovery). Critical habitat will be identified for each listed species in Recovery Strategies and/or Action
Plans, available on Environment Canada’s Species at Risk Act Public Registry: Sararegistry.gc.ca.
Section 79(1) of SARA requires every person who is required by a federal Act to ensure that a federal
environmental assessment is conducted to notify the competent minister(s) without delay if the project is
likely to affect a listed wildlife species or its critical habitat. S. 79(2),of SARA requires that, where a federal
environmental assessment is being carried out on a project that may affect a listed wildlife species or its
                                                                                                                   8
 critical habitat, the person responsible for ensuring the assessment is conducted must identify potential
adverse effects on the listed wildlife species and its critical habitat; and if the project is carried out, ensure
that measures are taken to avoid or lessen those adverse effects and to monitor them, and ensure that such
measures are consistent with any applicable recovery strategy and action plans. S. 79(3) defines ‘person’
as including an association or organization, and a responsible authority as defined in subsection 2(1) of
the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA).
In managing a project in the context of Species at Risk (SAR), proponents are advised to identify and
evaluate likely species occurrences (including methods such as conducting baseline surveys), assess
environmental impacts, develop mitigation strategies and follow-up monitoring plans. The guideline below
is offered to assist in this process:
      1. Complete an in-depth literature review of relevant databases to determine whether any species of
          concern are known or expected to use the site or adjacent lands if they are within the zone of
          influence of the project. This may include:
               o The Conservation Data Centre (CDC) database (for any rare element occurrence
                    records), including the ‘Species and Ecosystem Explorer search tool’;
               o Environment Canada’s Species at Risk Act Public Registry Sararegistry.gc.ca (for
                    Recovery Strategies, Action Plans, Species Accounts);
               o The Sensitive Ecosystem Inventory (http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/sei)
               o Environment Canada’s Species at Risk search tool www.speciesatrisk.gc.ca to determine
                    if the ranges of any COSEWIC listed Species at Risk overlap with the site; and,
               o Scientific journals (many available on-line).
      2. Consult with government and non-government agencies and organizations, such as:
               o federal SAR ‘Competent Minister’ departments: Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Parks
                    Canada, and Environment Canada;
               o Ministry of the Environment (MoE), municipalities and regional districts;
               o Species at Risk Recovery Teams; and
               o Local naturalists groups and organizations.
      3. Complete surveys, following accepted standards and methodologies, of the project area (and
          adjacent areas as necessary). The appropriate government jurisdiction – MoE or EC – should be
          consulted for advice on survey design. Permits under the BC Wildlife Act or SARA may be
          required in certain circumstances.
To assist proponents in accounting and managing for SAR, Environment Canada has developed an
environmental assessment guide titled, ‘Environmental Assessment Best Practice Guide for Wildlife at
Risk in Canada’. This document is online at:
http://ec.gc.ca/Publications/default.asp?lang=En&xml=5407909E-10F6-4AFE-ACDF-75B9E820B4A1.
Federal Wetland Policy
Refer to the Federal Policy on Wetland Conservation (available on the internet at http://dsp-
psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/CW66-116-1991E.pdf for advice relating to wetland habitats.
                                                                                                                   9
